Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Gates ,
as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 190, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as
the "Code of the Town of Gates," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever
reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
contained in the "Code of the Town of Gates" to any other local law,
ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be
changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number
or section number appearing in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or
resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Town Board of the Town of Gates, and it is the intention
of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby
reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former
local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed
repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Town of Gates in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local
law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Gates prior to the effective date of
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of Gates or
any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Gates.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Town of Gates.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Gates providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the Town of Gates or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Gates appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of Gates
or other instruments or evidence of the town's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for town employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the town.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to 10-12-1998.
O. Legislation pertaining to subdivision of land, specifically the legislation
adopted 1-19-1976, as amended.
P. Legislation pertaining to plumbing.
§ 1-4 GATES CODE § 1-5
1:4
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of
the Town Clerk of the Town of Gates and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Town
Clerk of the Town of Gates by impressing thereon the Seal of the town, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law,
coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the Town of Gates" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Town Board to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Board deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Town of Gates required to be filed in
the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code
and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Town Board
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate
the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes,
local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Town Clerk of the Town of
Gates upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Town Board,
which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Town of Gates or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Gates to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1
of the Code of the Town of Gates, such local law to be entitled "General
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Town of Gates, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Town Board that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
C. Nomenclature.
(1) Throughout the Code, all references to the "State Uniform Fire
Prevention Code" or the "State Building Code" are changed to the
"Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code."
(2) Throughout Chapter 62, Animals, Article I, Dogs and Cats, all
references to "Dog Warden" are changed to "Dog Control Officer."
(3) Throughout Chapter 190, Zoning, all references to "Ordinance
Enforcement Officer" are changed to "Code Enforcement Officer."
§ 1-9 GATES CODE § 1-12
1:6
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 4
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 4-1. Authorization of town officials to issue. [Amended 9-7-1999
by L.L. No. 2-1999]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the
Building Inspector, Assistant Building Inspectors, Code Enforcement
Officer, and Fire Marshal and duly authorized deputies or assistants of the
Town of Gates are each hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets for
violations of any statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to
parking, licensing of occupations or businesses, fire prevention and safety,
health and sanitation and building, zoning and planning.
Chapter 9
CHECKS, RETURNED
§ 9-1. Fee; waiver.
The Gates Town Board hereby adopts a service charge policy for bad
checks, said charge to be $15, allowing a potential waiver if shown that the
bad check is through no fault of their own.
Chapter 11
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS SEARCHES
§ 11-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Criminal History Record Search Law"
of the Town of Gates.
§ 11-2. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Gates, along with the Gates Fire District
and Gates Volunteer Ambulance Service, Inc., wishes to ensure that all
personnel acting on behalf of the Town of Gates and the Gates Fire District
and Volunteer Ambulance Service, Inc. are not only well-trained but also
upstanding and law-abiding citizens. Members of these organizations must
often enter homes on emergency conditions and must necessarily be trusted
not only with people's welfare but their property. It is therefore necessary
that a thorough criminal record search be done with respect to each
individual joining these organizations so as to ensure the welfare and safety
of the citizens of Gates. The Town of Gates has been informed that in
order for such criminal history record searches to be done, a local law
must be passed authorizing the Chief of Police to conduct such searches.
It is the intent of the Town of Gates that such a criminal history record
§ 1-13 GATES CODE § 11-2
4:8
search will be limited to searches concerning any outstanding charges
against an individual or convictions. Nothing in this chapter is intended to
authorize inquiries into whether there have been charges brought against
an individual which resulted in dismissal in such individual's favor.
Therefore, this chapter will authorize the Chief of Police of the Town of
Gates to submit fingerprints to obtain criminal history records from the
Division of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS) of the State of New York for
applicants for employment, membership and licenses with the Gates Fire
Department and Gates Volunteer Ambulance Service, Inc.
§ 11-3. Fingerprinting required; scope of investigation.
All applicants for employment with the Gates Fire District for the position
of firefighter and applicants with the Gates Volunteer Ambulance Service,
Inc. for the position of emergency medical technician must be fingerprinted.
All such applicants, upon the request of the Gates Fire District or Gates
Volunteer Ambulance Service, Inc., shall be investigated by the Gates Police
Department, which investigation shall be limited to the submission of a full
set of applicant's fingerprints to the New York State DCJS for a criminal
history record search.
§ 11-4. Authority of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police of the Town of Gates, or his/her designees, is authorized
to obtain the fingerprints of such applicant and shall thereupon forward the
fingerprints and any appropriate processing fee to the New York State DCJS
for processing and return of a criminal history record. The Chief of Police
of the Town of Gates, or his/her designee, in utilizing the criminal history
provided by the DCJS shall comply with all applicable law and policies of the
DCJS.
Chapter 13
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE
§ 13-1. Findings; policy.
The Town of Gates has a responsibility to its employees, town residents
and the public at large to take active, reasonable steps to assure safety
in the workplace and safety in the delivery of the services that it provides
to the citizens of Gates. To this end, the town affirms its policy that it
strictly prohibits the unlawful use, distribution, possession or manufacture
of controlled substances in the workplace, in town vehicles (whether
performing town business or not), while performing town business
anywhere, including off of town property, or during work hours; the
consumption of alcohol in the workplace, in town vehicles (whether
performing town business or not), while performing town business
anywhere, including off of town property, or during working hours; and
allowing staff to work while they are under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
§ 11-2 DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE § 13-2
13:9
§ 13-2. Disciplinary action.
Any staff member who is determined to unlawfully use, distribute, possess
or manufacture controlled substances under the above-stated conditions;
to consume alcohol under the above-stated conditions; or to be working
with ability impaired due to the use of alcohol or drugs will be subject to
appropriate disciplinary action, including loss of wages or termination. The
town will also pursue legal recourse when appropriate.
§ 13-3. Employee assistance.
To assist employees who may have a drug or alcohol abuse problem, the
Town of Gates has entered into a contract with Park Ridge Hospital to
administer an Employee Assistance Program. This program is a confidential
counseling and referral program for employees with a variety of problems,
including alcohol and drug abuse. If a supervisor feels that an employee has
an abuse problem that is affecting his work performance or if the employee
is found to have unlawfully used, distributed, possessed or manufactured
controlled substances in the workplace or reported to work with ability
impaired due to drug or alcohol abuse, the supervisor should report this
immediately to the department head, who may mandate the employee's
attendance and follow through with the Employee Assistance Program.
§ 13-4. Compliance required; report of convictions.
Employees must as a condition of employment abide by the terms of this
policy. Employees who perform work that is funded by a federal project
must report any conviction under a criminal drug statute for violations
occurring on or off the town's premises while conducting town business to
their immediate supervisor. A report of conviction must be made within five
days after the conviction.
Chapter 17
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 13-2 GATES CODE § 13-4
17:10
ARTICLE I
Intent
§ 17-1. Statement of legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Gates recognizes that there are state
statutory provisions mandating towns to establish rules and standards of
ethical conduct for public officers and employees which, if observed, can
enhance public confidence in local government. In the light of a tendency
today on the part of some people to downgrade our local governments
and to discredit our public servants and our free institutions generally, it
appears necessary that every effort be made to assure the highest caliber
of public administration of this town as part of our state's important system
of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter to implement this
objective through the establishment of standards of conduct, to provide for
punishment of violation of such standards and to create a Board of Ethics to
render advisory opinions to the town's officers and employees as provided
for herein.
§ 17-2. Applicability of other laws.
The standards, prohibited acts and procedures established herein are in
addition to any prohibited acts, conflicts of interest provisions or
procedures prescribed by statute of the State of New York and also in
addition to common law rules and judicial decisions relating to the conduct
of town officers to the extent that the same are more severe in their
application than this chapter.
§ 17-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 17-2
17:11

ARTICLE II
Code of Ethics
§ 17-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999] — A direct or indirect
pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal officer or employee as
the result of a contract with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves. For the purposes of this chapter, a municipal officer or employee
shall be deemed to have an interest in the contract of:
TOWN — Any board, commission, district, council or other agency,
department or unit of the government of the Town of Gates.
TOWN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the Town of
Gates, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any administrative
board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall be deemed
to be a town officer or employee solely by reason of being a volunteer
fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a fire chief or assistant fire
chief.[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
§ 17-4. Rule with respect to conflicts of interest.
No town employee shall have any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or
indirect or engage in any business or transaction or professional activity or
incur any obligation of any nature, which is in substantial conflict with the
proper discharge of his duties in the public interest.
§ 17-5. Standards.
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves.
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee.
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee.
C.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
A. No town employee shall accept other employment which will impair his
independence of judgment in the exercise of his official duties.
B. No town employee shall accept employment or engage in any business
or professional activity which will require him to disclose confidential
information which he has gained by reason of his official position or
authority.
§ 17-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 17-5
17:13
C. No town employee shall use or attempt to use his official position to
secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or others.
D. No town employee shall engage in any transaction as representative or
agent of the town with any business entity in which he has a direct or
indirect financial interest that might reasonably tend to conflict with
the proper discharge of his official duties.
E. A town employee shall not by his conduct give reasonable basis for the
impression that any person can improperly influence him or unduly
enjoy his favor in the performance of his official duties, or that he is
affected by the kinship, rank, position or influence of any party or
person.
F. Each town employee shall abstain from making personal investments in
enterprises which he has reason to believe may be directly involved in
decisions to be made by him or which will otherwise create substantial
conflict between his duty in the public interest and his private interest.
G. Each town employee shall endeavor to pursue a course of conduct
which will not raise suspicion among the public that he is likely to be
engaged in acts that are in violation of his trust.
H. No town employee employed on a full-time basis nor any firm or
association of which such employee is a member nor corporation a
substantial portion of the stock of which is owned or controlled directly
or indirectly by such employee shall sell goods or services to any
person, firm, corporation or association which is licensed or whose
rates are fixed by the town in which such employee serves or is
employed.
I. Each town employee shall, to the extent that he is cognizant thereof,
disclose any interest he may have in legislation before the Town Board.
J. No town employee within six months after the termination of his service
or employment with the town shall accept employment which will
involve contacts with the town which can work to his special advantage
by virtue of his prior contact and relationship with the town.
K. Gifts. No officer or employee shall be permitted to directly or indirectly
solicit any gift; or accept or receive any gift having a value of $75 or
more, whether in the form of money, services, loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise, or any other form, under
circumstances in which it could be reasonably inferred that the gift was
intended to influence him, or could reasonably be expected to influence
him, in the performance of his official duties or was intended as a
reward for any official action on his part. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L.
No. 2-1999]
§ 17-5 GATES CODE § 17-6
17:14
§ 17-6. Violations.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any such
town employee who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the
provisions of this chapter may be fined, suspended or removed from office
or employment in the manner provided by law.
§ 17-6 ETHICS, CODE OF § 17-6
17:15

ARTICLE III
Board of Ethics
§ 17-7. Board of Ethics established.
There is hereby established a Board of Ethics consisting of three members
to be appointed by the Town Board, all of whom reside in the Town of Gates
and who shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of the Town
Board of the Town of Gates. A majority of such members shall be persons
other than town employees but shall include at least one member who is an
elected or appointed town employee of the Town of Gates.
§ 17-8. Duties.
The Board of Ethics established hereunder shall render advisory opinions
to town employees on written request and upon request of the Town Board
make recommendations to such Town Board as to any amendments of
this chapter. The opinions of the Board of Ethics shall be advisory and
confidential and in no event shall the identity of the town employee be
disclosed except to authorized persons and agencies. Such opinions shall be
on the advice of counsel employed by the Board of Ethics or, if none, of the
Town Attorney.
§ 17-9. Rules and regulations.
Such Board of Ethics upon its formation shall promulgate its own rules and
regulations as to its form and procedures and shall maintain appropriate
records of its opinions and proceedings.
§ 17-7 ETHICS, CODE OF § 17-9
17:17

ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 17-10. Distribution of copies.
Upon the adoption of this chapter, the Town Supervisor shall cause a copy
thereof to be distributed to every town employee of this town. Failure to
distribute any such copy or failure of any town employee to receive such
copy shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with this chapter, nor the
enforcement of provisions hereof. The Town Supervisor shall further cause a
copy of this chapter to be kept posted conspicuously in each public building
under the jurisdiction of the town. Failure to so post this chapter shall
have no effect on the duty of compliance herewith, nor the enforcement
provisions hereof.
§ 17-11. Filing of copies.
Within 30 days of the adoption of this chapter, the Town Clerk shall file a
copy thereof in the office of the State Comptroller.
§ 17-12. Appropriation of money.
The Town Board may appropriate moneys from the general town funds
for the maintenance of and for personnel services to the Board of Ethics
established hereunder, but such Board of Ethics may not commit the
expenditure of town moneys except within the appropriations provided
herein.
§ 17-10 ETHICS, CODE OF § 17-12
17:19
Chapter 24
INSURANCE
§ 17-12 GATES CODE § 17-12
24:20
ARTICLE I
Alternative to Health Care Insurance Benefits
[Adopted 8-4-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997]
§ 24-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Local Law Providing an Alternative to
Health Insurance Benefits."
§ 24-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to codify the Town of Gates' procedure to
allow employees to take a cash payment in lieu of certain health insurance
benefits. This procedure was established by resolution of the Gates Town
Board on March 1, 1993 (R. 9193). This policy results in a savings of health
insurance costs to the Town of Gates and a cash benefit to eligible town
employees.
§ 24-3. Waiver of town-provided coverage; payment in lieu of
benefits.
Any Town of Gates employee who is eligible to receive health insurance
coverage provided by the Town of Gates and who has an alternative
provider of similar health insurance coverage and benefits may elect to
waive said health insurance coverage and benefits and receive, in cash, one
half of the annual health insurance premium which would have been paid
by the Town of Gates to the health insurance provider for said coverage and
benefits.
§ 24-4. Plans included.
The health insurance plans which are subject to this article include general
medical insurance coverage and benefits, dental coverage and benefits
and vision care coverage and benefits. In the event that additional health
insurance plans are added to those offered to Town of Gates employees, the
Town Board of the Town of Gates may extend this article to apply to said
additional health insurance plan(s) by passing a resolution to that effect.
§ 24-5. Procedure; resumption of coverage.
Any Town of Gates employee who wishes to take advantage of this
alternative must make a request in writing to the Town of Gates Payroll
Administrator. Said letter must indicate which plan or plans the employee
wishes to terminate, a termination date and, with respect to the medical
insurance benefits, the source of the alternative medical insurance
coverage. The Payroll Administrator will take the appropriate steps to
terminate the insurance subsequent to receipt of the letter. The employee
shall receive one half of the pro rata savings to the town of the insurance
premium for the balance for the year in which termination occurs. The
payment will be made the first February following the date of termination.
§ 24-1 INSURANCE § 24-5
24:21
The payments in lieu of health insurance benefits will continue in
subsequent years unless the employee notifies the Payroll Administrator
in writing of his/her desire to resume receiving town-provided medical
coverage. In the event of resumption of coverage, the employee will receive
a cash benefit equal to one half of any pro rata savings applicable to the year
in which health care coverage was resumed. Any payments made pursuant
to this article will be net of any taxes or other required deductions.
§ 24-5 GATES CODE § 24-5
24:22
Chapter 26
INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENTS
§ 24-5 INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENTS § 24-5
26:23

ARTICLE I
Emergency Mutual Aid
[Adopted 10-6-1997]
§ 26-1. Approval; participation.
The Town Board of the Town of Gates does hereby approve the
Intermunicipal Emergency Mutual Aid Agreement and shall participate as a
party to the agreement and amendments approved by this Board.
§ 26-2. Execution of agreement.
The Gates Town Highway Superintendent is authorized and directed to
execute the Intermunicipal Emergency Mutual Aid Agreement on behalf of
the Town of Gates.
§ 26-3. Appointment of Review Committee representative.
The Gates Town Highway Superintendent, or his/her designee, is hereby
appointed to serve as the Review Committee representative for the Town of
Gates.
§ 26-4. Filing of copies.
The Town Clerk is hereby directed to transmit a copy of this article to the
Monroe County Highway Superintendent.
§ 26-1 INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENTS § 26-4
26:25
Chapter 36
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 26-4 GATES CODE § 26-4
36:26
ARTICLE I
Defense
[Adopted 4-6-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981]
§ 36-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any member of a public board or commission, officer,
employee, volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a publicly
sponsored volunteer program or any other person holding a position by
election, appointment or employment in the service of the Town of Gates,
whether or not compensated. The term "employee" shall not include an
independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former
employee, the employee's estate or a judicially appointed personal
representative.[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
TOWN — The Town of Gates.
§ 36-2. Defense in civil actions or proceedings.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 36-3 of this
article, the town shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
have occurred while the employee was acting or in good faith
purporting to act within the scope of his public employment or duties.
Such defense shall not be provided where such civil action or
proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the town.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in this article, the employee shall be
represented by the Town Attorney or an attorney employed or retained
by the town for the defense of the employee. The Town Board shall
employ or retain an attorney for the defense of the employee whenever
the town does not have a Town Attorney or the Town Board determines,
based upon its investigation and review of the facts and circumstances
of the case, that representation by the Town Attorney would be
inappropriate or a court of competent jurisdiction determines that a
conflict of interest exists and that the employee cannot be represented
by the Town Attorney. Reasonable attorney's fees and litigation
expenses shall be paid by the town to such attorney employed or
retained, from time to time, during the pendency of the civil action
proceeding, subject to certification by the Town Supervisor that the
employee is entitled to representation under the terms and conditions
of this article. Payment of such fees and expenses shall be made in the
same manner as payment of other claims and expenses of the town. Any
dispute with respect to representation of multiple employees by the
Town Attorney or by an attorney employed or retained for such
purposes or with respect to the amount of the fees or expenses shall be
resolved by the court.
§ 36-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 36-2
36:27
§ 36-3. Defense contingent upon certain conditions being met.
[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
The duties to defend provided in this article shall be contingent upon
delivery to the Town Attorney or, if none, to the Town Supervisor of the
original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or
pleading, within 10 days after he is served with such document, and the full
cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding
and defense of any action or proceeding against the town based upon the
same act or omission and in the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery
shall be deemed a request by the employee that the town provide for his
defense pursuant to this article, unless the employee shall state in writing
that a defense is not requested.
§ 36-4. Benefits to inure only to employees; effect on state law.
The benefits of this article will inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this article be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provisions
of the Workers' Compensation Law.
§ 36-5. Employees of negotiating units.
The benefits of this article shall be extended to an employee of a negotiating
unit for which an agreement has been negotiated pursuant to Civil Service
Law Article 14 only if such agreement expressly so provides.
§ 36-6. Rights of insurers.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 36-7. Effect on immunities provided for under other laws.
As otherwise specifically provided in this article, the provisions of this
article shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the town or any right to defense provided for
any governmental officer or employee by, in accordance with or by reason
of any other provision of state or federal statutory or common law.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Town Attorney or the Town Supervisor, as required by § 36-3 of this
article, the Town Attorney or the Supervisor, as the case may be, shall
take the necessary steps, including the retention of an attorney under
the terms and conditions provided in Subsection B of this section, on
behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment, pending
resolution of any question relating to the obligation of the town to
provide a defense.
§ 36-2 GATES CODE § 36-8
36:28
§ 36-8. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all actions and proceedings
specified herein which have been commenced, instituted or brought on or
after the effective date of this article.
§ 36-8 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 36-8
36:29

ARTICLE II
Court Clerk
[Adopted 4-4-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
§ 36-9. Residency requirements.
A person may not hold the office of Court Clerk for the Town of Gates unless
such person is a citizen of the United States and a resident of the County
of Monroe or an adjoining county and the State of New York. However, a
person may hold the office of Court Clerk for the Town of Gates whether
or not such person is a resident of the Town of Gates and/or an elector of
the Town of Gates. The provision of this article stating that a person may
hold the office of Court Clerk whether or not such person is a resident of
the Town of Gates and/or an elector of the Town of Gates shall supersede
the requirement of local residency set forth in § 3, Subdivision 1, of the
Public Officers Law of the State of New York and shall also supersede the
requirement of being a local elector set forth in § 23, Subdivision 1, of the
Town Law of the State of New York.
§ 36-9 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 36-9
36:31
Chapter 39
POLICE
§ 36-9 GATES CODE § 36-9
39:32
ARTICLE I
Temporary or Special Police Officers
[Adopted 7-7-1997]
§ 39-1. Establishment; when effective.
Effective September 1, 1997, the Town of Gates establishes the positions of
temporary or special police officers.
§ 39-2. Powers; intent.
Such temporary or special town police shall have all the powers and
authority conferred upon constables under the laws of the State of New
York and such additional powers not inconsistent with law as may be
conferred upon them by the Town Board from time to time. The expressed
intention of the Town Board is that the temporary or special police officers
shall have the same functions and duties as the current auxiliary police.
§ 39-3. Service.
All such temporary or special town police shall serve at the pleasure of the
Town Board.
§ 39-4. Compensation.
Such temporary or special town police shall be deemed to be volunteers and
serve without compensation.
§ 39-5. Uniforms and equipment.
The Town of Gates shall purchase uniforms and equipment that are
necessary for the temporary or special town police officers to carry out their
duties.
§ 39-6. Activation for service; role of Administrator.
The temporary police officers shall be activated for service by the Gates
Town Board and, upon activation, shall be under the command and direction
of the Temporary or Special Police Administrator or his designee. Said
Administrator shall coordinate the operation of the temporary or special
police with the Chief of the Gates Police Department.
§ 39-7. Establishment and determination of rank.
The establishment of ranks and determination of rank for temporary or
special police officers shall be made by said Administrator.
§ 39-8. Appointments.
All present members of the Gates Auxiliary Police are hereby appointed
temporary or special police officers of the Town of Gates and any additional
§ 39-1 POLICE § 39-8
39:33
temporary or special police officers who meet the standards established by
the Town Board and pursuant to New York State Town Law § 158 may be
appointed as temporary or special police officers by the Town Board.
§ 39-9. Determination of exempt status by Civil Service
Commission.
In the event that the New York State Civil Service Commission determines
that temporary or special police officers as appointed by this article are not
members of the exempt class pursuant to Civil Service Law § 41, then said
appointment of such temporary or special police officer shall be terminated
effective within 30 days after notification of the same to the Town of Gates
unless a subsequent resolution of the Board is made.
§ 39-8 GATES CODE § 39-9
39:34
Chapter 41
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
§ 41-1. Department established; duties and functions.
There is hereby established in the Town of Gates a department to be known
as the "Public Works Department of the Town of Gates." Said Department
shall undertake and perform such duties and functions as may from time to
time be assigned thereto by the Town Board of the Town of Gates.
§ 41-2. Director.
The Department created hereby shall be headed by a Director to be
appointed by the Town Board of the Town of Gates.
Chapter 44
RECORDS
§ 39-9 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT § 41-2
41:35

ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
[Adopted 4-7-1975]
§ 44-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 44-2. Designation of records access officer.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decision-making
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by
which records may be obtained.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records
required by the Freedom of Information Law and those which were
furnished to the public prior to its enactment.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Supervisor of the Town of Gates is responsible for ensuring
compliance with the regulations herein, and designates the following
persons as records access officers:
Town Clerk
Town of Gates
1605 Buffalo Road
Rochester, New York 14624
B. Records access officers are responsible for ensuring appropriate
agency response to public requests for access to records. However, the
public shall not be denied access to records through officials who have
in the past been authorized to make records or information available.
C. Records access officers shall assure that personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions in
accordance with § 44-6B:
(a) Make records promptly available for inspection; or
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain in
writing the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
§ 44-1 RECORDS § 44-2
44:37
§ 44-3. Designation of fiscal officer.
§ 44-4. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the Town
Clerk's office, 1605 Buffalo Road, Town of Gates, New York, or at the
location where they are kept.
§ 44-5. Hours for public inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records
produced during all hours regularly open for business. These hours are 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily, except holidays, Saturdays and Sundays.
§ 44-6. Request procedure.
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 44-8; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a transcript is a true copy of records
copied.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The Town of Gates is not the legal custodian for such records;
or
(b) The records of which the Town of Gates is a legal custodian
after diligent search cannot be found.
A. The Supervisor of the Town of Gates, 1605 Buffalo Road, Rochester,
New York 14624, is designated the fiscal officer, who shall certify the
payroll and respond to requests. in accordance with § 44-6B, for an
itemized record setting forth the name, address, title and salary of
every officer or employee of the agency.
B. The fiscal officer shall make the payroll items listed above available to
any person including bona fide members of the news media as required
under the Freedom of Information Law. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L.
No. 2-1999]
A. Where a request for records is required, such request my be oral or in
writing. However, written requests shall not be required for records
that have been customarily available without written request.
B. Response to request.
(1) Except under extraordinary circumstance, officials shall respond to
a request for records no more than five business days after receipt
of the request, whether the request is oral or in writing.
§ 44-2 GATES CODE § 44-6
44:38
§ 44-7. Denial of access to records.
(2) If, because of extraordinary circumstances, more than five business
days are required to respond to a request, receipt of the request
shall be acknowledged within five business days after the request is
received. The acknowledgment shall state the reason for delay and
estimate the date when a reply will be made.
C. A request for access to records should be sufficiently detailed to
identify the records. Where possible, the requester should supply
information regarding dates, titles, file designations or other
information which may help identify the records. However, a request for
any or all records falling within a specific category conforms to the
standard that records be identifiable.
D. Subject matter list.
(1) A current list, by subject matter, of all records produced, filed or
first kept or promulgated after September 1, 1974, shall be
available for public inspection and copying. The list shall be
sufficiently detailed to permit the requester to identify the file
category of the records sought.
(2) The subject matter list shall be updated periodically and the date of
the most recent updating shall appear on the first page. The
updating of the subject matter list shall not be less than
semiannual.
E. No records may be removed by the requester from the office where the
record is located without the permission of the Supervisor.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing stating the reason
therefor and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the
individual or body established to hear appeals.
B. If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in § 44-6B
of these regulations, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of
access.
C. The following person or persons or body shall hear appeals for denial of
access to records under the Freedom of Information Law:
The Town Board of the Town of Gates
1605 Buffalo Road
Rochester, New York 14624
D. The time for deciding an appeal by the individual or body designated to
hear appeals shall commence upon receipt of written appeal
identifying:
(1) The date of the appeal.
§ 44-6 RECORDS § 44-7
44:39
§ 44-8. Fees.
§ 44-9. Public notice.
A notice containing the job title or name and business address of the records
access officers and fiscal officer; the name, job title, business address and
telephone number of the appeal person or persons or body; and the location
where records can be seen or copied shall be posted in a conspicuous
location wherever records are kept and/or published in a local newspaper
of general circulation.
(2) The date and location of the request for records.
(3) The records to which the requester was denied access.
(4) Whether the denial of access was in writing or was by failure to
provide records promptly as required by § 44-6B.
(5) The name and return address of the requester.
E. The individual or body designated to hear appeals shall inform the
requester of its decision in writing within seven business days of receipt
of an appeal.
F. A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in
Subsection E of this section, shall be subject to court review, as
provided for in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
A. There shall be a fee, paid to the Town Clerk, as follows:
(1) Inspection of records: no charge.
(2) Search for records: $1 per page (Town Board Resolution No. 4445).
(3) Certification by Town Clerk: $2 per document.
B. Photocopies of records as follows:
(1) Twenty-five cents per sheet 8 1/2 by 14 or less.
(2) Sheet over 8 1/2 by 14: cost to the town.
C. All other fees, if any, shall be charged in accordance with laws, rules
and regulations.
§ 44-7 GATES CODE § 44-9
44:40
ARTICLE II
Records Retention
[Adopted 3-6-1989]
§ 44-10. Adoption of Records Retention and Disposition Schedule
MU-1.
The Gates Town Board does hereby adopt Records Retention and
Disposition Schedule MU-1 for Use by Municipal Governments for the legal
disposition of official municipal records.
§ 44-10 RECORDS § 44-10
44:41
Chapter 47
RECREATION DEPARTMENT
§ 47-1. Department established; duties and functions.
There is hereby established in the Town of Gates a department to be known
as the "Recreation Department of the Town of Gates." Said Department shall
undertake and perform such duties and functions as may from time to time
be assigned thereto by the Town Board of the Town of Gates.
§ 47-2. Director.
The Department created hereby shall be headed by a Director to be
appointed by the Town Board of the Town of Gates.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 59
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 59-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Local Law Regulating Alarm Systems in
the Town of Gates."
§ 59-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Gates by reducing
the number of avoidable alarms to emergency agencies. Avoidable alarms
contribute to ineffective utilization of public safety manpower and
equipment. In addition, avoidable alarms require emergency responses
which may contribute to a high accident rate and delayed responses to
genuine emergencies. This chapter seeks to ensure that police, fire
communications and ambulance facilities will be available to dispatch
police, fire and ambulance personnel for actual emergencies and to alleviate
the nuisance of audible alarms in the town. Another purpose of this chapter
is to provide the town with the names of responsible people to contact in
the case of activation of an alarm.
§ 59-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or an assembly of equipment which emits an
audible response, which is intended to alert persons outside a premises
to the existence of a hazard or emergency or which is intended to alert
§ 44-10 GATES CODE § 59-3
47:42
emergency agencies by automatically dialing an emergency agency or
which is connected to a private answering point for the purpose of reporting
such alarms to emergency agencies or which is directly connected to the
Emergency Communications Center or other emergency agency.
ALARM USER — Any person who owns, leases or uses an alarm system
within the Town of Gates, except for a person whose alarm system is on a
motor vehicle or is a proprietary system. If, however, an alarm system on a
motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises (other than
a proprietary system) in the Town of Gates, the person using such system is
an alarm user.
AVOIDABLE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of
the owner, user, custodian or lessee of an alarm system, or of his employees
or agents, or through any other cause which, through direct connection to
an emergency agency or through notification of an emergency agency by a
private answering point or automatic dialing device or through notification
to an emergency agency by any second party or means, indicates that
an emergency situation exists requiring response within the town when,
in fact, an emergency situation does not exist. An "avoidable alarm" also
includes the knowing or intentional activation of an alarm to an emergency
agency when the activator knows that an emergency situation does not
exist. "Avoidable alarm" does not include alarms activated by violent
conditions of nature such as hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or any
other similar cause beyond the control of the user of the alarm system.
Activation of an alarm system under any circumstances which the activator
reasonably believes that an emergency situation exists is not an avoidable
alarm. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary, the defective
installation of an alarm system, the failure to repair or cause to be repaired
an alarm system or the use of defective equipment in connection with an
alarm system shall not constitute an extraordinary circumstance beyond the
reasonable control of the alarm user.
EMERGENCY AGENCY — Any Police Department, Fire Department or other
law enforcement agency or ambulance company (public or private) or other
agency summoned to respond to an emergency situation and any public
safety answering point serving the Town of Gates.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM — A signaling system which, when activated,
causes an audible signaling device to be activated outside the premises
within which the system is installed.
NOTICE ADDRESS — The address which an alarm user designates on the
application for a permit as the address to which notices are to be sent.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE ANSWERING POINT — A business which offers the service of
receiving emergency signals, monitoring said signals and relaying them to
an emergency agency.
§ 59-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 59-3
59:43
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — An alarm, sounding and/or recording within the
premises protected by the alarm, which is not intended to alert persons
outside of the premises on which the alarm system is located of a possible
hazard and not intended to alert an emergency agency, the control center
being under the supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises. If a
proprietary system includes a signal line connected directly or by means of
an automatic device to an emergency agency or to a private answering point
or to a local alarm system, it thereby becomes an alarm system as defined
in this chapter.
TOWN — The Town of Gates.
§ 59-4. Exemptions.
§ 59-5. Permit required.
No person shall own, use, lease, operate or maintain an alarm system within
the Town of Gates unless such person shall have first obtained from the
town a permit for such alarm, as herein provided.
§ 59-6. Application for permit.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to proprietary systems.
B. Permits shall be required for alarm systems located in buildings of
federal, state or local governmental agencies or authorities or in public
or private elementary schools, but said alarm systems shall be exempt
from the permit fee, but said alarms shall be subject to the fines and
penalties herein provided for avoidable alarms.
A. In order to obtain an alarm user permit, any person who operates an
alarm system shall submit an application for such permit in the form
designated by the town, which application shall contain the following:
(1) The name, home address and telephone number of the person
applying for the permit.
(2) The address of the premises upon which the alarm system is or will
be located.
(3) The address to which notices required under this chapter shall be
sent.
(4) The type of alarm system for which the permit is sought.
(5) The name of the alarm business or businesses selling, installing,
monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm
system, if applicable.
(6) The name, address and telephone number of one or more persons
who can be reached at any time and who are authorized by the
owner of the premises in which the system is installed to open the
premises.
§ 59-3 GATES CODE § 59-6
59:44
§ 59-7. Fee.
§ 59-8. Duration of permit.
An alarm user permit shall expire on April 30 next following its date of
issuance.
§ 59-9. Renewal of permit.
(7) Any other information relating to the alarm system or user as the
town may require.
B. The information required on the permit application shall be treated as
confidential and shall not be made available to members of the general
public. The Town Board finds that the release of such information would
constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy and could
endanger the life or safety of persons at the premises where an alarm
system is located. The information on a permit application shall be used
by the town only for public safety purposes.
A. Every application for an alarm user permit shall be accompanied by a
fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board, except that
no fee shall be required for applications submitted by any alarm user by
December 31, 1985, nor for applications submitted after said date if the
application is submitted prior to the installation of an alarm system.
[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
B. Upon the receipt of a properly executed permit application, the town
shall issue an alarm user permit to the applicant. Alarm user permits
shall not be transferable, shall be kept on the premises where the alarm
system is located and shall be made available for inspection by
emergency agency officers.
A. Subject to the provisions of this chapter and upon the payment of the
appropriate renewal fee as stipulated in Subsection B hereof, an alarm
user permit may be renewed by the alarm user.
B. The annual permit renewal fee shall be based upon the number of
avoidable alarms recorded for each alarm user as follows:
(1) For an alarm user with zero avoidable alarms during the preceding
year, no renewal fee shall be charged.
(2) For an alarm user with one to three avoidable alarms during the
preceding year, a base permit renewal fee as set from time to time
by resolution of the Town Board shall be charged. [Amended
9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
(3) For an alarm user with more than three avoidable alarms during
the preceding year, a base permit renewal fee plus an additional
excessive use fee for each avoidable alarm in excess of three shall
be charged as set from time to time by resolution of the Town
§ 59-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 59-9
59:45
§ 59-10. Notice of excessive use.
The town shall notify an alarm user in writing, by means of first-class mail
sent to the notice address listed on the permit application, when an alarm
user has had three avoidable alarms during the permit year. The notice
shall inform the alarm user that additional avoidable alarms will subject
the alarm user to the excessive use fee as specified in this chapter for
each additional avoidable alarm. At the end of the permit year, the town
shall notify each alarm user having more than three avoidable alarms of
the number of avoidable alarms incurred during the preceding year and the
amount to be charged for the renewal of the alarm user permit. The notice
shall be in writing and shall be sent by first-class mail to the notice address
listed on the application.
§ 59-11. Revocation of permit.
An alarm user permit shall be revoked whenever 10 or more avoidable
alarms are recorded for a system in any one permit year. Notice of such
revocation shall be sent by the town via first-class mail, to the notice
address listed on the permit application, at least 15 days before the
revocation takes effect. The alarm user may reinstate a revoked permit by
the payment of the excessive use fee for each avoidable alarm in excess of
three (the excessive use fee shall be as specified in § 59-9B of this chapter)
and by submission of proof that modifications have been made to the alarm
system or other steps have been effected so as to reduce the number of
avoidable alarms. An alarm user permit shall not be revoked under this
section if said alarm system is required by federal, state or local law.
However, all other provisions of this chapter shall apply to such systems and
the user thereof shall remain responsible for the payment of all authorized
fees.
§ 59-12. Enforcement.
Any emergency agency as herein defined desiring the town to initiate
enforcement of this chapter against an alarm user who has generated
avoidable alarms shall comply with the following requirements:
Board. At the time of renewal, an alarm user shall receive credit
for any amounts paid during the permit year to reinstate a revoked
permit. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
C. No renewal of a permit shall be granted unless the appropriate renewal
fee is submitted with the application.
A. The emergency agency shall send to the Town Clerk of the Town of
Gates an alarm incident report containing the information required in
§ 59-13 within seven days of the alarm call.
B. A copy of the avoidable alarm incident report shall be mailed by the
emergency agency, via first-class mail, to the alarm user to the notice
address listed on the permit application.
§ 59-9 GATES CODE § 59-12
59:46
§ 59-13. Avoidable alarm incident report.
Whenever an emergency agency files an avoidable alarm report, such report
shall contain the following information:
§ 59-14. Authority of Supervisor.
The Supervisor of the Town of Gates is authorized to develop procedures
for the purpose of implementing or providing clarification for §§ 59-12 and
59-13 of this chapter.
§ 59-15. Connections to Emergency Communications Center.
Alarm systems which are interconnected or otherwise transmit signals
directly to the Emergency Communications Center shall be subject to the
laws, rules, regulations and penalties adopted by the County of Monroe
relating to such systems.
§ 59-16. Local alarms.
C. An alarm user receiving a notice of an avoidable alarm may challenge
such classification by notifying the emergency agency in writing,
specifying in detail the reasons why the alleged avoidable alarm should
not be so classified. The challenging notice must be received by the
emergency agency within 20 days after notification to the alarm user. A
hearing may be requested by the alarm user with the notice. The failure
to give timely notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to challenge
the classification.
D. Within a reasonable time, but not more than 45 days after receipt of a
notice from the alarm user challenging the classification of an alarm as
an avoidable alarm, the emergency agency shall make a final
determination, which shall be reviewable only pursuant to Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E. Within 10 days after a final determination has been made by the
emergency agency, a copy thereof shall be filed with the Town Clerk and
a copy mailed or otherwise given to the alarm user.
A. The alarm user's name and address.
B. The date and location of the avoidable alarm.
C. The reasons why the alarm was determined to be an avoidable alarm.
D. Any other pertinent information.
A. All local alarm systems shall become deactivated and silenced
automatically after a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
B. Police and/or fire officials may disable an audible alarm signal that has
not been silenced prior to the expiration of the fifteen-minute period
and shall not be liable for any damage that may result.
§ 59-12 ALARM SYSTEMS § 59-17
59:47
§ 59-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
In addition to any other fees or penalties provided for in this chapter, a
violation of § 59-5 of this chapter shall be deemed an offense and shall
be punishable by a mandatory fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment; provided, however, that no person shall be charged with
such offense until 15 days after notice to said person that he is required to
obtain an alarm user permit, and further provided that no charge shall be
filed against a person so notified if he obtains a permit during said fifteenday
period. A person found guilty of violating § 59-5 shall not be excused
from obtaining the required permit.
§ 59-18. Applicability.
The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall apply to all persons
who are alarm users on the effective date of this chapter and to all persons
who subsequently become alarm users.
Chapter 62
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 4.
§ 59-17 GATES CODE § 59-18
59:48
ARTICLE I
Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 11-4-1965; amended in its entirety 5-22-1967]
§ 62-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Gates Dog and Cat Ordinance."
§ 62-2. Purpose; statutory authority.
§ 62-3. Definitions.
As used and intended in this article and for the purposes hereof, unless the
context otherwise indicates, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Male or female dogs and cats, either singular or plural.
AT LARGE — As applied to an animal, shall designate and describe each
animal at all times when it is off the premises of its owner or is on the
premises of another without his consent and is not under the visual and
voice control of its owner.
CONFINED — As applied to an animal, shall mean that such animal is
securely confined or restrained and kept on the owner's premises, either
within a building, kennel or wire or other suitable enclosure or securely
fastened on a chain, wire or other effective tether of such length and so
arranged that the animal cannot reach or endanger any person or any
adjacent premises, or on any public street, way or place or, if the animal
is being transported by the owner, that it is securely confined in a crate
or other container or so restrained in a vehicle that it cannot escape
therefrom.
DANGEROUS — Shall mean, designate and apply to any animal which,
without just cause, bites, attacks, chases or snaps at or otherwise threatens
to attack any person or attacks and wounds a dog or other domestic animal
or which displays any other fierce, vicious or dangerous propensities.
OWNER — Considered to be the party purchasing the license, unless the
dog is or has been lost and such loss has been reported to the Gates Police
and reasonable search has been made. If an animal is not licensed, the term
"owner" shall designate and cover any person or persons, firm, association
A. The purpose of this article shall be to preserve the public peace and
good order in the Town of Gates and to contribute to the public welfare
and good order of its people by enforcing certain regulations and
restrictions on the activities of dogs and cats that are consistent with
the rights and privileges of the owners of dogs and cats and the rights
and privileges of other citizens in the Town of Gates.
B. This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of § 124 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York. [Amended
9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
§ 62-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-3
59:49
or corporation who or which at any time owns or has custody or control of,
harbors or is otherwise responsible for any animal which is kept, brought or
comes within the town. Any person owning or harboring a dog for a period
of one week prior to the filing of any complaint charging a violation of this
article shall be held and deemed to be the owner of such dog for the purpose
of this article. In the event any dog found to be in violation of this article
shall be owned by a minor, the head of the household in which said minor
resides shall be deemed to have custody and control of said dog and shall
be responsible for any acts of said dog and violation of this article.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — As applied to an animal, shall describe, designate or
apply to:
TOWN — The area within the corporate limits of the Town of Gates.
§ 62-4. Owner's responsibility.
The owner of every animal which is at any time kept, brought or comes into
the town will be held responsible for the strict observance, by such animal
and with respect to such animal, of all the rules and regulations contained
in this article at all times when such animal is within the town.
§ 62-5. Dog license fees. [Added 10-1-1979; amended 12-2-1991 by
L.L. No. 6-1991; 12-6-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
Every animal which seriously and habitually disturbs the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood by barking or howling or making other
disturbing noises.
A.
Every animal which habitually chases any persons or bicycles,
automobiles or other vehicles upon any public highway or in any such
public place.
B.
Every animal which is a dangerous animal as defined in the above
definition of "dangerous," and every such animal is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance.
C.
A. License application and fees.
(1) The owner of any dog reaching the age of four months shall
immediately make application for a dog license. No license shall be
required for any dog under the age of four months that is not at
large or that is residing in a pound or shelter maintained by or
under contract or agreement with the state or any county, city,
town or village, any duly incorporated society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, duly incorporated humane society or duly
incorporated dog protective society.
(2) Application for a dog license shall be made to the Clerk and shall be
accompanied by the appropriate license fee, as specified below.
(3) The application shall state the sex, actual or approximate year of
birth, breed, color(s), and municipal identification number of the
§ 62-3 GATES CODE § 62-5
59:50
dog, and other identification marks, if any, and the name, address,
telephone number, county and town of residence of owner, and
such other information as deemed necessary by the Clerk.
(4) In the case of a spayed or neutered dog, every application shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian
showing that the dog has been spayed or neutered, provided that
such certificate shall not be required if the same is already on file
with the Clerk.
(5) The application shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
licensed veterinarian showing that the dog or dogs have been
vaccinated to prevent rabies or, in lieu thereof, a statement
certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that because of age or
other reason, the life of the dog or dogs would be endangered by
the administration of vaccine. The Clerk shall make or cause to be
made from such statement a record of such information and file
such record with a copy of the license.
B. License fees. The fee for a dog license shall be as follows:
(1) Spayed/neutered dog: $9 per year (includes state-mandated
surcharge of $3).
(2) Unspayed/unneutered dog: $18 per year (includes state-mandated
surcharge of $1).
(3) Upon submission of proper documentation, there shall be no fee
charged for the license issued for any detection dog, guide dog,
hearing dog, police work dog, service dog, therapy dog, war dog or
working search dog, as such terms are defined by the Agriculture
and Markets Law.
(4) Senior citizens will receive $4.00 off the dog licensing fee.
C. Upon validation by the Clerk, the application shall become a license for
the dog described therein. Once an application has been validated, no
refund shall be made.
D. The Clerk shall provide a copy of the license to the owner and retain a
record of the license in either paper or electronic format.
E. A license shall be renewed after a period of one year beginning with the
first day of the month following the date of issuance. Renewal shall be
for a minimum of one year and shall not exceed three years, based on
the validation term of the rabies vaccination.
F. No license shall be transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of any
dog, the new owner shall immediately make application for a license for
such dog. The original issued identification tag shall remain the same
for the life of the dog.
§ 62-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-6
59:51
§ 62-6. Animals in heat.
The owner of every female animal must effectively confine such animal at
all times during every period which such animal is in heat.
§ 62-7. Number of animals on premises. [Amended 12-6-2010 by
L.L. No. 5-2010]
§ 62-8. Animals to be leashed.
No person who owns a dog, shall permit such dog to be at large in the
Town of Gates, Monroe County, New York, unless on a leash not to exceed
six feet in length, other than when on the premises of the person owning,
keeping, harboring or having the custody and control of such dog or upon
the premises of another with the knowledge, consent and approval of the
owner of said premises or when hunting in the company and under the
control of a hunter or hunters.
A. It shall be unlawful to keep more than four animals, four months old or
older, of which not more than two shall be either dogs or cats, on any
premises, regardless of the number of owners, unless the provisions of
Chapter 190, Zoning, in regard to kennels have been complied with, or
as provided for in § 62-7B below.
B. A homeowner may apply for a special use permit to retain more than
two dogs on his/her premises.
(1) A homeowner owning more than two dogs may apply for a special
use permit from the Animal Control Officer. The Animal Control
Officer shall review applications for permission to retain more than
two dogs on a case-by-case basis. The Animal Control Officer shall
consider the effect on the character of the neighborhood in the
event that additional dogs are permitted to remain on the
homeowner's premises.
(2) A homeowner applying for a special use permit must have had no
violations of Chapter 62 of the Gates Town Code during the 12
months prior to the application.
(3) In the event that a permit is granted by the Animal Control Officer,
the permit will terminate upon the death or removal from the
homeowner's premises of any dog for whom the permit was issued.
The permit may be revoked in the event that the homeowner is
convicted of two violations of Chapter 62 of the Gates Town Code
within any twelve-month period or if any dog owned by the
homeowner is determined to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this
chapter or the New York Agriculture and Markets Law.
(4) The application for a special use permit will be $50. An annual
renewal of fee of $25 will also be required.
§ 62-6 GATES CODE § 62-9
59:52
§ 62-9. Dangerous animals.
It shall be unlawful for any animal determined to be dangerous to be at
large within the Town of Gates at any time, even though such animal is
licensed, muzzled and effectively immunized against rabies. A dangerous
animal which is found at large may be taken and impounded. If any
dangerous, fierce or vicious animal found at large cannot be safely taken up
and impounded, such animal may be summarily slain.
§ 62-10. Restrictions. [Added 6-8-1978]
In addition to other restrictions contained in this article, it shall be unlawful
for any owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to:
§ 62-11. Appointment of Dog Control Officer.
A. Become a public nuisance as defined in this article.
B. Engage in loud howling or barking or conduct itself in such a manner as
to habitually annoy any person other than the owner of person
harboring such animal.
C. Cause damage or destruction to property other than the property of the
owner or person harboring such animal.
A. The Town of Gates shall appoint a Dog Control Officer or Dog Control
Officers, as needed, pursuant to the appropriate statutes of the State of
New York. It shall be the duty of such Dog Control Officer or Dog
Control Officers of the Town of Gates to enforce the appropriate
provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law with respect to dogs in
the Town of Gates and to enforce this article.
B. The Dog Control Officer or Dog Control Officers of the Town of Gates
shall seize any dog which is found to be in violation of any portion of this
article as well as any dog or dogs otherwise required to be seized under
and by virtue of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New
York. All complaints concerning alleged violations of this article shall be
communicated to the Dog Control Officer or Dog Control Officers. All
such complaints shall be investigated and it shall be the duty of the Dog
Control Officer or Dog Control Officers in the appropriate case to
proceed with civil or criminal enforcement of this article or any other
provisions of law pertaining hereto.
C. The Dog Control Officer or Dog Control Officers are hereby authorized
to issue and serve appearance tickets, and the Dog Control Officer or a
peace officer observing a violation of this article in his presence may
issue and serve an appearance ticket for such violation. The appearance
ticket shall be in the form prescribed by this Board by resolution in
accordance with the provisions of § 124 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law and this article. [Added 6-8-1978; amended 9-7-1999 by L.L.
No. 2-1999]
§ 62-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-12
59:53
§ 62-12. Complaints.
All complaints made under any provisions of this article must be in writing,
signed and sworn to before a Justice of the Peace. Any such complaint shall
be promptly heard and determined by a currently presiding Justice of the
Peace after written notice of said complaint to the owner of such animal,
appointing a time for such hearing, which shall not be less than three days
after personal service of the notice on the owner or the purported owner.
Personal service may be complied with by notification through ordinary
mail. If the Justice of the Peace finds that the complaint made is duly
established, he shall determine and declare such animal to be a public
nuisance or make any other determination consistent with the provisions of
this article and other laws relating thereto.
§ 62-13. Procedures for enforcement. [Added 6-8-1978]
A. The owner of a dog who is issued an appearance ticket pursuant to
§ 62-11 herein may answer the same by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, within five days of the violation(s) as
hereunder provided, in lieu of a personal appearance on the return date
at the time and court specified in said appearance ticket.
B. If the person charged with the violation admits to the violation as
charged in the appearance ticket, he may complete the appropriate
form on such appearance ticket and forward such form and appearance
ticket to the office specified on such appearance ticket. Where the
appearance ticket sets forth the schedule of penalties and fines for
violations of this article, a certified check or money order in the amount
of the penalty for the violation charged shall be submitted with such
answer. If no schedule of penalties is set forth, the court shall set the
penalty as herein provided and notify the person charged with the
violation of the amount thereof. If the penalty specified by the court
shall not be paid within the time allowed by the court for payment of the
same, a warrant of arrest may be issued.
C. If the person charged with the violation denies part or all of the
violation as charged in the appearance ticket, he may complete the
appearance ticket likewise prescribed for that purpose and forward
such appearance ticket, together with a certified check or money order
in an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board,
to the office of the court specified on such appearance ticket. Upon
receipt, such answer shall be entered in the docket and a new return
date established by said court officer. Such person shall be notified of
the date and place of such return date and/or trial, and the security
shall be returned upon appearance thereat. If a person shall fail to
appear at a return date when such is provided for pursuant to this
section, the security posted to secure such appearance shall be
forfeited and a summons or a warrant of arrest may be issued pursuant
to the Criminal Procedure Law. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
§ 62-12 GATES CODE § 62-13
59:54
§ 62-14. Abandoned dogs.
Any dog at large which does not display any current dog license or other
means of identification or which fails to exhibit any evidence of having had
administered to it a rabies vaccination shall be considered an abandoned
dog and may be summarily impounded by the Dog Control Officer.
§ 62-15. Redemption of seized dogs.
D. In the event that a violation of this article is based upon an information
and not an appearance ticket and the owner of the dog desires a trial,
he shall post bail in an amount as set from time to time by resolution of
the Town Board. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
E. Whenever an animal has been impounded or is required to be
impounded, in addition to any penalties which may be imposed, the
owner shall pay for the care and maintenance of the animal during the
period of impoundment.
A. Every dog seized shall be properly fed and cared for at the expense of
the Town of Gates until disposition thereof as herein provided and in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Agriculture and
Markets Law of the State of New York.
B. Every dog seized shall be treated in a humane manner.
C. If the dog seized bears a license tag, the Dog Control Officer shall
ascertain the owner of the dog and shall give immediate notice by
personally serving such owner or by mailing said personal notice to
such owner or an adult member of his family with a notice, in writing,
stating that the dog has been seized and will be destroyed unless
redeemed as herein provided. If notification is personally given, such
dog shall be held for a period of seven days after day of notice, during
which period the dog may be redeemed by the owner. If such
notification is made by mail, such dog shall be held for a period of nine
days from the date of mailing, during which period the dog may be
redeemed by the owner. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
D. The owner of a dog so seized may redeem the dog within the time
period prescribed by the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law
by paying to the Town Clerk a sum as set from time to time by resolution
of the Town Board for the cost of seizure and the reasonable cost of
feeding and caring for such dog. The redemption fee for a second
seizure and for any subsequent seizures of the same dog shall be as set
from time to time by resolution of the Town Board. [Amended
2-4-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991; 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
E. If not so redeemed, the owner shall forfeit all title to the dog and the
dog shall be sold, made available for adoption or euthanized by the Dog
Control Officer. In the case of sale, the purchaser must pay the
purchase price to the Town Clerk and obtain a license for such dog. A
§ 62-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-15
59:55
§ 62-16. Humane treatment of animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town of Gates to torture, torment,
deprive of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat or otherwise
abuse or needlessly mutilate or kill a living animal or creature. Any animal
so treated shall be impounded by the Dog Control Officer. The owner thereof
shall be notified, in writing and by personal service or by regular mail, of
the alleged violation, and the matter shall be referred to the Justice of the
Peace for hearing and determination.
§ 62-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-8-1978; 9-7-1999 by
L.L. No. 2-1999]
Except as otherwise provided in § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law,
upon conviction, a violation of this article shall be deemed an offense
punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 62-18. Compensation for dogs destroyed.
The owner, harborer or possessor of any dog destroyed under the provisions
of this article shall not be entitled to any compensation and no action shall
be maintainable thereafter to recover the value of the dog.
dog which is to be destroyed shall be done so only by a veterinarian in
keeping with the latest humane practices of disposing of animals. The
Dog Control Officer who causes such dog to be destroyed shall make
a written report of such destruction and disposition to the Town Clerk,
together with a statement from the veterinarian destroying the dog,
stating that the dog was destroyed in keeping with humane practices.
The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all dogs which are destroyed.
[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
F. In those instances where a dog has been seized and bears a license tag,
the notice given by the Dog Control Officer pursuant to this section
shall contain a statement advising the owner that, in the event of the
owner's failure to redeem the dog within the time allowed, all costs in
connection with the feeding, caring, housing and destruction of said
dog shall be a charge against the owner and written request will be
made for said expenditure after destruction of said dog. Said notice will
further advise the owner that in the event of his failure to pay the
expense as aforesaid within 30 days of the receipt of said request from
the town, the sum will be placed on the tax rolls of any real property in
the Town of Gates to which the owner has title. [Added 4-17-1972]
G. In lieu of recovering the cost of maintenance by placing said cost on the
tax rolls as provided in Subsection F of this section, the town may
recover such costs against the owner by a civil action. [Added
6-8-1978]
§ 62-15 GATES CODE § 62-19
59:56
§ 62-19. Amendments.
The Town Board may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify
or repeal this article pursuant to the provisions of the Town Law applicable
thereto.
§ 62-20. When effective.
This article shall take effect 10 days after publication and posting pursuant
to § 133 of the Town Law of the State of New York but shall take effect from
the date of its service as against a person served personally with a copy
thereof, certified by the Town Clerk under the corporate seal of the town
and showing the date of its passage and entry in the minutes.
§ 62-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 62-20
59:57
Chapter 63
BEST VALUE AWARD METHODOLOGY
§ 63-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "the Town of Gates Best Value Contract
Award Law."
§ 63-2. Finding and intent.
A. The State Legislature and Governor amended General Municipal Law
§ 103 (A08692/S6117) on January 27, 2012, to provide local
governments greater flexibility in awarding contracts by authorizing
the award of purchase contracts, including contracts for service work,
on the basis of best value. The state legislation requires political
subdivisions with a population of less than 1,000,000 to pass a local law
authorizing the use of the best value award process.
B. (From Assembly Bill Memo A08692) Enactment of this chapter provides
additional procurement options to localities in ways that may expedite
the procurement process and result in cost savings. The "best value"
standard for selecting goods and services vendors, including janitorial
and security contracts, is critical to efforts to use strategic sourcing
principles to modernize the supply chain and ensure that taxpayers
obtain the highest quality goods and services at the lowest potential
cost, while also ensuring fairness to all competitors.
C. The federal government, approximately half of the states and many
localities have added best value selection processes to their
procurement options, in recognition of these advantages. With the
increased complexity of the goods and services that municipalities must
obtain in order to serve taxpayers, it is critical to consider selection and
evaluation criteria that measure factors other than cost in the strictest
sense.
D. Taxpayers are not well served when a public procurement results in low
unit costs at the outset, but ultimately engenders cost escalations due
to factors such as inferior quality, poor reliability and difficulty of
maintenance. Best value procurement links the procurement process
directly to the municipality's performance requirements, incorporating
selection factors such as useful lifespan, quality and options and
incentives for more timely performance and/or additional services.
E. Even if the initial expenditure is higher, considering the total value over
the life of the procurement may result in a better value and long-term
investment of public funds. Best value procurement also encourages
competition and, in turn, often results in better pricing, quality and
customer service. Fostering healthy competition ensures that bidders
will continue to strive for excellence in identifying and meeting
municipalities' needs, including such important goals as the
§ 62-20 GATES CODE § 63-2
59:58
§ 63-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST VALUE — The basis for awarding contracts for services to the offerer
who optimizes quality, cost and efficiency, among responsive and
responsible offerers. Such basis shall reflect, wherever possible, objective
and quantifiable analysis. Such basis may also identify a quantitative factor
for offerers that are small businesses or certified minority- or women-owned
business enterprises as defined in Subdivisions 1, 7, 15 and 20 of § 310
of the Executive Law to be used in evaluation of offers for awarding of
contracts for services.
§ 63-4. Requirements.
participation of small, minority- and women-owned businesses, and the
development of environmentally preferable goods and service delivery
methods. Best value procurement will provide much-needed flexibility
in obtaining important goods and services at favorable prices, and will
reduce the time to procure such goods and services.
A. Where the basis for award is the best value offer, the Comptroller/
Director of Finance shall document, in the procurement record and in
advance of the initial receipt of offers, the determination of the
evaluation criteria, which, whenever possible, shall be quantifiable, and
the process to be used in the determination of best value and the
manner in which the evaluation process and selection shall be
conducted.
(1) The Comptroller/Director of Finance shall select a formal
competitive procurement process in accordance with General
Municipal Law and Town of Gates purchasing policies and
document its determination in the procurement record. The
process shall include, but is not limited to, a clear statement of
need; a description of the required specifications governing
performance and related factors; a reasonable process for ensuring
a competitive field; a fair and equal opportunity for offerers to
submit responsive offers; and a balanced and fair method of award.
Where the basis for the award is best value, documentation in the
procurement record shall, where practicable, include a
quantification of the application of the criteria to the rating of
proposals and the evaluation results, or, where not practicable,
such other justification which demonstrates that best value will be
achieved.
B. The solicitation shall prescribe the minimum specifications or
requirements that must be met in order to be considered responsive
and shall describe and disclose the general manner in which the
evaluation and selection shall be conducted. Where appropriate, the
solicitation shall identify the relative importance and/or weight of cost
§ 63-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 63-4
59:59
§ 63-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person, individual, corporation,
firm, partnership, entity or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such order or
judgment shall not affect, impair, effect or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or part of this chapter or in its application to the
person, individual, corporation, firm, partnership, entity or circumstance
directly involved in the controversy in which such order or judgment shall
be rendered.
§ 63-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the New York
State Secretary of State.
Chapter 66
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 102.
§ 66-1. Conduct authorized.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of the
General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the
game of bingo within the territorial limits of the Town of Gates, subject to
the provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law
and Article 19-B of the Executive Law.
and the overall technical criterion to be considered by the Town of
Gates in its determination of best value.
C. The Comptroller/Director of Finance shall develop procedures that will
govern the award of contracts on the basis of best value. These
procedures shall be included in the Town of Gates purchasing policies
and reviewed annually by the Town Board in conjunction with its annual
review and approval of the Town of Gates purchasing policies.
§ 63-4 GATES CODE § 66-1
66:60
Chapter 70
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 4.
Electrical code — See Ch. 87.
Fire sprinkler systems — See Ch. 97.
Zoning - See Ch. 190.
§ 70-1. Title; legislative intent.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Gates Building Construction
and Fire Prevention Code." It is the intent of this chapter to provide for
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of all laws, codes,
ordinances, regulations and orders applicable to:
§ 70-2. Adoption of Uniform Code.
There is hereby adopted by the Town Board of the Town of Gates, Monroe
County, New York, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
building construction and conditions hazardous to life and property from
fire, explosion or other cause, the regulations and standards as set forth
in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and
amendments thereto (henceforth referred to as the "Uniform Code").
§ 70-3. Definitions.
All technical terms used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in
the Uniform Code, latest edition, and/or the applicable generally accepted
standards contained in said Uniform Code, except as such terms may
otherwise be defined in this chapter.
§ 70-4. Administration; enforcement officers.
A. The location, design, materials, construction, alteration, repair,
equipment, maintenance, use, occupancy, removal and demolition of
buildings, structures and appurtenances in the town.
B. Fire prevention and firesafety regulations consistent with nationally
recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a reasonable degree,
of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosions arising from
hazardous conditions in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises
and from the storage and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices.
A. The Uniform Code and this chapter shall be administered and enforced
by the Building Inspector and Fire Marshal as follows:
§ 66-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-4
70:61
(1) The Fire Marshal shall enforce Chapter B, Parts 790 through 794
inclusive, and Chapter C, Parts 1150 through 1197 inclusive, of the
Uniform Code. In addition, the Fire Marshal shall also enforce
jointly with the Building Inspector those provisions of the Uniform
Code dealing with building construction related to fire prevention
and firesafety.
(2) The Building Inspector shall enforce all other provisions of the
Uniform Code not specifically delegated to the Fire Marshal and
shall jointly enforce with the Fire Marshal those provisions of the
Uniform Code dealing with building construction related to fire
prevention and firesafety.
B. The Building Inspector may be assisted by such Deputy or Assistant
Building Inspectors as may be appointed by the Town Board who shall
have the power to act generally for and on behalf of the Building
Inspector. Additionally, the Building Inspector may be assisted by one or
more other employees as may be deemed necessary to carry out the
functions of the office.
C. Any Deputy Fire Marshals shall be appointed by the Gates Town Board.
Any Deputy Fire Marshal shall have the power to act generally for and
on behalf of the Fire Marshal. Their appointments shall continue at the
pleasure of the Town Board.
D. Each Deputy Fire Marshal shall have the authority to make fire
prevention inspections under Chapter C of the Uniform Code. A copy of
any inspection report or other report of other official action shall be
filed with the Fire Marshal.
E. The Town Board of the Town of Gates may appoint a temporary Building
Inspector or Fire Marshal in the event that such officer becomes unable
to perform his duties due to illness or disability.
F. Powers and duties of Building Inspector and Fire Marshal.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance, rule or
regulation or except as herein otherwise provided, the Building
Inspector shall administer and enforce all the provisions of laws,
codes, ordinances, rules, regulations and orders applicable to the
location, design, materials, construction, alteration, repair,
equipment, maintenance, use, occupancy, removal and demolition
of buildings, structures and appurtenances thereof. The Fire
Marshal shall administer and enforce all laws, codes, ordinances,
regulations and orders applicable to fire prevention and firesafety.
(2) The Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal, as may be
appropriate, shall issue appropriate notices or orders to remove
illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary safeguards
during construction or demolition and to assure compliance with all
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
§ 70-4 GATES CODE § 70-4
70:62
§ 70-5. Application of code.
(3) The Fire Marshal may assist, where practicable, in determining the
cause and origin of any fire occurring in the Town of Gates which is
of a suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to
persons or by which property has been destroyed or substantially
damaged. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
(4) The Building Inspector and Fire Marshal shall keep official records
of all transactions and activities of the office, including records of
all applications received, all permits and certificates issued,
inspections conducted and notices and orders issued.
(5) In addition to the duties specified in this chapter, the Building
Inspector and Fire Marshal shall perform such other duties as may
be assigned by the Town Board.
A. The provisions of the Uniform Code relating to maintenance,
housekeeping and behavior regulations so as to protect life and
property against the hazards of fire, explosion and the release of toxic
gases arising from the storage, handling or use of combustible or
hazardous substances, materials or devices shall apply equally to new
and existing buildings and conditions.
B. The Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal as may be appropriate
with the approval of the Town Board shall have the authority to permit
the continuance of existing conditions not in strict compliance with the
terms of this chapter where the exceptions do not constitute a distinct
hazard to life or property.
C. Whenever the Building Inspector or Fire Marshal shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the Uniform Code do not apply, or that the intent
and meaning of this chapter have been misconstrued or misinterpreted,
the person affected may appeal from the decision of the Building
Inspector or Fire Marshal to the Board of Review, established under the
applicable provisions of § 381 of the New York State Executive Law.
D. The procedures set forth herein for appeals shall not prohibit the
Building Inspector or Fire Marshal from immediately removing a
hazard or ordering the immediate closing of a building or premises until
a violation of this chapter has been corrected when such hazard or
existence of such violation constitutes a distinct hazard to life or public
safety.
E. Buildings used for any commercial or industrial purpose shall be
considered commercial buildings and their occupancy shall be
regulated in accordance with the following:
(1) Occupancy of a commercial building shall commence when the
building is occupied by employees and customers or clients for the
purpose of conducting regular business.
§ 70-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-5
70:63
§ 70-6. Permit provisions.
(2) Tenancy of a commercial building shall be deemed to have changed
whenever there is a change in the ownership of a business or a
change in the nature of the business. The Building Inspector shall
determine whether there has been a change in tenancy.
(3) Whenever there is a change in tenancy of a commercial building or
part of a commercial building, an inspection by the Fire Marshal
shall be required. The building or part shall not be occupied until
all violations noted by the Fire Marshal have been corrected.
(4) Whenever the occupancy group classification of a commercial
building or part of a building is changed, the building or part shall
not be occupied until a new certificate of occupancy is issued. A
certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the building or
part is brought into complete conformance with Chapter B of the
Uniform Code. Plans shall be filed with the Building Inspector and
Fire Marshal before the start of any work. Plans shall indicate the
scope of work in sufficient detail to enable the Town of Gates to
determine code compliance. A building permit shall be required
and no work shall be done prior to the issuance of the building
permit.
(5) Whenever a commercial building or part of a building is vacant for
a period of six months or more, the building or part shall not be
occupied until a new certificate of occupancy is issued. A certificate
of occupancy shall not be issued until the building or part is
brought into complete conformance with Chapter B of the Uniform
Code. Plans shall be filed with the Building Inspector and Fire
Marshal before start of any work. Plans shall indicate the scope of
work in sufficient detail to enable the Town of Gates to determine
code compliance. A building permit shall be required and no work
shall be done prior to issuance of the building permit.
(6) Whenever compliance with the above sections shall cause extreme
hardship, the Building Inspector and Fire Marshal are authorized
to modify the strict enforcement of this chapter and the Uniform
Code upon their written finding that such modification shall pose
no serious threat to life or health.
A. Application for permit.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall commence construction,
enlargement, alteration, removal, improvement, demolition,
conversion or installation therein of any building or structure or
change in use the occupancy of any building or structure without
first obtaining an appropriate permit from the Building Inspector,
except that no permit shall be required for the performance of
repairs which are not structural in nature and do not entail
plumbing, electrical, heating or ventilation systems or components.
§ 70-5 GATES CODE § 70-6
70:64
(2) Application for a permit shall be made by the owner or lessee or the
agent of either or by the architect, engineer or builder employed in
connection with the proposed work. When such application is made
by a person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by
written authorization by the owner that the proposed work is
authorized by the owner and that the applicant is authorized to
make such application on his behalf.
(3) Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
plans and specifications bearing the signature of the person
responsible for the drawings and, where required by § 7302, as
amended, of Article 147 of the Education Law of the State of New
York, the seal of a licensed architect or a licensed professional
engineer.
(4) In all cases where there is to be installation of new plumbing or
alteration of existing plumbing, a plumbing permit must be
obtained by a plumber licensed in the Town of Gates.
(5) Amendments to the application or to the plans and specifications
may be filed at any time prior to commencement of the work. Such
amendments shall likewise be subject to the approval of the
Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal, as may be appropriate.
B. Issuance or denial of permit.
(1) The Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal, as may be appropriate,
shall review or cause to be reviewed applications for permits
together with the plans, specifications and documents filed
therewith.
(2) Upon the payment of the required fee and upon satisfactory proof
being given that the applicant is in compliance with the applicable
provisions, rules and regulations of this chapter, a permit may be
issued by and bear the name and signature of the Building
Inspector or Fire Marshal, as may be appropriate. Fees collected
shall be as specified on the building permit fee schedule, plumbing
permit fee schedule or other fee schedule as approved by Town
Board resolution.
(3) Any permit granted hereunder shall be limited only to the activity
authorized on said permit, and its continued validity shall be
subject to the conditions set forth on said permit.
(4) Any permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable, and any
change in the activity, size, extent or type of operation, location,
ownership or use shall require a new permit.
(5) Permits shall continue until revoked as provided for herein or for a
period of time designated at the time of issuance. An extension of
the permit time period may be granted, provided that satisfactory
§ 70-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-6
70:65
reason can be shown for failure to start or complete the work or
activity authorized within the required time period.
(6) Any application for or acceptance of any permit issued or requested
pursuant to this chapter constitutes agreement and consent by the
person making application or accepting the permit to allow the
Building Inspector and Fire Marshal to enter the premises at any
reasonable time to conduct inspections as required by this chapter.
Refusal to allow the Building Inspector or Fire Marshal to conduct
said inspections of the premises and their records related to such
permit or required to be maintained by this chapter shall constitute
sufficient justification for the revocation or suspension of said
permit. In addition, should the Building Inspector or Fire Marshal
deem it necessary, either may request permission from the Town
Board to make an application to any court of competent jurisdiction
to obtain a warrant authorizing an inspection of the premises in
question.
(7) Consolidated permits. When more than one permit is required by
the Fire Marshal for the same property or premises, a single permit
may be issued listing all materials or operations covered.
Revocation or suspension as set forth herein of a portion or
portions of such consolidated permit for specific hazardous
materials or operations may, at the sole discretion of the Fire
Marshal, be sufficient cause to revoke or suspend the other
permitted activities.
C. Commencement and performance of work; posting of permits; validity.
(1) The issuance of a permit shall constitute authority to the applicant
to proceed with the work in accordance with all applicable laws,
codes, ordinances and regulations.
(2) A building permit shall become void if work does not commence
within six months after the date of its issuance.
(3) Building permits shall be posted on the job site at all times while
work is in progress.
(4) Permits issued by the Fire Marshal shall be kept posted in a
conspicuous place on property or premises covered by the permit
for so long a period of time as the permitted activity continues.
Such permits issued by the Fire Marshal shall be valid for the
period so stated on said permit and shall be renewed as required
upon the application therefor and the payment of the applicable
permit fee.
D. Revocation or suspension of permits. The Building Inspector and Fire
Marshal shall have the authority to revoke permits issued by them as
follows:
§ 70-6 GATES CODE § 70-6
70:66
(1) Where it is found that there have been false statements or
representation as to a material fact in the application, plans or
specifications of which the granting of the permit was based.
(2) Where it is found that the permit as issued was in conflict with the
requirements of any applicable law, code, ordinance, policy,
procedure, rule or regulation and, accordingly, should not have
been issued.
(3) Where the person to whom a permit has been issued fails or refuses
to comply with a stop-work order duly issued by the Building
Inspector.
(4) In the event of a violation of this code, the Fire Marshal may, in
addition to the other penalties provided for herein, suspend
permits issued by him for a period of time of from one to not more
than five business days. In the event that said violation cannot be
corrected within the period of the suspension set by the Fire
Marshal, the Fire Marshal, in his discretion, may suspend said
permit until such time as the violation is corrected. Should the Fire
Marshal determine that the violation constitutes a distinct hazard
to life or public safety, he may order the premises closed
immediately until said violation is corrected.
E. Stop-work orders.
(1) Whenever the Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or any duly
authorized deputy or assistant has reasonable grounds to believe
that work on any building or structure is proceeding without a
permit or is otherwise in violation of the provisions of any
applicable law, code, ordinance or regulation or is not in conformity
with any of the provisions of the application, plans or specifications
on the basis of which a permit was issued or is being conducted in
an unsafe and dangerous manner, he shall notify either the owner
of the property or the owner's agent or the person, firm or
corporation performing the work to immediately suspend all work.
In such instance, any and all persons shall immediately suspend all
related activities until the stop-work order has been duly rescinded.
(2) Such stop-work order shall be in writing on a form prescribed by
the Building Inspector and shall state the reason for the stop-work
order, together with the date of issuance. The stop-work order shall
bear the signature of the Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or any
duly authorized deputy or assistant and shall be prominently
posted at the work site.
F. Permits shall be obtained from the Fire Marshal (in addition to any
other required approvals) for the following:
(1) Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin):
§ 70-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-6
70:67
(a) To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of
cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin).
(b) To manufacture articles of cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin)
which shall include the use of cellulose nitrate plastics
(pyroxylin) in the manufacture or assembling of other articles.
(2) Combustible fibers: To store, handle or use combustible fibers in
quantities in excess of 100 cubic feet, except agricultural products
on a farm.
(3) Combustible materials: To store combustible materials, including
but not limited to empty combustible packing cases, boxes, barrels
or similar containers, rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork or
other similar materials, in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume,
on any premises.
(4) Compressed gases:
(a) To store, handle or use at normal temperatures at pressures
more than:
[1] Two thousand cubic feet of flammable compressed gas; or
[2] Six thousand cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas.
(b) To store, handle or use any quantity of liquefied natural or
hydrogen gas.
(5) Flammable and combustible liquids:
(a) To store, handle or use combustible liquids in excess of 25
gallons inside a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside of a
building. This provision shall not apply to fuel oil used in
connection with oil-burning equipment.
(b) For processing, blending or refining of flammable or
combustible liquids.
(c) To install, alter or replace any underground or aboveground
tank, pump, piping and other equipment relating to the storage
of flammable and combustible liquids.
(6) Hazardous chemicals:
(a) To store, handle or use more than 55 gallons of corrosive
liquids; or more than 50 pounds of oxidizing materials; or more
than 10 pounds of organic peroxides; or more than 50 pounds
of nitromethane; or 1,000 pounds or more of ammonium
nitrate, ammonium nitrate fertilizers and fertilizer mixtures
containing 50% or more of ammonium or any amount of toxic
material or poisonous gas.
§ 70-6 GATES CODE § 70-6
70:68
(b) For processing, blending or refining of flammable or
combustible liquids.
(7) Liquefied petroleum gas: For each installation of liquefied
petroleum gas employing a container or an aggregate of
interconnected containers of 500 gallons' or more water capacity,
and for each permanent installation, irrespective of size of
containers, made at buildings in which 20 or more persons
congregate for civic, political, educational, religious, social or
recreational purposes. Installers shall maintain a record of all
installations and replacements of portable cylinders and have it
available for inspection.
(8) Places of assembly: To maintain or operate a commercial place of
public assembly.
(9) Service stations; self-service stations; repair garages: To operate
service stations, self-service stations or repair garages.
(10)Waste oil heaters: To operate, maintain or use a waste oil heater in
any service station, self-service station or repair garage.
(11) Automotive wrecking yards: To operate an automobile wrecking
yard.
(12) Bowling establishments: For bowling pin refinishing and bowling
lane resurfacing operations involving the use and application of
flammable or combustible liquids or materials.
(13) Cellulose nitrate motion-picture film: To store, keep or have on
hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose nitrate motion-picture film.
(14) Acetylene generators: To operate an acetylene generator having a
calcium carbide capacity exceeding five pounds.
(15) Automobile tire rebuilding plants: To operate an automobile tire
rebuilding plant.
(16) Cryogenics: To store, handle or use cryogenic fluids, except
cryogenics used as a motor fuel and stored in motor vehicle tanks,
as follows:
(a) Production, sale or storage of cryogenic fluids.
(b) Storage or use of flammable cryogenic fluids, cryogenic
oxidizers or liquefied oxygen in excess of 10 gallons.
(17) Dry-cleaning plants: To use in excess of four gallons of solvents or
cleaning agents classified as flammable or combustible.
(18) Dust-producing plants: To operate any grain elevator, flour, starch
or feed mill, woodworking plant or plant pulverizing aluminum,
coal, cocoa, plastics, magnesium, spices, sugar, sulfur or other
materials producing explosive-potential dust.
§ 70-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-6
70:69
(19) Explosive ammunition and blasting agents:
(a) To manufacture, possess, store, sell or otherwise dispose of
explosives and blasting agents.
(b) To use explosives or blasting agents.
(c) To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting
agents.
(20) Flammable finishing: For spraying, coating or dipping operations
utilizing flammable or combustible liquids.
(21) Fruit-ripening process: To conduct a fruit-ripening process using
ethylene gas.
(22) Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging: To conduct
fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging operations.
(23) Junkyards: To operate a junkyard.
(24) Lumberyards: To operate a lumberyard.
(25) Magnesium: For melting, casting, heat treating, machining or
grinding of more than 10 pounds of magnesium per working day.
(26) Matches:
(a) To manufacture matches.
(b) To store matches in excess of 25 cases. (NOTE: One case
equals one matchman's gross of 14,400 matches.)
(27) Organic coatings: To perform organic coating operations utilizing
more than one gallon of organic coating on any working day.
(28) Ovens and furnaces: To operate industrial processing ovens and
furnaces operating at approximately atmospheric pressures and
temperatures not exceeding 81,400º F. which are heated with oil or
gas fuel or which during operation contain flammable vapors from
the material in the oven or catalytic combustion system.
(29) Solid fuel appliances: To install any solid-fuel-burning heating
appliance, chimney or flue.
G. Permit fees. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
(1) Whenever the code provides or requires the issuance of a permit,
application therefor shall be made to the Fire Marshal of the Town
of Gates. Upon the filing of the application, a fee in the amount per
the fee schedule as set from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board shall be paid to the Town Clerk of the Town of Gates.
(2) All such permits as herein required shall be valid for a period of one
year and shall be renewed yearly upon application therefor and the
§ 70-6 GATES CODE § 70-6
70:70
§ 70-7. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 70-8. Inspections.
§ 70-9. Violations; appearance tickets.
payment of the permit fee as herein required. Exception: Solid fuel
devices shall not require an annual renewal and shall be valid for
not more than 90 days from the date of issuance.
A. No newly constructed building or addition shall be used or occupied in
whole or part until a certificate of occupancy has been duly issued by
the Building Inspector.
B. The owner or his agent must submit to the Building Inspector a tape
location map or instrument survey map, as required by the Building
Inspector, showing the true location of the new building or additions in
reference to all the property lines and existing structures.
A. A schedule of inspections normally required shall, upon request, be
made available to all applicants for permits.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent to notify the
Building Inspector when work is ready for each required inspection.
Specific requirements as to the advance time for inspection requests
and the acceptable means of notification shall be by discretion of the
Building Inspector or in accordance with his established policy,
procedures, rules and regulations.
C. Failure to request a required inspection shall be cause for rejection of
the work or an order to expose the work for inspection.
D. The Building Inspector and Fire Marshal may at all reasonable hours
enter any building or premises within the Town of Gates for the purpose
of making any inspection or investigation to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the Uniform Code.
E. Should entrance to make an inspection be refused or permission to
enter be unable to be obtained, application may be made for a warrant
to make such inspection to any court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided in § 70-6B(6).
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building or structure or portion thereof in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or to fail in any manner to comply with any
notice, directive or order of the Building Inspector or to construct, alter
or use and occupy any building or structure or part thereof in a manner
not permitted by an approved building permit, plumbing permit or
certificate of occupancy.
§ 70-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-9
70:71
§ 70-10. Fire lanes.
No person shall park, stand or stop a vehicle in a designated fire lane
except to avoid conflict with other traffic or pedestrians or in obedience to
direction of a peace officer or stop sign, nor shall any person, in any manner,
obstruct any fire lane or other means of access to a building or premises
or otherwise obstruct a source of water or other service necessary for firefighting
purposes.
B. Any individual, partnership, corporation or other firm owning,
operating, occupying or maintaining property or premises within the
scope of the Uniform Code or this chapter shall comply with all the
provisions of the Uniform Code, this chapter and all orders, notices,
rules, regulations or determinations issued in connection therewith.
C. Whenever it is found that there has been a violation of the Uniform
Code, this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
chapter, a violation order and/or an appearance ticket may be issued to
the person, individual, partnership or corporation owning, operating or
maintaining the premises in which such violation has been noted.
D. Violation orders shall be in writing; shall identify the property or
premises; shall specify the violation or remedial action to be taken; and
shall provide that said violation must be corrected within 10 days from
the receipt of said violation notice unless said ten-day period shall be
modified in the discretion of the enforcement officer issuing such
violation order.
E. Violation orders and other orders or notices referred to in this chapter
shall be served on the owner or some one of the owner's executors,
legal representatives, agents, lessees, any tenant or other person
occupying the premises or other person having a vested or contingent
interest in the premises, either personally or by United States mail,
addressed to the last known address, if any, of the owner or some one of
the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any
other person having a vested or contingent interest in the same, as
shown by the last preceding completed record of the Receiver of Taxes
or in the office of the County Clerk or County Register.
F. Appearance tickets. The Building Inspector, Fire Marshal and duly
authorized deputy or assistant shall have the authority, pursuant to the
Criminal Procedure Law, to issue an appearance ticket subscribed by
him, directing a designated person to appear in a designated local
criminal court at a designated future time in connection with the
alleged commission of a designated violation of this chapter or any
order made thereunder.
A. Whenever the Fire Marshal or a duly authorized assistant deems that
an obstruction to or on a fire lane or other means of access to a building
or premises, or that an obstruction to a source of water or other service
necessary for fire-fighting purposes, is such that it constitutes a distinct
§ 70-9 GATES CODE § 70-10
70:72
§ 70-11. Removal of fire-damaged buildings.
§ 70-12. Supplementary administrative procedures.
Whereas the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
makes reference to various subjects dealing with fire protection and for
fire prevention practices and provides only general procedures for
administering said code, it is hereby deemed necessary and appropriate
to set forth additional administrative and enforcement procedures for the
Town of Gates to enable the Fire Marshal or Building Inspector to effectively
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The specific areas of fire protection
and/or fire prevention which are the subject of these additional
administrative provisions are set forth herein, and each subject is
referenced to the applicable section of the Uniform Code, where such
subject is addressed.
hazard to life or public safety or is interfering with the operation of the
Fire Department during an emergency, he may order the obstruction
removed immediately at the owner's expense.
B. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any vehicle or other obstruction
found standing, parked or left in a fire lane, or found standing, parked
or left within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, will be ticketed for a fire lane
violation or fire hydrant parking violation, as necessary, or may be
removed, towed away and/or stored by or at the discretion of any peace
or law enforcement officer, Fire Marshal or Deputy Fire Marshal. Any
such removal, towing and storage, as herein provided, may be
performed by a private towing contractor, and any and all expenses
related thereto shall be at the full responsibility of the owner or person
entitled to possession of said vehicle or obstructing article.
A. Whenever it is found that a building or structure or part thereof may be
an imminent danger to life and safety of the public, the Building
Inspector or Fire Marshal may require the occupants of any such
building or structure or any part thereof to vacate the premises
forthwith. No person shall use or occupy such building or structure or
part thereof until it is made safe. Except for the owner, no person shall
enter premises which have been ordered vacated unless authorized to
perform inspections, repairs or to demolish and remove such building
or structure or part thereof.
B. In addition to the above-mentioned provision, the Fire Marshal shall
report to the Building Inspector the location of any building or structure
investigated by the Fire Marshal which has been damaged by fire or
explosion for any action deemed appropriate by the Building Inspector.
[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
A. Fire Department and emergency service access (Reference: Uniform
Code, Part 1161):
§ 70-10 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-12
70:73
(1) All premises and buildings in the Town of Gates which a fire
department may be called upon to protect in case of fire shall be
provided with suitable access roads and fire lanes so that all
buildings on the premises are accessible. Where new construction
or additions to existing structures is proposed, the Fire Marshal
shall recommend to the Planning Board, or other agency or board
responsible for the approval of such new construction or addition,
the location of access roads and fire lanes. During construction and
until such time as permanent roads and/or fire lanes are in place,
suitable access roads shall be constructed and maintained so as to
provide access for fire-fighting equipment, emergency vehicles and
others who may be required to enter upon the premises for the
purpose of making required inspections or for other purposes.
(2) Fire lanes for shopping centers, office buildings, places of assembly
and other commercial buildings shall be a minimum of 30 feet in
width and 25 feet in width in multiple residence districts. The Fire
Marshal, with the approval of the Town Board, shall be authorized
to modify the width requirements of fire lanes where such widths
may be in conflict with other requirements of law.
(3) Fire lanes shall be clearly designated by suitable pavement
markings and/or signs to be provided by the owners or occupants of
the premises. Failure to replace or repair damaged, rusted or faded
signs or pavement markings within 30 days after written notice
shall have been served upon the owner or occupant shall constitute
a violation of this chapter.
(4) The signs required to be posted by this chapter shall conform to the
size and color requirements for parking signs as set forth in the
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices of the New York State
Department of Transportation. In addition, said signs shall also:
(a) Have arrows pointing in the direction of the area designated as
a fire lane.
(b) Be posted not more than 50 feet apart.
(c) Be neither of a portable or movable type, except where
otherwise directed by the Fire Marshal.
(5) The pavement markings required by this chapter shall be:
(a) No more than 50 feet apart.
(b) Painted so as to read in the direction of travel; or, if two-way
traffic is maintained, every other marking shall be painted in
the opposite direction.
(c) Painted in yellow or white, 24 inches minimum elongated
height for each letter, 18 inches minimum width for each letter
(except the letter "I") and five inches stroke for each letter.
§ 70-12 GATES CODE § 70-12
70:74
B. Means of egress (Reference: Uniform Code, Part 1162): Whenever any
special security methods or security devices deemed necessary by the
owner or person generally in charge of the premises affect the means of
egress, such security methods or security devices shall not be used or
installed without first obtaining the written consent of the Fire Marshal.
C. Fire protection equipment; water supply [Reference: Uniform Code
§ 1163.13(a)]:
(1) Fire Department connections for standpipe and sprinkler systems
shall be maintained accessible to emergency use at all times. No
large shrubbery, fences or other obstructions of any type shall be
placed within 10 feet of these connections.
(2) Fire hydrants in residential districts shall not exceed a maximum of
500 feet apart. In higher-density areas, such as apartments and
commercial or industrial districts, hydrants shall not exceed a
maximum of 300 feet apart and shall be so located that all buildings
can be reached by comparatively short hose lays from more than
one hydrant. The location and size of water mains and hydrants
shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Marshal and/or Town
Engineer.
(3) Fire hydrants.
(a) The location of public or private hydrants shall not exceed the
maximum distances herein established. Hydrants located in
subdivisions and other residential areas shall be located at
intersections whenever possible.
(b) In areas where new construction is being undertaken and
public or private water mains and hydrants do not exist, water
mains and hydrants shall be installed and be in proper
operating condition prior to the commencement of any
aboveground construction. Upon written application to the
Town Board and considering the recommendations of the Fire
Marshal, the Town Board may grant temporary exceptions to
this requirement on such terms and conditions as the Board
may deem proper.
(c) No person shall cause any obstruction to be placed within 15
feet of any public or private fire hydrant. No person, except
those officially authorized to do so, shall intentionally cause
snow to be placed around any public or private hydrant so as to
unreasonably interfere with its use.
D. Fire alarm systems [Reference: Uniform Code § 1163.13(c)]:
(1) All fire alarm systems required by any applicable code shall be
approved by the Fire Marshal prior to the time of their installation.
§ 70-12 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-12
70:75
(2) Whenever a general fire alarm system is activated, the premises
shall be evacuated unless other provisions have been approved by
the Fire Marshal.
E. Places of assembly (Reference: Uniform Code § 1164.2):
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or other person
generally in charge of the premises to knowingly permit occupancy
of the premises to exceed the occupancy limits established by the
Town of Gates or the Fire Marshal. Failure to so prevent
overcrowding shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(2) No person shall refuse to vacate any premises in which the
occupancy limits have been exceeded when directed to do so by the
management of the premises or any official authorized by the Town
of Gates or the Fire Marshal to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Failure to so vacate the premises shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
F. Self-service stations and garages (Reference: Uniform Code § 1164.3):
(1) Storage and handling of motor vehicle fuel.
(a) Underground storage tanks containing gasoline, oil or other
liquids that generate flammable vapors at normal
temperatures shall be limited to a maximum of 12,000 gallons
per tank. The maximum aggregate capacity of all tanks at any
one site shall not exceed 30,000 gallons' total capacity. The
Fire Marshal may increase the maximum aggregate capacity
requirements established in this subsection if he finds that the
public safety of the particular area involved will not be
jeopardized by such modification, and he may require such
further conditions as he may deem necessary in the interests of
public safety in the granting of said modification.
(b) The Fire Marshal or his duly authorized representative may
order the owner or occupants of premises having liquid
storage tanks to have such tanks or associated piping tested by
methods prescribed by the Fire Marshal when the Fire Marshal
has a reasonable cause to believe that such tanks or piping
may contain a leak.
(c) Leaking tanks containing any flammable or combustible liquid
or any pump or piping used in connection therewith which may
be defective or in need of repair shall be repaired or replaced
immediately, and it shall be within the sole discretion of the
Fire Marshal as to whether the station or facility must cease
any or all operations while such repairs or replacements are
being done.
(d) No installation, alteration or replacement of underground or
aboveground tanks, pumps, piping and other equipment
§ 70-12 GATES CODE § 70-12
70:76
relating to the storage of flammable liquids shall be permitted
without prior notification to the Fire Marshal, nor shall any
pressure test or other test for leaks be conducted without
giving at least twenty-four-hour prior notification to the Fire
Marshal.
(e) No more than one gasoline tank truck shall be permitted to
deliver flammable liquids on the premises of a gasoline service
facility at any one time. Before making any deliveries to
underground tanks, the driver or other authorized person shall
set the brakes of the truck and shall turn off the engine of the
vehicle. Evertite or O.P.W. fill couplings, or equivalent, must be
used when unloading flammable liquids from tank truck to
storage tank. The driver shall remain at the point of delivery to
prevent spillage and overflow. In case of spillage or overflow,
the Fire Department shall be notified immediately.
(f) All accidental spillage or leakage of a flammable liquid in
quantities of five U.S. gallons or greater, whether or not it may
enter sewers, shall be immediately reported to the Fire
Department.
(g) A sufficient quantity of Stay Dry Absorbent or equivalent must
be kept on the premises at all times for flammable liquid spills
and should be used for this purpose whenever possible instead
of flushing with water.
(h) The telephone number of the owner, lessee or station operator
shall be posted on the door in a conspicuous location so that
proper notification can be made in the event of an emergency.
(2) Self-service stations. "Self-service station" shall mean that portion
of the property where Class I liquids used as motor vehicle fuels are
stored and subsequently dispensed from fixed, approved
dispensing equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by
persons other than the service station attendant and may include
facilities available for sale of other retail products. Self-service
stations, in addition to the requirements set forth herein for the
storage and handling of motor vehicle fuel, shall also be subject to
the following:
(a) At the time of the application for a permit, the application shall
submit a full site plan or instrument survey of the property
showing all tank locations, island setbacks and such other and
further information that may be necessary to determine
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Self-service pumps and nozzles shall be confined to service
islands with no more than three self-service dispensing units
per island, each of which dispensing units shall utilize no more
than two hoses and nozzles per unit. Approved dispensing
devices, such as but not limited to card-operated and remote
§ 70-12 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-12
70:77
preset types, shall be permitted, provided that the dispensing
of Class I liquids is under the direct supervision of a qualified
attendant. Self-service gasoline station attendants shall be at
least 18 years of age, properly trained and physically fit to
act in an emergency. Trainees enrolled in a school training
program who are at least 16 years of age need not meet the
basic age requirement.
(c) Necessary equipment.
[1] All self-service gasoline dispensing units shall be equipped
with the following:
[a] A control device which will permit the pump to
operate only when the dispensing nozzle is removed
from its bracket on the dispensing unit and the switch
for this dispensing unit is manually activated. Said
control device shall also stop the pump when the
nozzle has been returned to its bracket.
[b] A means of being kept locked or otherwise inoperable
when the station is not open for business.
[2] The area where said Class I liquids are actually dispensed
shall be equipped with all of the following:
[a] A traffic mirror, of sufficient size, located on each end
of each pump island to give the attendant a clear and
unobstructed view of each island, said mirrors to be
installed in locations acceptable to the Fire Marshal.
[b] A two-way communications system of the public
address type to facilitate direct and individual
communication between the control room area and
each pump island at all times that Class I liquids are
being dispensed.
[c] An automatic fire-extinguishing system installed in
conformity with RS 58-4 of the Uniform Code and
approved by the Fire Marshal. Said system shall also
be designed so as to be able to be activated from a
location remote from the pump island area, preferably
in the control room area if said station is so equipped,
and to automatically terminate the electrical power to
all service islands in the event of the systems
operation. Where a service station has one self-service
island within 30 feet of a full-service island, both selfservice
and full-service islands shall be so equipped
with the automatic fire-extinguishing system as
provided for herein.
§ 70-12 GATES CODE § 70-12
70:78
[d] Signs conspicuously posted setting forth the operating
instructions of the dispensing units.
[e] A clearly visible numeral or letter at least six inches in
height shall be conspicuously posted on each island
with a smaller corresponding numeral or letter posted
as near as possible to the automatic fire-extinguishing
system controls.
[f] Pipe, post bumpers or equivalent (four inches
minimum diameter) to protect each self-service island
against physical damage, to be in a location
acceptable to the Fire Marshal.
G. Bulk plants and terminals (Reference: Uniform Code § 1164.4):
(1) An automatic fire-extinguishing system, installed in conformity
with RS 58-4 and RS 47-1 of the Uniform Code and approved by the
Fire Marshal, shall be installed at all bulk plants and terminals
truck loading racks dispensing flammable and combustible liquids.
(2) Aboveground or underground storage of flammable, combustible or
hazardous liquids shall be subject to the appropriate provisions set
forth in § 70-12F(1) of this chapter, which affect the testing,
inspection, installation, replacement or use of said tanks and their
associated piping.
H. Aboveground storage tanks shall be allowed subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Except as modified by the provisions of this subsection,
aboveground storage tanks and their piping systems shall comply
with the applicable provisions of RS 47-1 and RS 47-2 of the
Uniform Code.
(2) Tanks are listed in accordance with UL design standard 142 and
2085 as an insulated aboveground tank for flammable and
combustible liquids. Tanks designed and built for underground use
shall not be installed for aboveground storage.
(3) Tanks shall be fully enclosed on top, bottom and all sides by a
seamless, monolithically poured, reinforced concrete or similar
material, which is impermeable to the product to be stored in such
aboveground tank. The thickness of said concrete or other similar
material shall be designed to withstand the anticipated loading,
shall be liquid-tight and shall have no openings except for those
necessary for access to, inspection of and filling, emptying and
venting of such aboveground storage tank. The enclosure shall be
tested in accordance with UL standard 2085 or other generally
accepted standard which is nationally recognized so as to provide a
fire-resistance rating of at least two hours. Heatsinks shall not be
permitted.
§ 70-12 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-12
70:79
§ 70-13. Disclaimer of liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to hold any code enforcement officer
of the Town of Gates or the Town of Gates responsible for any damages to
persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized
herein or failure to inspect or reinspect for any permits required under
this chapter, nor shall it be liable for any damage to persons or property
by reason of the Building Inspector's or Fire Marshal's exercising his
discretion as provided in this chapter.
(4) Aboveground tanks storing flammable or combustible liquids at an
individual site shall be limited to a maximum individual capacity of
1,000 gallons and an aggregate capacity of 2,000 gallons.
(5) The aboveground storage tank shall have provided as an integral
part of said storage tank a UL listed overfill system with internal
reservoir and a normally closed UL listed drain port where
required.
(6) The aboveground storage tank shall be provided with permanent
weather-resistant signage as deemed necessary by the Fire
Marshal. Such signage shall include but not be limited to an
identification of its contents, warning: "It is unlawful and
dangerous to dispense gasoline into unapproved containers. No
smoking and stop motor."
(7) The location of aboveground storage tanks shall be limited to
agricultural, commercial, industrial, governmental or
manufacturing occupancies and shall be used solely in connection
with the operation of such occupancies.
(8) The location of aboveground storage tanks shall also be in
compliance with all generally accepted standards and Chapter 190,
Zoning. Prior to the installation or use of said aboveground storage
tank, a permit shall be obtained from the office of the Gates Fire
Marshal.
(9) The handling, storage and dispensing of products stored in
aboveground tanks shall be in compliance with all rules and
regulations of the Town of Gates, the Uniform Code and all
nationally recognized standards dealing with the handling, storage
or dispensing of flammable liquids.
(10) The area where any flammable liquids are dispensed shall be
protected by an automatic fire-extinguishing system complying
with the provisions of § 774.10 of the Uniform Code and NFPA 17,
Dry Chemical Fire Extinguishing Systems.
(11) These regulations shall not apply to the aboveground storage of
fuel oil in approved tanks not exceeding 660 gallons' capacity used
solely in conjunction with oil-burning equipment installed in
residential or commercial occupancies.
§ 70-12 GATES CODE § 70-14
70:80
§ 70-14. Severability.
§ 70-15. Penalties for offenses.
A. If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
persons or circumstances shall be judged invalid, such judgment shall
be confined to the part or application adjudged to be invalid; such
decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any
part thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid.
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision
of this code to any building, other structure or tract of land to be invalid
in whole or part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to the
person, property or situation involved, and the application of any such
provisions to any other person, property or situation shall not be
affected.
A. Any person who shall willfully fail to comply with a written order of the
Building Inspector, Fire Marshal or any duly authorized assistant within
the time fixed for compliance therewith and any owner, builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, plumber, construction
superintendent or their agents or any other person taking part or
assisting in the construction or use of any building who shall violate any
of the applicable provisions of this chapter or any lawful order, notice,
directive, permit or certificate of the Building Inspector, Fire Marshal
or any duly authorized assistant made thereunder or in addition to any
other penalties provided for in this chapter, any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter, the Uniform Code, any rules
or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, or who shall violate or
fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted
and approved thereunder, shall severally for each and every such
violation be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than
one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violation or defects within a reasonable time; and when not
otherwise specified, each day that the prohibited condition(s) or
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition
of any such penalty shall not be held to prohibit the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions by any appropriate remedy, including immediate
application for an injunction. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
B. An action or proceeding in the name of the Town of Gates, New York,
may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation of any provision
of the Uniform Code, this chapter, a rule or regulation adopted pursuant
to this chapter or a violation order, or to vacate the occupancy or
§ 70-14 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE § 70-15
70:81
§ 70-16. Conflict with other provisions.
In the event that the provisions of this chapter shall be in conflict with any
other law, rule or regulation, the more stringent provision shall govern.
§ 70-17. Compliance required.
Unless a shorter time period is provided for under the Uniform Code,
premises within the Town of Gates which are not in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter shall be put in compliance therewith by no
later than July 1, 1985, unless such date of July 1, 1985, is extended for
cause by the Fire Marshal or Building Inspector as may be appropriate.
Chapter 73
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
§ 73-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "House and Building Number Law of the
Town of Gates."
§ 73-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide emergency personnel in the Town
of Gates, such as police, fire and ambulance, with the most expeditious
manner of identification of houses, commercial properties, commercial
buildings and other buildings within the Town of Gates in order to allow
them to quickly and accurately respond to the proper address.
§ 73-3. Regulations.
building in the case of imminent danger to life or property. Such remedy
shall be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
A. Regulations regarding house and building numbering shall be as
follows:
(1) Address numbers shall at all times be affixed and mounted in a
secure fashion to the building's front wall (facing the public or
private street), entryway from a public street or main path of travel
leading to the main entrance from a public street. Such numbers
shall be no less than four inches in height and shall be Arabic in
format and style. Script or Roman numerals shall not be considered
to be in compliance with this chapter and must be removed. In
§ 70-15 GATES CODE § 73-3
73:82
§ 73-4. Enforcement.
The Zoning Code Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector and Fire Marshal
of the Town of Gates are hereby declared to be responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter.
residential zoning districts, the numerals shall be a maximum of
eight inches in height. In other zoning districts, the maximum size
of the numeral shall comply with the requirements for signage.
(2) Address numbers in nonresidential zoning districts may also be
mounted on a post in the front of the main parking lot or the main
street right-of-way, said post being outside the street right-of-way
but no further than 25 feet from said right-of-way.
(3) All address numbers shall be mounted at a height of not less than
four feet and not more than 10 feet above grade. The numbers shall
be mounted against a contrasting background arranged so that the
numbers are legible from the center of the road.
(4) In all cases, address numbers shall be clearly visible at all times
from the public or private street on which the property is located.
(5) The view of said address numbers from the public or private street
shall not be obstructed by trees, shrubs, structures or other
objects.
(6) Where the building upon which the number is to be displayed is
more than 150 feet from the edge of the right-of-way, whether
improved or not, of the street or road serving the building, the
number shall, in addition to the other requirement of this chapter,
be displayed on a sign clearly visible from the road or street and in
no event further back than 25 feet from said road or street right-ofway.
B. Builders and developers of new structures may post a temporary
weather-resistant sign on the site displaying the assigned street
address. The posting shall otherwise be in accordance with Subsection
A above. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued if said numbers are
not so installed.
C. Where a group of structures or buildings carry the same address, the
posting of the address number at the principal entry point to the
complex, being visible as required in Subsection A above, shall be
considered in compliance.
D. All existing structures shall comply with the requirement of this chapter
by July 1, 1994. All structures completed and/or occupied subsequent to
the effective date of this chapter shall comply immediately.
§ 73-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 73-5
73:83
§ 73-5. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or anyone acting on
behalf of said person, firm or corporation to violate any of the provisions
of this chapter relating to the posting and continuation of the numbering
system of the numbers on said buildings. Any structure not displaying the
numbers as set forth in this chapter shall be considered in violation of this
chapter.
§ 73-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Any person, firm or corporation violating or permitting the violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
$250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each week of continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
Chapter 76
CARNIVALS AND OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking — See Ch. 131 Tents and awnings — See Ch. 172
§ 76-1. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police for the Town of Gates.
PARADE — Any parade, march, procession (excluding customary and
normal wedding or funeral processions), demonstration of any kind or any
similar display in or upon any street, park or other public place within the
Town of Gates.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TOWN — The Town of Gates.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Gates.
TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Gates.
§ 76-2. License required; application; contents; fee.
A. No carnival, circus, traveling show, music festival or parade shall be
opened or operated in the town unless and until a license has been
issued for the same in accordance with this chapter.
§ 73-5 GATES CODE § 76-2
76:84
§ 76-3. Review of application; approval or denial of license.
B. A person seeking issuance of a license shall file an application with the
Town Clerk on forms provided by the town. Such application shall be
delivered to the town no earlier than 120 days before the event and no
later than 30 days before the event.
C. The application for a license shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons
sponsoring the event.
(2) If the application is made on behalf of or by an organization, the
name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization and of the authorized or responsible persons.
(3) The date(s) when the event is to be conducted.
(4) The route to be traveled or the area within the town to be used for
the event, including the starting point and termination point.
(5) The approximate number of persons who will constitute the event
and, if there are animals and vehicles, the approximate number and
types of animals and the approximate number and description of
vehicles.
(6) The hours when the event will start and terminate and the times at
which any portions of the event will begin to assemble at a
particular area or areas.
D. No license application will be considered or reviewed unless the
application has been completed in its entirety and is accompanied by
the requisite fee.
A. The application for license shall be reviewed by the Town Board and,
after such review, the Town Board shall approve or deny such
application. In reaching such determination, the Town Board shall
consider relevant information and factors, including but not limited to
the following:
(1) Whether the requested event will substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of traffic within and contiguous to the event.
(2) Whether the requested event will require the town to police such
event, and whether the numbers of police officers assigned to
properly police such event will prevent the town from providing
adequate police protection to the remainder of the town.
(3) Whether the requested event will unduly or substantially interfere
with proper and adequate fire and police protection or proper and
adequate ambulance service to the areas contiguous to such event
and the town in general.
§ 76-2 CARNIVALS AND OUTDOOR § 76-3
76:85
§ 76-4. Fees.
The application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee. The application
fees for events shall be established by resolution of the Town Board from
time to time and shall be kept on file at the Town Hall.
§ 76-5. Duties of licensee.
§ 76-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
The Town Board, acting through the Supervisor, shall have the right to
suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter for violations of one
or more of the regulations promulgated hereunder.
§ 76-7. Interference prohibited; enforcement.
(4) Whether the requested event will substantially interfere with the
movement of fire-fighting equipment or ambulance service to the
town or to the areas contiguous to the requested event.
(5) Whether the requested event will otherwise substantially interfere
with or be a substantial detriment to the general health, safety and
welfare of the town.
(6) Whether there are other events scheduled on the day of the
requested event.
B. In the case of the approval of a license, the Town Board shall establish
such conditions regulating time, place and the manner in which the
event is conducted and such other conditions as will assure the general
health, safety and welfare of the town, its residents and people
participating in such event.
A. A licensee hereunder shall comply with all license directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws of the town and the State of New
York.
B. The event chairman or other person in charge of such event shall carry
the license upon his or her person during the conduct of such event.
A. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere
with any event or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or
used in an event issued a license under this chapter.
B. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade or event when such vehicles or persons are in
motion and are conspicuously designed.
C. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary,
to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along the highway or part
thereof constituting any portion of a parade route or event. The Chief of
Police shall post signs to such effect. Parking in violation of this section
§ 76-3 GATES CODE § 76-7
76:86
§ 76-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of an offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 79
CONSERVATION, RECREATION AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Department — See Ch. 47.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 134.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 161.
§ 79-1. Title.
This chapter shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Conservation,
Recreation and Drainage Easement Ordinance of the Town of Gates."
§ 79-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the acquisition of interests
or rights in real property for the preservation of open space areas which
shall constitute a public purpose. It is the intention that public funds may
be expended or advanced after due notice and public hearing, by which the
Town of Gates may acquire, by purchase, gift, grant, bequest, devise, lease
or otherwise, the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement,
covenant or other contractual right necessary to acquire open space or open
area as the same are defined in § 79-5 below.
§ 79-3. Authority.
In accordance with § 247 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New
York, the Town Board of the Town of Gates has the authority to acquire
such interests or rights in land. Pursuant to the above authority, the Town
Board has prepared and adopted this chapter setting forth standards to be
followed in the acquisition of such interest.
§ 79-4. Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall apply to the entire area of the Town of Gates.
shall be considered a violation of the same nature as a violation of the
provisions of Chapter 131, Parking.
§ 76-7 CONSERVATION, RECREATION AND § 79-5
79:87
§ 79-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN SPACE or OPEN AREA —
§ 79-6. Procedure.
A. Any space or area characterized by natural scenic beauty.
Any space or area whose existing openness, natural condition or
present state of use, if retained:
Would enhance the present or potential value of surrounding or
abutting development.
(1)
Would enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources,
including lands actually used in bona fide agricultural production.
(2)
Would serve as a usable recreation area under the supervision of
the Town of Gates.
(3)
Would prevent environmental problems in the surrounding area or
any other area in the Town of Gates or surrounding towns.
(4)
B.
A. Proposal by owner. Any owner or owners of land may submit a proposal
to the Conservation Advisory Board of the Town of Gates for granting of
interests or rights in real property for the preservation of open spaces
or areas. Such proposal shall be submitted in such manner and form as
may be prescribed by the Conservation Advisory Board and shall
include a survey map and metes and bounds description of the
proposed area.
B. Review by Conservation Advisory Board. Upon receipt of such proposal
the Conservation Advisory Board shall investigate the area to
determine if the proposal would benefit the people of the Town of Gates
and may discuss the terms and conditions of the offer. If the
Conservation Advisory Board determines that it is in the public interest
to accept such proposal, it shall recommend to the Town Board that it
hold a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the
town should accept such proposal.
C. Public hearing by Town Board.
(1) The Town Board may, within 45 days of receipt of such advisory
opinion, hold a pubic hearing concerning such proposal at a place
within the Town of Gates.
(2) At least 10 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall
be published in a paper of general circulation in such town, and a
written notice of such proposal shall be given to all adjacent
property owners and to any municipality whose boundaries are
within 500 feet of the boundaries of said proposed area, to the
§ 79-5 GATES CODE § 79-6
79:88
§ 79-7. Assessment.
After acquisition of any such interest pursuant to such local law, the
valuation placed upon such area for purposes of real estate taxation shall
take into account and be limited by the limitation on the future use of the
land. Assessment is subject to change with transfer of ownership.
§ 79-8. Penalty for violation or cancellation of agreement.
If there is a substantial violation of the terms and conditions of said
agreement or if said agreement is canceled by the Town Board upon petition
to it, then the owner or owners of said property must pay to the Town
of Gates and all special improvement districts, school districts and other
taxing units from which exemption had been granted an amount equal to all
taxes reduced hereunder with interest computed on all balances at a rate
1% above the average prime rate for each calendar year of the agreement.
Chapter 83
DUMPING AND LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 155. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 158.
§ 83-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Town Board of the Town of Gates to limit and control
the number of dumps located within the confines of the Town of Gates and
to prevent other municipalities outside the Town of Gates from establishing
dumps within our town for the dumping of refuse and garbage. It is also the
intent of the Town Board of the Town of Gates to control littering within our
Monroe County Department of Planning and to the school district
in which it is located.
D. Determination. The Town Board, after receiving the reports of the
Conservation Board and the Monroe County Department of Planning
and after such public hearing, may adopt the proposal or any
modification thereof it deems appropriate or may reject it in its entirety.
E. Recording agreement. If such proposal is adopted by the Town Board, it
shall be executed by the owner or owners in written form, suitable for
recording in the Monroe County Clerk's office.
F. Cancellation. Said agreement may not be canceled by either party.
However, the owner or owners thereof may petition the Town Board for
cancellation upon good cause shown, and such cancellation may be
granted only upon payment of the penalties provided in § 79-8 below.
§ 79-6 DUMPING AND LITTERING § 83-1
83:89
town and to provide for penalties for those persons, firms or organizations
violating this chapter.
§ 83-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Includes waste food, papers, dead animals or parts thereof
and all waste or discarded wood, vegetable matter of any kind or any other
matter which shall be combustible or capable of fermentation or decay.
PERSON — Includes any individual, society, club, firm, partnership,
corporation or association of persons, and the singular number shall include
the plural number.
REFUSE — Includes waste metal, tin cans, ashes, cinders, glass, pottery
and all discarded substances of a solid and incombustible nature.
§ 83-3. Throwing, dumping and depositing forbidden.
No person shall throw, dump, deposit or place or cause to be thrown,
dumped, deposited or placed upon any highway, road or street or within
the limits of the right-of-way of any such highway, road or street of the
Town of Gates or elsewhere in the Town of Gates any refuse, trash, garbage,
rubbish, litter, snow, ice, sand, gravel, cinders, topsoil, mud, earth or any
other nauseous or offensive matter. No person shall dump, deposit or place
or cause to be thrown, dumped or deposited any refuse or garbage on his
property or cause his property to be used as a dump or a refuse collection
area without first obtaining the permission of the Town Board of the Town
of Gates after a public hearing pursuant to notice as provided in the Town
Law.
§ 83-4. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the Town of Gates except in public receptacles or
in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 83-5. Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent
scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 83-6. Sweeping into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
§ 83-1 GATES CODE § 83-6
83:90
or from any public sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
§ 83-7. Merchants' duty to keep property free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the town shall keep their premises, whether owned or leased, free of
litter.
§ 83-8. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the town or upon private
property.
§ 83-9. Truck loads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the town
unless such vehicle is so constructed or located as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or other
public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within
the town the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street,
alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign
matter of any kind.
§ 83-10. Owner to maintain private premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 83-11. Litter on vacant lot.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Town of Gates whether owned by such person or not.
§ 83-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-6-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992; 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter with respect to dumping is
hereby declared to be a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, for each
offense. In addition, the town may recover a civil penalty of not less
than $25 nor more than $100 for each violation of this chapter and also
shall have the right to maintain an action or a proceeding in a court of
competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by
§ 83-6 DUMPING AND LITTERING § 83-12
83:91
Chapter 87
ELECTRICAL CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70. Swimming pools — See Ch. 164.
§ 87-1. Purpose.
Since there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical
energy, this chapter is enacted to regulate the installation and/or the
alteration of wiring for electric light, heat or power and signal systems,
except telephones, in or on all real property within the Town of Gates.
§ 87-2. Prohibited actions.
No person, firm or corporation shall install or cause to be installed or
alter electrical wiring for light, heat or power in or on properties in the
Town of Gates until an application for inspection has been duly filed with
an electrical inspection organization which has been licensed by the Town
Board of the Town of Gates to make electrical inspections in the Town
of Gates. No person, firm or corporation shall connect or cause to be
connected electrical wiring in or on properties within the Town of Gates to
any source of electrical energy supply, prior to the issuance of a temporary
certificate, or a certificate of compliance, by the electrical inspection
organization with which the application for inspection has been filed.
§ 87-3. Adoption of standards.
All electrical installations or alterations within the Town of Gates shall
be made in conformity with the National Electric Code except when the
provisions of this chapter, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code or any ordinance or regulation of the Town of Gates
shall have more stringent requirements, in which event, compliance with
more stringent requirements shall be recognized as compliance with this
chapter. The requirements of the National Electrical Code shall be those
known as the "National Fire Protection Association, Pamphlet No. 70-1984"
injunction any violation of the provisions of this chapter pursuant to
§ 135 of the Town Law.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter with respect to littering
shall be an offense against this chapter which shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding
15 days for each such offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
§ 83-12 GATES CODE § 87-3
87:92
as approved and adopted by the American Standards Association and as
may be modified or amended by said Association in the future.
§ 87-4. Licensing of electrical inspection organizations.
§ 87-5. Standards and criteria for electrical inspection
organizations.
A. No electrical inspection agency shall make electrical inspections in the
Town of Gates unless licensed to do so by the Town Board of the Town of
Gates.
B. Any electrical inspection agency desiring to make electrical inspections
in the Town of Gates may apply to the Town Board for an electrical
inspection license on application forms prescribed by the Town Board.
C. No applicant for a license shall be issued a license unless such applicant
shall certify as part of his application that he accepts and will comply
with the standards and criteria for electrical inspection agencies set
forth in § 87-5 of this chapter, and the requirements of this chapter.
D. Each applicant for an electrical inspection license shall pay a
nonrefundable fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board to the Town of Gates. A license issued hereunder shall expire on
the 31st day of December in the year issued. [Amended 9-7-1999 by
L.L. No. 2-1999]
A. The agency shall be authorized to conduct business within the State of
New York.
B. The agency has and will maintain an office in the Rochester service
area, staffed to receive telephone calls during normal business days for
a minimum of six hours per day.
C. The agency, its employees and workmen shall comply with all federal,
state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to any
electrical inspection.
D. The agency shall establish a system to receive applications and issue
inspection reports in accordance with the following:
(1) The agency shall provide an application form which shall include a
copy for the Municipal Building Department and the customer.
(2) The agency shall issue in a timely manner a temporary certificate
directly to the utility, indicating that the electrical service meets
code requirements for energizing. When all electrical work is
completed and in compliance with the code requirements, a
certificate shall be issued to the applicant and a copy sent to the
Town of Gates Building Department.
(3) When subsequent progressive inspections are required, the agency
shall establish a procedure for prompt notification of any
§ 87-3 ELECTRICAL CODE § 87-5
87:93
noncompliance. The notice shall be given to the customer and the
Municipal Building Department.
(4) Upon a finding of compliance, the agency shall promptly issue a
certificate of final compliance and shall provide a copy thereof to
the Building Department and the customer.
E. All charges for inspections, reinspections, etc., as above, or as may be
otherwise required by the Town of Gates, shall be without cost to the
Town of Gates.
F. The agency agrees to and shall maintain adequate records so that it can
provide the Town of Gates or the officials of the town and its customer
with records of inspection when requested to do so. Such records will
be maintained for a maximum of six years.
G. The agency shall require that all wiring inspected meets the standards
as set forth in § 87-3 of this chapter.
H. The agency shall not compete with any other agency in any manner
which would cause it to reduce the quality of its inspections. It shall not
knowingly accept an application from any applicant who has received
notice of violation(s) from another agency. The agency shall make such
inquiry on its standard application forms.
I. Each licensed agency is required to maintain and furnish the Town of
Gates with a list of current inspection charges. Established charges will
be applied uniformly. Inspections and reports shall be made only by
qualified electrical inspectors. The agency shall ascertain and ensure
that the inspectors they employ have adequate experience, education
and training to meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) A working knowledge of the principles of electricity necessary to
interpret the National Electrical Code and applicable codes of the
State of New York and the Town of Gates and knowledge and
understanding of the requirements of such codes.
(2) Familiarity with the construction practices of the electrical wiring
trade.
(3) Affirmation by the agency and each inspector of said agency that it,
he or she does not and will not engage in or have any interest,
direct or indirect, with any wholesaler or retailer of electrical
equipment in the State of New York; and that inspectors will not
engage in the work of an electrician anywhere within the County of
Monroe, except that an inspector may do electrical work on his or
her own property located within the Town of Gates. However, if an
inspector does perform such electrical work, any required
inspections under this code shall be performed by another agency
licensed to make inspections in the Town of Gates.
§ 87-5 GATES CODE § 87-5
87:94
§ 87-6. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the electrical installations
in mines, ships, railway cars, automotive equipment or the installations or
equipment employed by a railway, electrical or communication utility in the
exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings
used exclusively for that purpose. This chapter shall not apply to any
work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical
J. No agency will be licensed by the Town of Gates without proof that
inspections by said agency will be accepted by the electric utility
company serving the Town of Gates with electric power. In the event
that an agency is acceptable at the time of the license application but
subsequently becomes unacceptable to the utility company, any
inspection license issued by the Town of Gates shall automatically
terminate, and the agency shall make no further inspections in the
Town of Gates.
K. Insurance.
(1) No applicant for an electrical inspection license will be approved
for a license unless the applicant agency has in force and will
continue to maintain during the license period the following
minimum insurance:
(a) Workmen's compensation and employees liability: statutory.
(b) General liability: $500,000 minimum.
(c) Excess liability: $5,000,000 minimum.
(d) Automobile liability: $500,000 minimum.
(2) A certificate of insurance shall be furnished with each application
for an electrical inspection license.
(3) In the event of a cancellation of any of the above insurance policies,
the licensee and/or the insurance carrier must submit to the Town
of Gates 10 days' notice of cancellation prior to the cancellation
date. Failure to comply with this requirement will be sufficient
reason for cancellation or suspension of any license issued
hereunder.
L. By the acceptance of an electrical inspection license by an agency, such
agency shall, at its own expense, indemnify and hold harmless the Town
of Gates, its officers, agents, servants and employees from all liability,
judgments, costs, damages and expenses (including attorney's fees)
arising out of any electrical inspection made by the agency in the Town
of Gates. In satisfaction of this requirement, an agency may name the
Town of Gates as an additional insured on its general and excess
liability insurance policy, insuring the Town of Gates against liability
arising out of electrical inspections made in the Town of Gates.
§ 87-5 ELECTRICAL CODE § 87-6
87:95
machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as their principal business.
It shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by
the government of the United States or the State of New York.
§ 87-7. Disclaimer of liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Town
of Gates be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of any
inspection made pursuant to this chapter.
§ 87-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or any rule or regulation made pursuant thereto shall be guilty
of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment; and, in addition, may be ordered to pay all costs
and expenses relating to such violation. Each day on which such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 87-9. Repealer.
Chapter 88
ELEVATORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 70.
§ 88-1. Title; purpose; applicability; standards.
A. The Electrical Code Ordinance of the Town of Gates, being Chapter 87
of the Code of the Town of Gates, and all ordinances and local laws and
parts of ordinances and local laws inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed.
B. In order to have continuity in electrical inspections, the Chief Inspector
and all Deputy Inspectors of the New York Board of Fire Underwriters
are hereby authorized to continue to make inspections for a period of 60
days after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 87-6 GATES CODE § 88-1
88:96
§ 88-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as
indicated:
ALTERATION — Any major change made on existing equipment other than
the repair or replacement of damaged, worn or broken parts necessary for
normal operation and maintenance.
ANSI — The American National Standards Institute.
ANSI A17.1 — The edition of the American National Standards Institute
Code for elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and moving walks, as
supplemented by published amendments and additions as referenced by
Title 9 NYCRR of the State of New York.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A document issued by the Building
Inspector which certifies each conveyance defined herein as being in
operating order and in compliance with this chapter.
CONVEYANCE — Any elevator, escalator or other device as defined in ANSI
A17.1.
EXISTING INSTALLATION — Any installation of a conveyance existing prior
to the effective date of this chapter.
INSPECTION CERTIFICATION — A form completed by a licensed inspector
certifying the periodic safety tests and inspections of a conveyance which is
filed at required intervals with the Building Inspector by the owner, lessee
or occupant of any building or structure.
INSPECTION REPORT — The report of an inspection performed by a
licensed inspector certifying full use of the pieces of equipment and
designating that the equipment is maintained in operative condition, ready
for service at all times.
A. This chapter shall be known as and cited as the "Gates Elevator
Inspection and Certification Law."
B. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for public health and safety
through the establishment of regulations relating to the installation,
alteration, maintenance, required installations, and inspection of
elevators, escalators, moving walks, lifts and other conveyances in the
Town of Gates.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the installation, alteration,
maintenance, required installation and inspections of all such
conveyances in the Town of Gates.
D. In addition to the provisions in the chapter, the New York State Fire
Prevention and Building Code, henceforth referred to as "Title 9
NYCRR, ANSI A17.1," and the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990
shall be recognized as the standards regulating all conveyances in the
Town of Gates.
§ 88-1 ELEVATORS § 88-2
88:97
INSPECTOR — A person licensed by the Town of Gates to witness and/or
perform tests and inspections on conveyances.
LICENSE — A document which is issued by the Town of Gates to an
inspector to engage in the trade of the inspections on conveyances.
NEW INSTALLATION — Any conveyance newly installed or an existing
conveyance which has been moved to a new location subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter.
SECURED INSTALLATION — An elevator in a vacant or occupied building
which has its suspense ropes removed from the driver, counterweights
resting at the bottom of the hoist weight, car safety permanently set,
safety sling attached and hoist weight doors permanently boarded up or
barricaded on the hoist weight side; or an escalator which has its power
feed lines disconnected and top and bottom entrances boarded up or
barricaded.
SIMPLE REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with the same or like
materials used in the existing work.
TAMPERING — Any unauthorized use or alteration of a conveyance.
TEMPORARILY OUT OF SERVICE — An elevator or other conveyance which
is locked at the top floor with its disconnect pulled and car hoist weights
doors closed. Such an elevator or other conveyance may remain out of
service for not more than one year with inspections occurring in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 88-3. Administration and enforcement.
§ 88-4. Permits and inspections.
A. The administration and enforcement of this chapter, and the provisions
of Title 9 NYCRR and ANSI A17.1 applicable to conveyances, shall be in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and those of the
Gates Building Construction and Fire Prevention Code (Chapter 70).
B. This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Town of Gates
Building Inspector.
A. Permits are required for:
(1) New installations of elevators or other conveyances;
(2) Alterations to existing elevators or other conveyances;
(3) Placing back in service any secured installation; and
(4) Placing back in service any temporarily out of service elevators or
other conveyances.
B. In all cases where there is a new installation of a conveyance, or a move
of an existing conveyance, a permit must be obtained by the installer or
contractor. To obtain a permit, the applicant must provide plans for said
§ 88-2 GATES CODE § 88-4
88:98
§ 88-5. Licenses for inspectors.
installation. These plans must adequately satisfy the requirements of
this chapter, of state or local building codes, and of the New York State
Department of Education.
C. The installer must have proof of insurance coverage and provide proof
of this coverage to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector.
D. Permits must be displayed at the job site at all time while work is in
progress. Failure to display the required conveyance permit shall be
grounds for the issuance of a stop-work order by the Building Inspector.
The only exception to the requirement of displaying a permit is during
the installation in a new building also under construction.
E. All conveyances and installation must be inspected by an Inspector
licensed by the Town of Gates to perform conveyance inspections. After
the initial installation inspection, all conveyances shall be reinspected
at regular intervals as prescribed by Title 9 NYCRR and ANSI A17.1, as
amended. All existing installations and conveyances shall be subjected
to an inspection by a licensed inspector at intervals of no longer than six
months for all conveyances, except those located within a dwelling unit
of a single- or two-family residence. An alternate interval may be
required by the Building Inspector based upon a report by a licensed
inspector or upon receipt of a complaint of possible unsafe condition.
F. An inspection report and certification must be submitted to the Building
Inspector before issuance of a certificate of compliance. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner, lessee or occupant to submit the inspection
report and certification to the Building Inspector.
G. A certificate of compliance is required prior to the operation or use of
any conveyance in any building or structure in the Town of Gates.
H. A certificate of compliance is required for the continuing operation or
use of any conveyance in any building or structure in the Town of Gates
which has been placed out of service or secured.
I. Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation who is the
owner, installer, lessee or occupant of a building or structure and who
operates, installs, repairs or causes to be operated therein any
conveyance shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Every applicant for an inspector's license shall make application to the
Building Inspector, detailing appropriate experience and current
qualified elevator inspector (QEI) certification along with name,
address and business name, if applicable.
B. A company in the business of conveyance inspections must submit
names, addresses and current qualified inspector certificates for all
§ 88-4 ELEVATORS § 88-5
88:99
§ 88-6. Conveyances requiring work or repair.
employees who will be performing conveyance inspections in the Town
of Gates.
C. A fee, established by the Town Board of the Town of Gates and changing
as deemed necessary by resolution thereof, will be required before
issuance of a license to inspect conveyances. The initial fee established
by the Town Board is $500.
D. The elevator inspector shall maintain insurance policies in full force and
effect while performing inspections and submitting certificates of
inspection and compliance. Said policies shall include statutory
workmen's compensation for his or her employees and workmen and
public liability insurance of at least $1,000,000/$3,000,000, for
personal injury, $100,000 for property damage and $5,000 for excess
liability. All policies must name the Town of Gates as an additional
insured, and a certificate of insurance showing coverage in the required
amounts shall be submitted to the Town of Gates. The terms of the
policies shall be subject to the approval of the Town of Gates.
E. All licenses shall expire on the last day of December each year and shall
be renewed annually. Renewal will require:
(1) Necessary fees for each licensee;
(2) Current qualified elevator inspection certificates; and
(3) Proof of insurance.
F. It is the responsibility of the license holder to obtain the renewal of the
license. The Town of Gates may send renewal notices in advance at the
end of each year, however, failure to receive such a notice will not
relieve the license holder of his or her responsibility to renew the
license.
A. If an inspection report is filed which indicates that a code violation
exists, the Building Inspector shall serve or cause to be served a written
notice upon the owner, lessee and/or occupant, either personally or by
regular mail. The notice shall specify the property address and each
conveyance to be repaired and shall require that the repairs listed be
performed within the specified time limit from the date of personal
service or mailing of the notice. Except in life safety situations, the
owner will have 30 days to submit documentation that the conveyance
is in compliance with all applicable codes.
B. Where the work or repairs required is in the nature of an emergency as
determined by the Building Inspector, the equipment shall be sealed
temporarily out of service, and such work or repairs shall be ordered to
be done at once. After service of notice, it shall be the duty of the owner
to make such repairs or changes as are necessary to place said
conveyance in a safe condition. It shall also be the duty of the owner to
§ 88-5 GATES CODE § 88-6
88:100
§ 88-7. Fees.
§ 88-8. Alteration or service of conveyances.
submit documentation that the conveyance is in compliance and to
obtain a new certificate of compliance.
C. If, upon inspection of any device covered by this chapter, the equipment
is found in a dangerous condition or if there is an immediate hazard to
life or if the design or the method of operation in combination with
devices used is considered inherently dangerous in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, he or she shall notify the owner as provided herein
of such condition and seal the conveyance temporarily out of service.
The Building Inspector shall order such alterations or additions as may
be deemed necessary to eliminate the dangerous condition. It shall be
the duty of the owner to submit documentation that the conveyance is
in compliance and to obtain a new certificate of compliance.
A. Fees, as set by resolution of the Gates Town Board, are required for all
permits described in § 88-4A hereinabove.
B. Fees as set by resolution of the Gates Town Board are required for all
certificates of compliance.
C. Fees are required to be submitted with the first inspection report and
certification for all existing installations.
D. Each inspection certification form shall be accompanied by a filing fee
before obtaining an updated certificate of compliance.
A. When an existing building's conveyance systems are undergoing
service, alterations, or repairs and when there are two or more such
conveyances, at least one shall be maintained in service until the
completion of the service, alteration or repair.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, repair contractor, lessee and/
or occupants to provide safety barricades, signs and additional
precautions as necessary for the general safety of the public while any
conveyance is installed, serviced or repaired and to maintain adequate
safety precautions until the conveyance is operational and ready for
public use as determined by a licensed inspector.
C. It shall be the duty of the owner, repair contractor, lessee and/or
occupant of any conveyance to report any accident which causes injury
or damage to the conveyance which may hinder the safe operation of
the conveyance to the Building Inspector within 24 hours of the
accident. Upon occurrence of such an accident, the conveyance shall be
taken out of service and shall not be returned to service until a new
certificate of compliance is obtained. The owner, repair contractor,
lessee and/or occupant shall also cooperate during any investigation,
with the Building Inspector or any other agency, as required.
§ 88-6 ELEVATORS § 88-9
88:101
§ 88-9. Penalties for offenses.
§ 88-10. Effective date.
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect upon the expiration of all
relative time periods for publication, posting, and governmental approvals,
as required by law, but no earlier than November 1, 2003.
Chapter 90
EXCAVATIONS
A. Any person who shall willfully fail to comply with this chapter shall
severally, for each and every violation, be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 per day of violation or imprisonment not exceeding
one year, or both. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue, and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defects within a
reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each day the
prohibited condition(s) or violation(s) continues shall constitute a
separate offense. The imposition of any such penalty shall not be held to
prohibit the enforced removal of prohibited conditions by any
appropriate remedy.
B. An action or proceeding in the name of the Town of Gates, New York,
may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation or any provision
of this chapter. Such remedy shall be in addition to penalties otherwise
prescribed by law.
§ 88-9 GATES CODE § 88-10
90:102
ARTICLE I
Undrained Excavations
[Adopted 4-24-1946]
§ 90-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Undrained Excavations
Ordinance."
§ 90-2. Drainage of standing water.
No person shall maintain or own a cellar or other excavation in the Town
of Gates in which water is allowed to stand for a period of 30 days or more
without having the same properly drained or filled or made free of such
water.
§ 90-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
a violation and punishable by a fine of not to exceed $250 or imprisonment
not to exceed 15 days, or both, to be recovered by the town in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 90-1 EXCAVATIONS § 90-3
90:103
Chapter 94
FIREARMS
§ 94-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Firearms Regulating Ordinance."
§ 94-2. Purpose. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
Considerable damage is being done to property of residents of the Town of
Gates and the lives and persons of the inhabitants thereof are being placed
in jeopardy by careless use of firearms, air guns, spring guns and bow and
arrow. It is the purpose of this chapter to preserve and to promote the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of
Gates.
§ 94-3. Prohibitions. [Amended 12-18-1967; 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
No person shall fire or discharge or cause to be fired or discharged any bow
and arrow; any gun, revolver, pistol or other firearm; or any air gun, spring
gun or other instrument or weapon in which the propelling force is a spring
or air, within the Town of Gates.
§ 94-4. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police of the Town of Gates and the peace officers shall enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period of not more than one year, or both such
fine and imprisonment.
§ 94-6. Exceptions. [Amended 12-18-1967; 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any peace officer or other
law enforcement officers while engaged in the performance of their duties.
§ 94-7. Target ranges. [Added 12-18-1967]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the discharge of rifles or
firearms on target ranges approved by the Chief of Police of the Town of
Gates. Such target ranges shall be constructed, maintained and supervised
in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Chief of Police of the Town
§ 90-3 GATES CODE § 94-7
94:104
of Gates and shall be subject to inspection by any duly authorized peace
officer.
Chapter 97
FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 59.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 70.
Fire systems safety — See Ch. 98.
§ 97-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Gates Fire Sprinkler System
Law."
§ 97-2. Purpose.
It is the intention of this chapter to provide for the installation,
maintenance, approval and compliance of automatic sprinkler systems
within the Town of Gates.
§ 97-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION — The extension or increase in area, height or equipment of a
structure1
ALTERATION — Any change, rearrangement or addition to a structure,
other than repairs; any modification in construction or in equipment.
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM — A sprinkler system, for fire protection
purposes, designed in accordance with fire protection engineering
standards. Where the provisions of this Code require that a building or
portion thereof be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system,
sprinklers shall be installed throughout in accordance with the applicable
NRA standard as referenced in the Uniform Code.
REPAIRS — Replacement or renewal, excluding additions, of any part of
a structure, with like or similar materials or parts, for the purpose of
maintenance, preservation or restoration of such materials.
§ 97-4. Structures required to have automatic sprinkler systems.
A. Any building or structure as classified by the New York State Building
and Fire Code, with the exception or one- and two-family dwellings and
Utility and Miscellaneous Group U occupancies, which require a
§ 94-7 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS § 97-4
97:105
§ 97-5. Compliance required prior to issuance of building permit.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any structure
required to have an automatic sprinkler system under § 97-4 of this chapter
unless plans incorporating such automatic sprinkler systems are filed with
the Town of Gates Building Department
§ 97-6. Approval required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure required to
have an automatic sprinkler system under § 97-4 of this chapter unless the
system is installed, operational, inspected and tested-
§ 97-7. Maintenance.
Installed automatic sprinkler systems shall be maintained by the properly
owner as prescribed in the Uniform Code.
§ 97-8. Administration.
The requirements set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to and shall
supplement the requirements set forth in Local Law No. 2-1984. The plans,
specifications, rating body approvals and materials required by the Town
of Gates Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal relating to the automatic
sprinkler system shall be submitted to the Building Inspector and/or Fire
Marshal in conjunction with an application for a building permit pursuant
to Chapter 70, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 97-9. Liability of Town and employees for damages.
This chapter shall not be construed to hold any Code Enforcement Official
of the Town of Gates responsible for any damages to persons or property by
reason of inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect
certificate of occupancy, constructed after the effective date of this
chapter, shall be required to have an automatic sprinkler system
installed and operational prior to occupancy.
B. Any alteration, addition, or repair of a structure, with the exception of a
one- or two-family dwelling, existing on the effective date of this
chapter, when the cost of the alteration, addition or repair made within
any six-month period exceeds 50% of the value of replacement of the
existing structure, excluding the alteration, addition or repair, or, a
change of use or occupancy as defined in the Uniform Code shall be
considered a "structure constructed after the effective date of this
chapter" within the meaning of this section.
C. Replacement value of the existing structure shall be determined by
equalizing the assessed value of the existing structure based on the
most current tax assessment roll in the Town of Gates.
§ 97-4 GATES CODE § 97-9
97:106
or reinspect, as required by any permits under this chapter, nor shall it
be liable for any damage to persons or property by reason of the Building
Inspector and/or Fire Marshal exercising their discretion as provided in this
chapter.
§ 97-10. Appeals.
A. Generally. An applicant may appeal a decision of the Building Inspector
and/or Fire Marshal regarding issues related to automatic sprinkler
systems pursuant to this chapter. Such appeals shall be heard by the
Gates Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Grounds for appeal. The grounds for such appeal shall include one or
more of the following:
(1) Undue economic hardship or burden.
(2) Requirements restrict the achievement of a valid state or federal
policy.
(3) Physical or legal impossibility of performance.
(4) Requirements are unnecessary, in light of viable alternatives, which
meet the intended objective of this chapter.
C. Appeal procedure. All appeals shall be conducted at the regularly
scheduled meetings of the Gates Zoning Board of Appeals and shall be
conducted in the same manner as other appeals. The Town Building
Inspector and/or Fire Marshal shall present a position paper for the
Board's review, said paper shall become part of the review process and
may appear at the hearing on said appeal. The applicant may also
present a position paper in addition to the applicant appearing at the
hearing. The Board may affirm, modify or reverse the determination of
the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal after its deliberations.
D. Time for appeal. The time for filing of an appeal regarding fire sprinkler
systems shall be 90 days from the date of the Town's action involving
the applicant.
E. Decisions. The hearing on the appeal will be recorded in the formal
minutes of the Zoning Board and. determination on the appeal shall be
made by a majority vote of the Board, The decision of the Board will be
delivered in writing to the petitioner and the involved Town officials.
The petitioner may institute an Article 78 proceeding within 30 days
after the filing of the minutes of the meeting in the Town Clerk's office.
F. Jurisdiction. In no event shall the Town of Gates Zoning Board of
Appeals assume jurisdiction over nor interpret or modify any provision
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
(Uniform Code) nor shall it in any manner substitute for the New York
State Regional Board of Review with respect to Uniform Code
provisions.
§ 97-9 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS § 97-11
97:107
§ 97-11. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 98
FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 59.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 70.
Fire sprinkler systems — See Ch. 97.
§ 98-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Fire Systems Safety Law" of the Town
of Gates, County of Monroe, State of New York.
§ 98-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that all persons installing,
inspecting, recharging or otherwise servicing portable fire extinguishers
and all automatic fire extinguishing systems do so in a trained and qualified
manner so as to protect the health and safety of Gates' residents and
business owners.
A. Any person who violates or knowingly permits the violation of this
chapter shall be deemed to have committed an offense against this
chapter and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than one year. or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each separate violation shall constitute a separate
additional offense. However, for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction
upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter
shall be deemed misdemeanors and, for such purpose only, all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person violating any
provision of this chapter or any article, section or subdivision thereof
shall be subject to a civil penalty in the sum of $200 for the first such
violation and $300 for any subsequent violation, said penalties to be
recoverable in a civil action in the name of the Town of Gates.
B. Any action or proceeding in the name of the Town of Gates may be
commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with, or restrain by injunction the violation of the provisions
of this chapter or to vacate the occupancy or structure in the case of
imminent danger to life and property. Such remedy shall be in addition
to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 97-11 GATES CODE § 98-3
98:108
§ 98-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MARSHAL — The Fire Marshal or any duly appointed Deputy Fire Marshal
of the Town of Gates.
TRADE — The trade of installing, charging, filling, maintaining, recharging,
refilling, repairing and/or testing rechargeable fire extinguishers or
automatic fire extinguishing systems.
§ 98-4. License required.
No person shall engage in or conduct the trade within the Town of Gates
without first having obtained a license therefor issued by the Marshal
and without having first obtained and filed with the Marshal an insurance
certificate showing coverage as may be determined by the Marshal. The
Marshal may issue a license to any applicant holding a valid license to
engage in the trade issued by the City of Rochester or holding a valid license
to engage in the trade issued by another jurisdiction which the Marshal
determines has requirements for its issuance that are substantially similar
to the licensing requirements of the City of Rochester.
§ 98-5. Licensing of corporations or limited companies.
A corporation or limited liability company may conduct the trade within the
Town of Gates and shall be entitled to a license therefor, provided that one
or more employees of such entity is the holder of a license duly granted
in this chapter. No person shall perform the trade on behalf of such entity
unless he or she is licensed hereunder.
§ 98-6. Insurance certificate required.
An insurance certificate showing coverage shall be filed in the office of the
Marshal by every person or entity engaged in the trade within the Town
of Gates. Such insurance certificate shall name the Town of Gates as an
additional insured. Such insurance policy shall be renewed from year to
year so long as the licensee engages in the trade within the Town of Gates.
§ 98-7. Revocation of license.
The Gates Town Board may revoke any license issued under the authority
of this chapter, provided that before such revocation a public hearing
shall be held before the Town Board at the next Town Board meeting.
Following the public hearing the Town Board will decide whether or not the
licensee is qualified to properly conduct the trade in the Town of Gates. If
the Town Board determines that the licensee is not qualified to properly
conduct the trade in the Town of Gates, it shall revoke the licensee's license.
The Marshal shall have the authority to immediately revoke any licensee's
license due to revocation of said license by the City of Rochester or other
licensing jurisdiction.
§ 98-3 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 98-8
98:109
§ 98-8. Penalties for offenses.
Persons who violate any provision of this chapter shall for each and every
such violation be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than one
year or both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 100
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 70.
Excavations — See Ch. 90.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 100-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Gates finds that the potential and/or actual
damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of
the Town of Gates and that such damages may include: destruction or loss
of private and public housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and
privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize
the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives
hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 100-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
§ 98-8 GATES CODE § 100-2
98:110
§ 100-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
§ 100-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the base
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges, located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 100-2 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 100-4
98:111
floodplain or one-hundred-year floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the
phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones
A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, elevated building also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE, or V, elevated building also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though
the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the
federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's flood insurance study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along water courses studied in detail in the flood
insurance study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
§ 100-4 GATES CODE § 100-4
98:112
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
Flood or flooding also means the collapse or subsidence of land along
the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A(1) above.
B.
§ 100-4 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 100-4
98:113
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering
department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 100-4 GATES CODE § 100-4
98:114
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD OR 100-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning
as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — That at least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a flood insurance study or by other agencies as
provided in § 100-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The actual start of construction means the first placement of
permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on
a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 100-4 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 100-4
98:115
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
§ 100-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Gates, Monroe County.
§ 100-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard for the Town of Gates, Community Number
360416, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 100-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers: 36055C0167G,
36055C0169G, 36055C0186G, 36055C0187G, 36055C0188G,
36055C0189G, 36055C0191G, 36055C0193G, 36055C0194G whose
effective date is August 28, 2008, and any subsequent revisions to these
map panels that do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
B. A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Monroe County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated August 28, 2008.
C. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The flood insurance study and/or maps are on file at: Town
of Gates Building Department, Gates Town Hall, 1605 Buffalo Road,
Rochester, New York 14624.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
§ 100-4 GATES CODE § 100-7
98:116
§ 100-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of
Gates from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or
remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under §§ 100-19 and
100-20 will be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
§ 100-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Town of Gates, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 100-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Town of Gates Director of Public Works is hereby appointed local
administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 100-11. Floodplain development permit; fees.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
§ 100-7 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 100-11
98:117
§ 100-12. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting
its citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure
to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an
area of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 100-6, without a valid floodplain development
permit. Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the local administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $100. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Town of Gates for any
additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this
project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than
$500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 100-15C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 100-17, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
§ 100-11 GATES CODE § 100-12
98:118
§ 100-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 100-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 100-12, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of §§ 100-14 through 100-18 and, in
particular, § 100-14A Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§§ 100-14 through 100-18, no permit shall be issued. The applicant
may revise the application to include measures that mitigate or
eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the application.
§ 100-12 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 100-13
98:119
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 100-12G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, the local administrator shall obtain from the permit
holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The certificate
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed
land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate
of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. A
certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
(unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
§ 100-13 GATES CODE § 100-13
98:120
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 100-8 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 100-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 100-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 100-13E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
§ 100-13 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 100-13
98:121
§ 100-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 100-6.
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1),
and whether or not the structures contain a basement:
(4) Variances issued pursuant to §§ 100-19 and 100-20; and
(5) Notices required under § 100-13C, Alteration of watercourses.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Town of Gates agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision,
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the
Town of Gates for all fees and other costs in relation to the
application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses
and mapping and reimburse the Town of Gates for all costs
related to the final map revision.
§ 100-13 GATES CODE § 100-14
98:122
§ 100-15. Standards for all structures.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 100-6 no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Town of Gates agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping
and reimburses the Town of Gates for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Town of Gates
for all costs related to the final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
§ 100-14 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 100-15
98:123
§ 100-16. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in § 100-14A, Subdivision proposals, and § 100-14B,
Encroachments, and § 100-15, Standards for all structures:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation or
be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
two feet above the base flood elevation.
§ 100-15 GATES CODE § 100-16
98:124
§ 100-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 100-14A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 100-14B Encroachments, and § 100-15,
Standards for all structures.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 100-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components
located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
§ 100-16 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 100-17
98:125
§ 100-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in § 100-14, General
standards, and § 100-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate
or other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of Subsection
A(2),: including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, C and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
§ 100-17 GATES CODE § 100-18
98:126
§ 100-19. Appeals Board.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 100-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Town of Gates shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 100-18 FIRE SYSTEMS SAFETY § 100-19
98:127
§ 100-20. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items § 100-19D(1)
through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 100-19 GATES CODE § 100-20
98:128
Chapter 102
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 66.
§ 102-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Ordinance of the
Town of Gates."
§ 102-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the conducting of games of
chance within the Town of Gates.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 100-13H of this chapter.
§ 100-20 GAMES OF CHANCE § 102-3
102:129
§ 102-3. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
§ 102-4. Definitions.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings
as such words and terms are used in Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law, unless otherwise provided herein or the context requires a different
meaning. "Town" means the Town of Gates; "officer" means the chief law
enforcement officer of the Town of Gates.
§ 102-5. License required.
Games of chance may be conducted in the town by an authorized
organization after obtaining a license therefor in accordance with the
provisions, requirements and limitations of Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law, the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and
Wagering Board and this chapter.
§ 102-6. Conduct of games on Sunday.
Pursuant to the authority contained in § 195 of the General Municipal Law,
the conduct of games of chance on Sunday is hereby authorized, except for
those days specifically prohibited in said § 195.
§ 102-7. Mandatory referendum.
The adoption of this chapter is subject to a mandatory referendum. A special
town election shall be held in the Town of Gates for the purpose of voting
for the approval or defeat of this chapter. Such special election shall be held
on the date and at the times and places designated by the Town Board.1
§ 102-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately after posting and publication
as provided in the Town Law and after a referendum, to be held as
hereinbefore provided, at which a majority of the qualified electors of the
Town of Gates voting at said referendum shall approve the same by voting
for the proposition.
1. Editor's Note: This ordinance passed at referendum on 4-18-1979.
§ 102-3 GATES CODE § 102-8
102:130
Chapter 107
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Construction and Fire
Prevention — See Ch. 70.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 107-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of historic landmarks, buildings, structures,
sites and objects is necessary to:
§ 107-2. Historic Preservation Commission.
There is hereby created a Commission to be known as the "Gates Historic
Preservation Commission" (the "Commission").
A. Protect and enhance the historic landmarks, which represent
distinctive elements of Gates' historic, architectural and cultural
heritage.
B. Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past.
C. Protect and enhance the attractiveness of Gates to homebuyers,
visitors, shoppers and residents and thereby provide economic benefits
to the town and its citizens.
D. Ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development
of the Town of Gates.
E. Stabilize and improve property values in the town.
F. Foster, encourage and advise the preservation, restoration and
rehabilitation of structures.
A. The Commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the
Town Board. Members shall be residents of the Town of Gates and shall
have a known interest in and knowledge of historic preservation and
architectural development within the Town of Gates. Commission
members shall serve in a voluntary capacity.
B. Commission members shall serve for terms of four years with the
exception that, of the initial term, one member shall be one year, one
member shall be two years, and one member shall be three years. In all
cases, terms shall expire on December 31.
C. The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be appointed
by the Town Board and shall be members of the Commission. The
§ 102-8 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 107-2
107:131
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be designated
annually by the Town Board. [Amended 12-4-2000 by L.L. No.
3-20002]
D. The powers of the Commission shall include:
(1) Promulgation of rules and regulations as necessary for the conduct
of its business;
(2) Seeking the advice of professional consultants, as necessary to
carry out the duties of the Commission, subject to Town Board
approval;
(3) Making recommendations to the Town Board regarding the
adoption of criteria for the identification of historic, architectural
and cultural sites and landmarks;
(4) Conducting surveys of historic, architectural and cultural sites and
landmarks within the town subject to Town Board approval;
(5) Making recommendations to the Town Board regarding the
designation of identified structures, sites or objects as landmarks;
(6) Making recommendations to the Town Board concerning the
acquisitions of facade easements or other interests in real property
as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter;
(7) Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, architectural
and cultural preservation by developing and participating in public
education programs;
(8) Making recommendations to the Town Board concerning the
utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote the
preservation of landmarks within the town;
(9) Analyzing the feasibility of and recommending the acquisition of an
historic landmark to the Town Board where its preservation is
essential to the purpose of this chapter and where private
preservation is not feasible;
(10) Making recommendations to the Town Board regarding approval or
disapproval of applications for certificates of appropriateness and
hardship applications pursuant to this chapter; and
(11) Making recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals and
Planning Board in relation to applications before those Boards
relating to properties that include landmarks.
E. The Commission shall meet at least monthly, but meetings may be held
at any time on the written request of any two Commission members or
on the call of the Chairman or Town Supervisor.
2. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection C as Subsection B.
§ 107-2 GATES CODE § 107-2
107:132
§ 107-3. Designation of landmarks.
F. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three of the
Commission members.
G. All voting members shall have inspected the property concerned before
voting on a recommendation regarding a certificate of appropriateness.
H. Notice of any public hearings required to be held under the chapter
shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the town at
least five days before the date of such hearing.
A. The Commission may recommend to the Town Board for final approval a
proposal to designate an individual property, site, structure or object as
a landmark (any property, site, structure or object so designated is
hereinafter referred to as a "landmark") if it:
(1) Possesses historic value as part of the cultural, political, economic,
architectural or social history of the locality, region, state or nation;
(2) Is identified with historic personages;
(3) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style;
(4) Is the work of a significant designer; or
(5) Because of a unique location or singular physical characteristic,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood.
B. The Commission may, in proposing designation of a landmark structure,
to include a minimal amount of land surrounding the structure,
including any nearby outbuildings, so as to protect the structure or
structures from undue encroachment. The boundaries of such land shall
be dictated by such features as nearby hedgerows, streams, tree line,
streets, maintained lawn areas and/or property lines.
C. Notice of proposed designation shall be sent, by certified mail, to the
owner(s) of the property, site or structure describing the proposed
designation and announcing a date, time and place for a public hearing
by the Town Board to consider the designation. Notice of such hearing
shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation at
least five days prior to the date of the public hearing. Once the
Commission has issued a notice of proposed designation, no building or
demolition permits shall be issued by the Building Inspector until the
Town Board has made its decision.
D. The Town Board shall hold a public hearing prior to designation of any
landmark. The Commission, owners and any interested parties may
present testimony or documentary evidence at the hearing, which will
become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural or cultural
importance of the proposed landmark. The record may also contain
§ 107-2 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 107-3
107:133
§ 107-4. Certificate of appropriateness.
No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, demolition, new construction or moving of a landmark, nor
shall any person make any material changes in the appearance of such
property, its light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps or paving without
first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Town Board. All
certificates of appropriateness will terminate one year after they are
granted unless significant work has commenced on the project. Exterior
painting of a structure shall not require a certificate of appropriateness.
§ 107-5. Criteria for approval of application.
staff reports, public comments or other evidence offered outside of the
hearing.
E. The Town Board shall make a determination and shall send its decision
to the property owner or owners affected. It shall also forward notice of
each property designated as a landmark to the Town Clerk who shall
deliver each such notice to the Monroe County Clerk's office for
recording.
F. The owner of any landmark previously designated by the Town Board
may request that the Town Board revoke the landmark designation at
any time based upon new factual information, not previously considered
by the Town Board, that demonstrates it no longer possesses the
historic, architectural or cultural significance as outlined under
§ 107-3A.
A. In making a recommendation to the Town Board upon an application for
a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall not consider
changes to the interior spaces unless they are open to the public. The
Commission's recommendation shall be based upon the following
principles:
(1) Any alterations of an existing property shall be compatible with its
historic character; and
(2) New construction attached to or appurtenant to a landmark shall
be compatible with its historic character.
B. In applying the principle of compatibility, the Commission and Town
Board shall consider the following factors:
(1) The general design, character and appropriateness to the property
of the proposed alteration of new construction.
(2) The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in relation to
the property itself, surrounding properties and the neighborhood.
(3) Texture and materials and their relation to similar features of other
properties in the neighborhood.
§ 107-3 GATES CODE § 107-5
107:134
§ 107-6. Certificate of appropriateness application procedure.
(4) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property's front facade, proportion and
arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade,
roof shape and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets,
including setback.
(5) The importance of historic, architectural or other features to the
significance of the property.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of
appropriateness, the owner shall file an application for such a
certificate with the Town Board. Such filing is to take place in the Town
Building Department on such forms as may be prepared by the
Department, which shall to the extent possible be integrated with any
other application forms required by the Department for such work. The
application shall contain:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) The location and photographs of the property;
(3) Elevation drawings of the proposed changes, if available;
(4) Perspective drawings, including the relationship to adjacent
properties, if available;
(5) Samples of materials to be used;
(6) Where proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing
showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions, a
description of materials to be used, the method of illumination and
a plan showing the sign's location on the property and that the
signage is in compliance with the Town of Gates Sign Ordinance;3
and
(7) Any other information which the Town Board may deem necessary
in order to visualize the proposed work.
B. No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a
certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the Town Board.
The certificate of appropriateness required by this chapter shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any other building permit that may be
required by any other ordinance of the Town of Gates. Both Zoning and
Planning Boards are hereby directed to implement procedures which
will integrate the certificate of appropriateness application procedure
with procedures for obtaining any other required town approvals. The
Historical Preservation Commission shall make a recommendation to
the Town Board and may make recommendations to both Zoning and
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Art. V, Signs.
§ 107-5 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 107-6
107:135
§ 107-7. Demolition hardship criteria.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed demolition
has been denied may apply for relief on the grounds of hardship. In order to
prove the existence of hardship, the applicant shall establish that:
§ 107-8. General hardship criteria.
Any owner of a landmark whose application for a certificate of
appropriateness for any purpose other than demolition has been denied
may apply to the Town Board for relief on the grounds of hardship. In
order to prove the existence of hardship for a business commercial property,
the applicant shall establish that the property is incapable of earning a
reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most
profitable return possible. If the applicant is certified under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, the applicant shall establish that
denial of the proposed alteration would prevent the applicant's charitable
purpose.
Planning Boards in connection with a certificate of appropriateness
granted with respect to any landmark.
C. The Town Board shall approve, approve with modifications or deny the
application within 30 days from receipt of the completed application.
The Town Board shall hold a public hearing on the application, at which
an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the
application to present their views. The applicant will be required to post
a sign provided by the town notifying the public of the application in the
front yard of the property subject to application for a period of 10 days
prior to the scheduled hearing.
D. All decisions of the Town Board shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the applicant by first class mail and a copy filed with the Town Clerk
for public inspection. The Town Board's decision shall state the reasons
for its decision.
E. A fee as set from time to time by the Town Board shall accompany the
application.
A. The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of
whether that return represents the most profitable return possible or, in
the case of a property owned and used for charitable purposes by an
entity certified under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
where the failure to permit demolition would unreasonably interfere
with the applicant's charitable purpose;
B. The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the
current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable
return; and
C. Reasonable efforts to fine a purchaser interested in acquiring the
property and preserving it have failed.
§ 107-6 GATES CODE § 107-9
107:136
§ 107-9. Hardship application procedure.
§ 107-10. Enforcement; stop-work order.
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued
under this chapter shall conform to any requirements included therein. The
Building Inspector and Fire Marshall may inspect periodically any such
work to assure compliance. In the event that work is found that is not being
performed in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, or upon
notification of such fact by the Commission, the Building Inspector or the
Fire Marshall may issue a stop-work order, in which case all work shall
immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as
long as a stop-work order is in effect.
§ 107-11. Maintenance and repair required.
A. After receiving written notification from the Town Board of the denial of
a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may commence the
hardship process. No building permit or demolition permit shall be
issued unless the Town Board makes a finding that a hardship exists.
B. The Town Board shall hold a public hearing on the hardship application
at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents
of the application to present their views.
C. The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Town Board, local
preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an
alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
D. All decisions on hardship applications shall be in writing. A copy shall
be sent to the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed at the town
Hall for public inspection. The decision shall state the reasons for
granting or denying the hardship application.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a
landmark which does not involve a change in design, material or
outward appearance.
B. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a
landmark shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of
disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior
architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the Commission,
produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the property itself.
Examples of such deterioration include:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
(2) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
(3) Deterioration of external chimneys;
(4) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar;
§ 107-9 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 107-11
107:137
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations,
including broken windows or doors; and
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition
which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the
public safety.
C. The Commission shall advise the Town Board of any landmark which
has fallen into a serious state of disrepair. The Town Board may then
request that the Director of Public Works review the advice of the
Commission and, if he determines such action to be warranted, shall
serve a notice of violation on the property owner of any landmark which
has fallen into a serious state of disrepair as defined pursuant to
§ 107-11B by one of the following methods:
(1) By personal service;
(2) By certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to his or
their last known address as shown on the latest completed
assessment roll of the Town of Gates; or
(3) By the posting of such notice in a conspicuous place upon the
premises affected, and a copy thereof mailed, on the same day it is
posted, addressed to his or their last known address as shown on
the latest completed assessment roll of the Town of Gates, such
notice to be sent by registered mail.
D. Such notice shall provide that if the owner fails to cure such violation
within the period proscribed for compliance, the Director of Public
Works may cure the violation or cause the violation to be cured and the
owner of the property shall be responsible for the cost of such cure by
the assessment and levy on the real property on which such violation
occurred and the expense so assessed shall constitute a lien and charge
on the real property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise
satisfied or discharged and shall be collected in the same manner and at
the same time as other town charges. Within 30 days of the date of such
notice or such lesser period of time as may be set forth in such notice if
the Director of Public Works determines that an emergency exits, the
affected property owner shall either:
(1) Cure the violation;
(2) If by the nature of said violation it cannot be cured within 30 days,
commence to cure and continue to work on said property until such
violation has been cured; or
(3) Appeal the notice of violation to the Town Board.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the town from enforcing its
Property Maintenance Law against owners and/or occupants of any
landmark.
§ 107-11 GATES CODE § 107-12
107:138
§ 107-12. Violations; notices.
§ 107-13. Penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or other entity to construct,
alter, repair, demolish or take any other actions with respect to any
landmark in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or to fail to
comply in any manner with any notice or order of the Director of Public
Works or his designee or Fire Marshall, and any such action or failure to
act shall be deemed a violation and will result in the termination of any
permits issued or any proceedings commenced under the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Whenever there is any violation of this chapter or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this chapter, a violation notice and/or appearance
ticket may be issued to the person, individual, partnership or
corporation owning, operating or maintaining the premises in which
such violation has been noted.
C. Violation notices shall be in writing; shall identify the property or
premises; shall specify the violation or remedial action to be taken and
shall provide that said violation must be corrected within 30 days from
the receipt of said violation notice unless said thirty-day period shall be
modified at the discretion of the enforcement officer issuing such
violation notice, or unless a shorter period of time has been prescribed
for in this chapter.
D. Violation notices and other orders or notices referred to in the chapter
shall be served on the person(s) or entity(ies) charged with the violation
either personally or by certified mail addressed to the last known
address, if any, of such person or entity, as shown by the last preceding
record of the Receiver of Taxes or in the Office of the County Clerk.
A. Any person who shall fail to comply with a written notice of the Director
of Public Works or his designee and/or Fire Marshall within the time
fixed for compliance therewith and any owner, builder, tenant,
contractor or subcontractor or their agents, or any other person taking
part or assisting in any construction, alteration or demolition in
violation of the applicable provisions of this chapter or any lawful order,
notice, directive, permit or certificate of the Director of Public Works or
his designee and/or Fire Marshall made thereunder shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment
for not more than 15 days, or both, and each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. The imposition of such
penalty shall not be held to prohibit the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions by any appropriate remedy, including immediate application
for an injunction.
B. An action or proceeding in the name of the Town of Gates, New York,
may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation of any provision
§ 107-12 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 107-13
107:139
§ 107-14. Compliance required.
No decision to carry out or approve an action subject to the provisions
of this chapter shall be rendered by any department, board, commission,
officer or employee of the Town of Gates until there has been full
compliance with all requirements of this chapter. This shall not prohibit
environmental, engineering, economic feasibility or other studies,
preliminary planning or budgetary processes, nor the granting of an
application relating only to technical specifications and requirements, but
not authorizing commencement of action until full compliance with this
chapter has been met.
§ 107-15. When effective; amendment of provisions.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon adoption and posting,
publication and filing as required by law. The Town Board may from time
to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter pursuant
to the provisions of the Town Law and General Municipal Law applicable
thereto.
§ 107-16. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Town Board relating to landmark
designation, hardship or certificate of appropriateness may, within 30 days
of the decision, file an Article 78 Petition with the New York State Supreme
Court for review of the decision.
Chapter 120
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 70.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
of this chapter, any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter
or a violation of any order issued under this chapter. Such remedy shall
be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
C. Any person who demolishes, alters, restores or reconstructs any
landmark in violation of this chapter shall be required to restore the
property and its site to its appearance prior to the violation. This civil
remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal
prosecution and penalty.
§ 107-13 GATES CODE § 120-1
120:140
§ 120-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Mobile Home Park Ordinance of the
Town of Gates."
§ 120-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the town through the regulation of
the location, planning, design, layout, construction and operation of mobile
home parks and mobile homes. A further purpose is to provide diversity
in housing choice and a greater opportunity for obtaining moderate-cost
housing. At the same time, the town does not desire large-scale
development of such parks so as to make other uses and particularly singlefamily
homes appear out of place. All mobile home parks commenced
henceforth shall be in conformity with this chapter.
§ 120-3. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE HOME — A detached dwelling unit with any or all of the
following characteristics:
MOBILE HOME LOT — An area of land in a mobile home park clearly
defined by markers at each of its corners intended for the purpose of
the placement thereon of a mobile home and any permitted accessory
structure incident thereto.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A tract of land of not less than five contiguous
acres, under the same ownership, with all necessary facilities and
services in accordance with a site development plan meeting all the
requirements of this chapter and which is intended for the express
purpose of providing a satisfying living environment for mobile home
residences on a long-term occupancy basis of not less than six months.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of a mobile home lot on which the
mobile home is placed.
PARK OCCUPANT — A person or persons living in a mobile home in a
mobile home park.
Manufactured as a relocatable dwelling unit intended for yearround
occupancy and for installation on a site without a basement
or permanent foundation.
(1)
Designed to be transported, after manufacture, on its own chassis
and connected to utilities after placement on a mobile home stand.
(2)
Any similar portable structure mounted or designed for mounting
on wheels and used or intended for use for dwelling purposes,
except recreational or camping-type trailers.
(3)
§ 120-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 120-3
120:141
§ 120-4. Mobile homes to comply with certain standards.
No mobile home manufactured after January 15, 1974, shall be admitted
to any park unless it bears the seal issued by the State of New York and
required by the State Code for Construction and Installation of Mobile
Homes, and/or after June 15, 1976, a seal as issued by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development certifying that the mobile
home unit complies with the standards of the National Mobile Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
§ 120-5. Location.
No mobile home park shall be located or maintained in any zoning district
in the Town of Gates except a district zoned Multiple Residence MR, subject
to the distance limitation of § 120-8G.
§ 120-6. Minimum and maximum number of units.
No mobile home park shall contain less than 20 units nor more than 60
units.
§ 120-7. Density; unit occupancy.
§ 120-8. Park development criteria.
PARK OPERATOR — The person or persons to whom a mobile home
park license is issued.
B. "Person," "lot area," "lot depth," "lot width," "site plan" and other terms
which are defined in Chapter 190, Zoning, or Chapter 161, Subdivision
of Land, shall have the meanings set forth therein.
A. Not more than six mobile home units per gross acre shall be permitted.
B. No mobile home unit shall be occupied except by a family as that term is
defined in Chapter 190, Zoning.
A. Park roads.
(1) Minimum construction requirements shall be as set forth in Table 1
annexed to and being a part of this chapter.4
(2) At points where traffic enters or leaves the park, road widths shall
be sufficient to permit free movement to or from the public street,
and park entrance-exit roads shall be not less than 30 feet wide for
a distance of 50 feet from the pavement edge of the existing public
street.
(3) Park roads shall be furnished with adequate lighting with style and
location to be approved by the Planning Board.
4. Editor's Note: Table 1 is on file in the office of the Town Clerk and may be examined there
during regular office hours.
§ 120-3 GATES CODE § 120-8
120:142
(4) Where feasible, all sewers and utilities shall be installed
underground outside of the paved portion of the roads.
(5) Speed limits on all park roads shall not exceed 20 miles per hour
and shall be posted and enforced by the park operator.
B. Sewage disposal and water supply. No mobile home park or mobile
home shall be permitted in the Town of Gates unless connected to a
public sewage disposal and public water supply system.
C. Fire protection.
(1) Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the fire district in which the park is located, and
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.5
[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
(2) Mobile home parks shall be kept free of flammable materials,
rubbish and litter.
D. Natural features. Mobile home park plans shall show existing tree
masses or trees six inches in diameter or more, hedgerows or other
notable existing natural features, such as streams or rock formations.
Natural features shall be retained as much as possible.
E. Facilities and open space.
(1) All mobile home parks established after the adoption of this
chapter shall set aside or otherwise provide not less than 5% of the
gross land area for recreational use by young children and/or
separate areas for active or passive enjoyment of older children
and adults. Passive and/or active recreational areas shall not be
more than 1,000 feet from the furthest mobile home unit.
(2) If community facilities are to be included in the mobile home park,
the plan shall include details of such facilities, including proposed
landscaping and parking facilities.
F. Buffers and screening.
(1) A buffer area of not less than 25 feet along the extremities of the
park and adjacent property lines shall be provided exclusive of
mobile home sites.
(2) The buffer area shall contain natural growth or screen plantings or
a combination thereof which shall be at least six feet high or
capable of rapidly growing to such height. The purpose of the
buffer area and screen plantings is to provide an aesthetically
pleasing separation between the park and adjacent uses. The
5. Editor's Note: For provisions on the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, see Ch.
70, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 120-8 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 120-8
120:143
§ 120-9. Lot development criteria.
Planning Board shall approve the type and density of the screening
so as to accomplish the stated purpose thereof.
(3) Within the 15 feet furthest from the adjacent property line, a
variety of recreational facilities, such as sandboxes and swings,
may be maintained for the use and enjoyment of small children and
toddlers.
G. Distance limitation between parks. In furtherance of one of the stated
purposes of this chapter, no mobile home park shall be permitted within
a one-half-mile radius of another mobile home park.
A. Lot area and lot width.
(1) Mobile home lots in a mobile home park shall have an average
minimum of 5,500 square feet of land area; however, no lot shall
have less than 5,000 square feet of area. The average minimum
shall be determined by dividing the total number of lots in the park
into the total land area for such lots.
(2) The minimum average width of mobile home lots in a park shall be
48 feet at the required setback line; however, no lot shall have a
width of less than 43 feet.
B. Setbacks.
(1) Required setbacks shall be as follows:
(a) From a public right-of-way: 100 feet.
(b) From a park road: 20 feet.
(c) From the rear lot line: 10 feet.
(d) From the side lot line opposite the required parking space: five
feet.
(2) A separation of not less than 25 feet shall be maintained between
the outer extremities of a mobile home or any expansion thereof or
any permitted accessory building on one lot from those on an
adjacent lot.
C. Off-street parking spaces. Each mobile home lot shall have two clearly
defined parking spaces of not less than 10 feet in width and 200 square
feet in area for each such space. Additionally, each mobile home park
shall provide a visitor or guest parking area not more than 1,000 feet
from the furthest unit to be served. Such parking area shall be paved.
The minimum number of parking spaces in such area shall be one space
for every two units in the park.
D. Mobile home stand.
§ 120-8 GATES CODE § 120-9
120:144
(1) Before any mobile home is permitted on any mobile home site, a
mobile home stand shall be provided which will give a firm base
and adequate support for the mobile home. Such stand shall have a
dimension approximating the width and length of the home and any
expansions or extensions thereto. Well-anchored tie-downs,
capable of sustaining a minimum tensile strength of 2,000 pounds
each, shall be provided at least on each corner of the stand. Stands
shall be constructed to the minimum requirements as shown in
Table 2 annexed to and being a part of this chapter.6
(2) The stand area shall be graded to ensure adequate drainage.
E. Patios and steps.
(1) Each mobile home site shall be provided with a patio with a
minimum width of eight feet and a total area of at least 160 square
feet. The patio shall be constructed of durable materials, such as
concrete or patio blocks, and shall be so located as to give good
access to the mobile home. Specifications for patio construction
shall be included in site plan review.
(2) Entrance steps as needed shall be installed at all doors leading to
the inside of the mobile home. Such steps shall be constructed of
materials intended for permanence, weather resistance and
attractiveness and shall be equipped with handrails which will
provide adequate support for users.
F. Lot grading and vegetation.
(1) Mobile home lots shall be so graded as to adequately drain surface
water off the lot.
(2) The park operator shall provide or shall by rules and regulation
require the occupant to provide that all exposed ground area of a
mobile home lot shall be seeded with grass. Bushes or other
vegetation may also be planted. The park operator shall maintain or
require that the occupant shall maintain these areas in a neat and
attractive condition.
G. Auxiliary vehicles prohibited. No travel trailer, camper, boat or similar
auxiliary vehicles shall be stored on any mobile home lot. Off-street
parking spaces as required under § 120-9C of this chapter shall be used
by passenger vehicles only. The park operator may provide a
supplemental parking area for the storage or temporary parking of
auxiliary vehicles.
H. Accessory buildings. There shall be no exterior storage of materials,
toys or equipment. If outside storage is desired, the mobile home park
operator shall provide or shall require the occupant to provide an
6. Editor's Note: Table 2 is on file in the office of the Town Clerk and may be examined there
during regular office hours.
§ 120-9 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 120-9
120:145
§ 120-10. Installation and skirting of mobile home units.
accessory storage building. Such building shall not exceed 140 square
feet in size and shall be of a standard prefabricated product. The park
operator shall determine the location of the accessory building either
at the time that the park is developed or as each site is occupied. No
accessory building shall be placed on the front half of any mobile home
site and the park operator shall strive to maintain uniformity in the
location of such buildings.
I. Litter, refuse and garbage.
(1) The park operator shall be responsible for keeping all mobile home
sites within the park in a neat condition, free of litter, rubbish,
refuse or any flammable materials. The park operator may impose
this obligation on the mobile home occupant; however, the ultimate
responsibility is that of the park operator.
(2) The park operator shall provide or require the mobile home
occupant to provide garbage cans with tight-fitting covers
adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Such
receptacles shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. Garbage
and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as may be necessary
to ensure that garbage cans will not overflow, but not less than
once weekly. The park operator shall establish the location of
garbage cans on the site (location in the front half of the site being
prohibited) and shall specify minimal screening of such receptacles
so as to provide an aesthetically pleasant appearance.
(3) If the park operator desires to provide community receptacles for
garbage and refuse, the location, screening, construction and
number of such receptacles shall be shown on the site plan and are
subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
(4) The park operator shall be responsible for keeping common park
areas and parking facilities free of litter, rubbish or refuse.
A. At the time of the installation of the mobile home on the site, the tires
and wheels and, if possible, the hitch shall be removed, and the unit
shall be securely blocked, leveled, tied down and connected to the
required utility systems and support services.
B. Within 90 days from the date of the installation of a mobile home on the
site, the mobile home shall be completely skirted. Materials used for
skirting shall provide a finished exterior appearance, shall be of similar
character and appearance as the mobile home and shall be of
nonflammable material.
C. Expandable rooms and other extensions to a mobile home shall be of
nonflammable materials and shall be installed in the same manner as
mobile home units and likewise skirted.
§ 120-9 GATES CODE § 120-11
120:146
§ 120-11. Fuel systems.
All fuel systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with all
applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.
§ 120-12. Mail service.
Mailbox location shall provide safe and easy access for the pickup and
delivery of mail.
§ 120-13. Responsibilities of park operator.
A. Where individual lot delivery is used, the park operator shall establish
rules and regulations regarding the uniform location of the mailboxes,
the type of support for the box and maintenance of the support and the
box. The object of such regulations is uniformity and aesthetically
pleasant appearance.
B. When mailboxes are grouped together for some form of cluster delivery,
the stand shall be maintained by the park operator, and the area where
such groupings are located shall be landscaped so as to present a
pleasant appearance.
A. The person to whom the license for a mobile home park is issued shall
be responsible for and operate the park in compliance with this chapter
and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its
common grounds, park roads, facilities and equipment in good repair
and in a clean and sanitary condition. Park roads shall be maintained
and, as required, such roads shall be plowed during the winter months
so that access to each of the sites and common parking areas shall be
available.
B. In addition to the above requirements, the park operator:
(1) Shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this
chapter and inform them of their responsibilities thereunder.
(2) Shall place or supervise the placement of each mobile home on its
mobile home stand, which includes ensuring its stability by
securing all tie-downs and installing all utility connections.
(3) Shall maintain a register containing the names of all occupants and
the make, year, seal and serial number, if any, of each mobile home.
Such register shall be available to the Building Inspector of the
Town of Gates and/or to such other enforcement officers as may be
designated by the Town Board.
(4) Shall notify the enforcement officer at least two working days prior
to when a mobile home is removed, placed or relocated in a mobile
home park.
§ 120-11 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 120-13
120:147
§ 120-14. Conditional use permit required; approval.
No new mobile home park and, where permitted, no expansion of an
existing park shall be permitted except upon the issuance of a conditional
use permit by the Town Board pursuant to Article XXXII of Chapter 190,
Zoning. Any conditional use permit shall be subject to site plan review
approval by the Planning Board pursuant to procedures therefor under
Article XXXIII of Chapter 190, Zoning.
§ 120-15. Applicability; expansion of existing park.
§ 120-16. Temporary permit.
(5) Shall not rent any mobile home lot for the placement and use of a
mobile home for residential purposes except for periods of not less
than six months.
C. The holder of every license for a mobile home park shall file with the
town's Assessor a duly verified record of all mobile homes located
within the mobile home park on such date as may be established by the
Assessor for the tentative tax date, together with the date such mobile
home first was permitted to be located in said park and the make,
model, year and size of each of said mobile homes.
A. This chapter shall apply to all mobile home parks in the Town of Gates,
except that it shall not impair or affect the lawful use of property in any
existing mobile home park or make illegal such use, provided that such
use was lawfully in existence as of the date of the adoption of this
chapter.
B. Where permitted, no expansion of an existing mobile home park shall
be allowed except in conformance with this chapter.
A. The Planning Board may issue a temporary permit for a mobile home
not located in a mobile home park upon proof by the applicant of special
necessity. "Special necessity" shall consist of circumstances where a
mobile home will serve as an interim dwelling when a permanent
dwelling has been damaged or destroyed beyond habitability and is to
be repaired or rebuilt by the applicant.
B. No such interim permit shall be issued unless the applicant
demonstrates the following:
(1) The mobile home shall be supplied with its own potable water from
a public source or a private source approved by the Monroe County
Health Department.
(2) Sewage disposal via a public system or one approved by the
Monroe County Health Department.
(3) A mobile home stand or foundation capable of maintaining the
mobile home in a stable position is provided.
§ 120-13 GATES CODE § 120-16
120:148
§ 120-17. License required; renewal; fee.
(4) All required setbacks are maintained.
C. Any mobile home located in the Town of Gates pursuant to this section
shall be removed within six months from the date of the issuance of a
temporary permit or upon the completion of the rehabilitation of the
permanent residence, whichever shall first occur. Not more than two
extensions of three months each may be granted by the Planning Board.
D. An application for a temporary permit shall be made in the Building
Department on forms provided by the Town of Gates. An application fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board shall be paid
with such application. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
A. No newly established mobile home park or existing park shall permit a
mobile home to occupy any mobile home lot unless the park operator
shall have first secured a license for said park from the Town Clerk. The
Town Clerk shall not issue a license except in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) The park operator shall file an application for a mobile home park
license on application forms to be furnished by the Town of Gates.
(2) For newly established parks, the applicant shall file with the Town
Clerk a copy of the final approved map for said park.
(3) For any existing park presently licensed under the Trailer Park
Ordinance7 of the Town of Gates, before the next annual renewal of
said license, the park operator shall file with the Town Clerk, along
with the application for renewal, a plan of the park prepared by an
engineer or other qualified person showing thereon the boundaries
of the park; the boundaries of the lots in said park; the location of
the mobile home and other structure on each lot, if any; the
distance between the extremities of the mobile home or other
structure on each lot from those on adjoining lots; the number of
lots in said park; and any other data which will reflect the actual
physical configuration of the park including parking areas, roads
and recreation areas, if any.
(4) A copy of park rules and regulations, if any.
(5) The payment of the mobile home park license fee as set from time
to time by resolution of the Town Board for each lot in said park.
[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
B. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year.
7. Editor's Note: See § 120-21, Repealer.
§ 120-16 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 120-17
120:149
§ 120-18. Enforcement; inspection.
C. Renewal applications for mobile home park licenses shall be filed with
the Town Clerk not less than 30 days prior to the annual expiration of
such license.
D. For any initial license, a proportionate adjustment in the licensing fee
shall be made for the balance of the year in which the license is issued.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector of the Town of
Gates and/or such other official as may be designated by the Town
Board.
B. Said officer and his representatives shall be authorized and have the
right in the performance of their duties to enter any mobile home park
and make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter. Such entrance and inspection shall be accomplished
at reasonable times, and in emergencies, whenever necessary to
protect the public interest. The park operator shall be responsible for
providing access to all parts of the premises to the enforcement officer
or his agents.
C. The enforcement officer or his representative shall make an inspection
of each mobile home park as may be necessary, but at least once each
year, investigate all complaints made under this chapter and, upon
detection of any violation, in addition to any other penalties herein
provided, serve a written notice upon the park operator or his
representative, as designated on the license application, directing the
park operator to correct the conditions therein specified within not
more than 30 days after the date of delivery of such order. The order
may also contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will
effect compliance.
(1) Service of the order may be made personally upon the park
operator or such other person as may be designated on the license
application or by registered mail.
(2) If such violation is not corrected within the period specified in the
order or within any written extension of such time, the enforcement
officer shall serve a notice in writing as provided in Subsection C(1)
above requiring the park operator to appear before the Town Board
at a time specified in such notice, to show cause at a hearing why
the mobile home park license should not be revoked.
(3) The Town Board shall hear all interested parties and their
witnesses. Within 20 days after the close of such hearing, the Town
Board shall make a determination, in writing, sustaining, modifying
or withdrawing the order issued by the enforcement officer. Failure
to abide by any Town Board determination shall be cause for the
revocation of the mobile home park license and an order that the
§ 120-17 GATES CODE § 120-18
120:150
§ 120-19. Variances.
Where there are practical difficulties, unusual circumstances or
unnecessary hardship, the Planning Board may recommend and the Zoning
Board may grant variances from the provisions of this chapter, except that
no variance shall be granted from the requirements set forth below:
§ 120-20. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
In addition to any other sanctions provided in this chapter, any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$250 or shall be imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. The imposition of any penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue nor shall it prevent
the enforced removal of the conditions prohibited by any appropriate legal
action.
§ 120-21. Repealer.
The trailer ordinance known as the "Tourist Camp and House Trailer
Ordinance of the Town of Gates, Monroe County, New York," adopted July
30, 1943, and amendments thereto, being Chapter 41 of the Code of the
Town of Gates, is hereby repealed with the provision that violations of said
ordinance shall remain violations to the extent that the matters in violation
do not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 131
PARKING
§ 131-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Motor Vehicle Parking Law of the Town
of Gates, Monroe County, New York."
park be closed and the removal therefrom of any mobile home
within a time specified in said order.
A. The minimum land requirement as contained in the definition of a
mobile home park. (See § 120-3.)
B. Location. (See § 120-5.)
C. Minimum and maximum units. (See § 120-6.)
D. Density. (See § 120-7A.)
§ 120-18 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 131-2
120:151
§ 131-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote and improve the health,
safety and general welfare of the community by establishing regulations of
and pertaining to parking on highways, roads, streets, shopping centers and
commercial centers which are regularly used by the public within the Town
of Gates.
§ 131-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in
this section, as follows:
ALL-NIGHT PARKING — The parking of any vehicle on a state, town or
county road between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m., for any length of time.
COMMERCIAL CENTER — Premises having one or more stores or business
establishments in connection with which there is provided on privately
owned property near or contiguous thereto a parking area or areas as
defined herein.
HANDICAPPED PARKING ACCESS AREA — That area adjacent to a parking
space designated for parking for handicapped persons which is provided
to permit ingress and egress to specially equipped handicapped access
vehicles. Said handicapped parking access area shall be designated by
signage and/or pavement striping or cross-hatching.
HANDICAPPED PERSON — Any person whose physical or mental
impairment or condition is of such nature as to impose unusual hardships in
utilization of public transportation facilities and such condition is certified
by a physician duly licensed to practice medicine in the State of New York
as constituting an equal degree of disability so as to prevent such person
from moving from place to place without great difficulty.
MULTIPLE-RESIDENCE COMPLEX — Premises having one or more
apartment buildings with four or more residential dwelling units in
connection with which there is provided on privately owned property near
or contiguous thereto a parking area or areas as defined herein.
PARKING AREA — An area or areas of land near or contiguous to a
commercial center or multiple-residence complex used by the public as a
means of access to and egress from the stores and business establishments
at a commercial center and the residential dwelling units in a multipleresidence
complex and for the parking of motor vehicles of customers and
patrons at a commercial center and for the residents and visitors of a
multiple-residence complex.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
other than temporarily and for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, loading or unloading a commercial vehicle.
PERSON(S) — Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
§ 131-2 GATES CODE § 131-3
120:152
PUBLIC HIGHWAY or PUBLIC ROAD — Includes the paved portion of all
highways, roads and streets, including paved shoulders, within the town.
STANDING — Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, as defined
in the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, as defined in the New York
State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 131-4. General provisions.
A. It shall not be lawful for any person to park a motor vehicle upon a
public road or highway in the Town of Gates:
(1) Within 20 feet of the intersection of another road or highway or
within 20 feet of a crosswalk.
(2) Upon any public sidewalk.
(3) Opposite a driveway.
(4) In front of a driveway.
(5) Upon that portion of a driveway extending from a public sidewalk
to the paved portion of a public highway.
(6) Upon any private road or driveway so as to obstruct the free
passage of another vehicle without the permission of the owner or
occupant of the premises of which said road or driveway is a part.
(7) Diagonally upon any public highway except where specifically
permitted as designated by signs.
(8) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(9) Upon the space which lies between a public sidewalk and a point
which is three feet from the paved portion of a public highway or
more than three feet into the public right-of-way adjacent to the
paved portion of a public highway where no public sidewalk exists.
[Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in a
fire lane as established pursuant to this chapter or pursuant to Chapter
70, Building Construction and Fire Prevention. [Amended 9-7-1999
by L.L. No. 2-1999]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in a
parking space, lane or area which has been designated for parking for
handicapped persons only, unless authorized as defined in this chapter.
D. The Town Board of the Town of Gates may, by resolution, adopt
additional rules and regulations related to the parking of motor vehicles
and may, by resolution, forbid the parking of motor vehicles in certain
§ 131-3 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 131-4
120:153
§ 131-5. Fire lanes.
§ 131-6. Parking for handicapped.
specified areas and upon certain streets and public highways, provided
that said areas and highways are duly posted by signs forbidding the
same.
E. Parking violation summonses issued by any authorized person, when
properly completed and signed by the person issuing the same, shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of all matters contained thereon.
F. Any vehicle or trailer with sleeping quarters, storage containers,
watercraft, enclosed trailers, or trucks that exceed GVWR of 14,000
pounds cannot be parked on Town roads more than two days during any
thirty-day period. [Added 4-4-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by New York State law and in
accordance with Municipal Home Rule Law, the Town Board of the
Town of Gates hereby authorizes the Fire Marshal of the Town of Gates
to establish fire lanes at all commercial centers, multiple-residence
complexes and also at any other buildings used for commercial
purposes which, in the determination of said Fire Marshal, require the
same.
B. Said fire lane shall be 30 feet in width around the perimeter of the
building, and said perimeter shall be maintained by the property owner
and kept open at all times for movement of emergency vehicles and
other traffic. The thirty-foot width shall be measured from the curbline,
if established or existing. If no curbline exists, the thirty-foot width for
the fire lane shall be measured from the edge of the building or
buildings where such widths will not conflict with the setback
requirements of zoning.8 In the event of a conflict with such setback
and boundary line requirements, the location and the width of such fire
lane shall be determined by the Fire Marshal so as to provide
reasonable access to the building for emergency vehicles.
C. Fire lanes shall be of such construction as determined by the Fire
Marshal and shall be located so as to be accessible to the nearest public
road or highway. The Fire Marshal shall approve the location, width,
layout and construction type of all fire lanes and access roads.
D. No person shall stop, stand, park a vehicle or discharge a passenger in
a fire lane other than temporarily and for the purposes of, and while
actually engaged in, loading or unloading a commercial vehicle (said
commercial vehicle being defined as one having been registered as a
commercial vehicle and having commercial license plates).
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 131-4 GATES CODE § 131-6
120:154
§ 131-7. Winter/emergency parking.
A. Every commercial center, multiple-residence complex and other
commercial buildings serving the public in the Town of Gates shall
provide a sufficient number of parking spaces designated for parking
for handicapped persons as set forth in the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code. The commercial buildings which are
subject to this chapter include, but are not limited to, shopping/
commercial centers, malls, plazas, multiple-residence complexes, retail
stores, public buildings, restaurants and other similar commercial
buildings to which the public is invited.
B. Each parking space designated for parking for handicapped persons
shall be identified by the uniform sign authorized for such purpose as
established by the Department of Transportation/Federal Highway
Administration.
C. The spaces so designated shall be located in the general parking area of
the commercial building or commercial center and shall be in close
proximity to an entrance of a store or stores in the commercial center or
to an entrance of the commercial building.
D. No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space designated for
parking for handicapped persons and identified by official signage
without displaying a valid official parking permit or an official license
plate for handicapped persons of any state.
E. No person shall park a vehicle in the handicapped parking access area
(as defined herein) adjacent to any space designated for handicapped
parking.
F. The Town Clerk of the Town of Gates is hereby designated as the agent
for issuance of special parking permits to handicapped residents of the
Town of Gates.
G. Such permits shall be in the form and style as may be prescribed by the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles pursuant to the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York. Application for such special permits shall
be in the form prescribed for said purpose by the Commissioner of
Motor Vehicles and in accordance with the procedures and guidelines
established by said Commissioner and the State Advocate for the
Handicapped.
H. Any person improperly using an official handicapped parking permit or
official handicapped license plate while parked in a space designated
for handicapped parking shall be deemed to be in violation of § 131-6D
herein and shall be subject to the fines hereinafter described in addition
to any other penalty which may be applicable by law.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Gates finds that the leaving of vehicles
on public roads during periods of snowfall can hinder and obstruct
snow removal operations. The Town Board additionally finds that the
§ 131-6 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 131-7
120:155
§ 131-8. Impounding of vehicle.
§ 131-9. Penalties for offenses.
leaving of vehicles on public roads within the town during snowstorms
may cause hazards to persons using said roads; therefore, the parking
of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all public roads within the Town of
Gates between the dates of November 1 and April 1 between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.
B. Whenever there shall be an accumulation of four inches or more of
snowfall on any public road in the Town of Gates, such road shall be
deemed an emergency route, and all such public roads shall continue to
be emergency routes until the Superintendent of Highways of the Town
of Gates shall have caused the same to be plowed free of such snowfall;
therefore, no person shall park, stop or permit to remain unattended
any motor vehicle on any public road or street which has been thereby
deemed an emergency route.
A. Any vehicle may be removed or ordered removed by any person
authorized to enforce this chapter if it is:
(1) Parked in a fire lane or within 15 feet of a fire hydrant pursuant to
this chapter.
(2) Abandoned upon a public road pursuant to New York State Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
(3) Parked in or blocking a space designated for handicapped parking
or a handicapped parking access area.
(4) Unattended, pursuant to New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law,
where it constitutes an obstruction to emergency traffic, as
provided in this chapter, or at any place where stopping, standing
or parking is prohibited by law.
B. After the removal of any vehicle by persons authorized to do so,
whichever authority may have effectuated said removal shall have the
vehicle stored in a designated storage area at the expense of the owner.
Such owner or person with legal authority to redeem the vehicle may
redeem the same upon payment of all expenses and charges actually
and necessarily incurred for such removal and storage.
C. It shall be the duty of the towing law enforcement agency to ascertain
to the extent possible the owner or person of legal authority to redeem
any vehicle removed and stored pursuant to this chapter and to notify
said person of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the
lawful way to redeem the same.
A. In addition to penalties and other mandates promulgated herein for the
enforcement of this chapter, the following parking violations shall carry
the following fines with respect to the following specific offenses:
§ 131-7 GATES CODE § 131-9
120:156
Offense Fine
Handicapped parking space $50
Handicapped parking access area 50
Fire lanes 35
Less than 15 feet from fire hydrant 35
No standing 25
No parking 25
Winter parking 25
Undesignated violations 25
B. Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine pursuant to the provisions herein. Such fines, if not paid or
contested, shall double after 15 days of issuance to a maximum of $100.
C. In the event that any fine issued pursuant to this section is not paid
within 60 days of issuance of the notice of violation, a default judgment
may be entered against the respondent for civil collection. In such an
event, a default judgment will include an additional penalty of $50 for
each violation.
D. Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted thereto shall, for a first
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as listed hereinabove or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. For a second such conviction within 18 months
thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more that
$200 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18
months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended 9-7-1999 by
L.L. No. 2-1999]
E. Scofflaws.
(1) Any person who has been issued three summonses pursuant to this
chapter in the preceding 18 months and has not satisfied the same
with the Town of Gates will be certified a scofflaw.
(2) The Town of Gates will notify the New York State Department of
Motor Vehicles, pursuant to New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law, of the same.
(3) In addition to the above, the court may issue a warrant if a person
fails to appear before the court.
F. Payment of the fine of a parking summons constitutes a plea of guilty to
the specified violation. A plea of guilty to a charge is the equivalent to a
§ 131-9 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 131-9
120:157
§ 131-10. Enforcement.
The Town Board of the Town of Gates hereby authorizes the Chief of Police
and the Town of Gates Police Department, the Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire
Marshals, the parking monitors or any other sworn police officer to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 131-11. Exceptions.
Chapter 133
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention —
See Ch. 70.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 73.
Dumping and littering — See Ch. 83.
Electrical Code — See Ch. 87.
Parking — See Ch. 131.
Plumbing — See Ch. 143.
Solid waste — See Ch. 155.
Junked and abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
179.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
conviction after trial. Failure of a person to respond to any charge after
60 days shall be deemed an admission of liability to the charge.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any peace officer or
other law enforcement officer or highway employee while engaged in
the performance of his/her duties.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to hold any
enforcement officer of the Town of Gates or other agency responsible
for any damages to persons or property by reason of the issuance of a
parking summons while exercising his/her discretion within the
parameters of this chapter.
§ 131-9 GATES CODE § 131-11
120:158
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 133-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Gates Property Maintenance
Law" and will be referred to herein as "this chapter."
§ 133-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent the gradual encroachment of
blight, deterioration, unsightliness and property devaluation and to assure
that all premises within the Town of Gates are maintained in a manner that,
in the discretion of the Building Inspector, will assure the safety, health and
welfare of the general public.
§ 133-3. Scope; applicability.
§ 133-4. Construction of provisions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings and premises
within the Town of Gates as follows:
(1) Lots, plots or parcels of land which are vacant or upon which are
occupied or vacant buildings or portions of buildings.
(2) Buildings intended for residential use or occupancy, including oneand
two-family dwellings and multiple dwellings, mixed-occupancy
buildings and accessory structures.
(3) Buildings intended for use as commercial, industrial, institutional
or storage, and related accessory structures.
(4) Any and all buildings or parcels which are under construction or
demolition, including buildings not completed, to the extent that a
nuisance or practice exists, or is being carried out, which, in the
opinion of the Building Inspector, is a disturbance to the public
health, safety or welfare.
B. Public land owned or under the control of local, state or federal
governments or their political subdivisions is exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall supplement state and local laws,
ordinances, codes and regulations. Where a provision of this chapter is
found to be in conflict with any provision of a state law, local law,
ordinance, code or regulation, the provision which is more restrictive or
which establishes the higher standard shall prevail when legally
permissible.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
ordinances or remedies of the Town of Gates or its officers or agencies
§ 133-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-4
120:159
relating to the repair, removal or demolition of any building deemed to
be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
C. For reference purposes, this chapter includes sections of and
references to Chapter 190, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Gates, to
codes of the Town of Gates and to the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code. References to local or state laws,
ordinances, codes, rules or regulations or sections thereof shall be
construed to include the addendum "as from time to time amended."
Any sections of this chapter which are contained in any laws, codes or
ordinances having provision for variances and appeals shall not prohibit
the seeking of variances and appeals under such laws, codes or
ordinances.
D. All words in this chapter which are not hereinafter defined shall carry
the meanings set forth in the laws referred, and if no such definition
exists, the meaning shall be derived from the customary use of the
English language. If a dispute should arise, the Building Inspector or
his/her representative shall be responsible for determining which
specific meaning is appropriate for a word which has more than one
meaning and which is not defined in this chapter.
E. When used in this chapter the reference to "New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code" shall include the 2015 editions of
the International Code Council Family of Codes (the 2015 I-Codes) as
amended by the 2016 Uniform Code Supplement, as each shall be
amended, from time to time, collectively the "Uniform Code."
§ 133-4 GATES CODE § 133-4
120:160
ARTICLE II
Regulatory Provisions
§ 133-5. Property maintenance.
A. Exterior property areas.
(1) Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to
protect buildings and structures and to prevent ponding (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code).
(2) Fences, walls and other minor constructions shall be maintained in
safe, good and substantial condition (as required by the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code). Fences must be
constructed in a workmanlike manner using generally accepted
standard fencing materials, in the opinion of the Building Inspector.
(3) Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas
shall be maintained to afford safe and convenient passages (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code). All hazards, including but not limited to holes, deep
ruts, cracking or buckling of service walks, driveways and parking
lots, shall be repaired or removed.
(4) Yards, courts and vacant areas shall be kept clean and free of
hazards (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
(5) Ground cover shall be properly established to prevent undue soil
erosion, due to the elements (as required by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(6) Heavy undergrowth and accumulations of plant growth which are
noxious or detrimental to health or safety shall be eliminated (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code). Except for farms, all grass, weeds, trees, or other
plant growth shall be cut or trimmed to avoid the development of
places for the accumulation of blowing trash, dumping, rodent
harborages, infestation, criminal activity or places which constitute
a blighting or unsightly influence on the neighborhood. In addition
thereto, in order to provide for the proper use of land and to
prevent unhealthful, hazardous or dangerous conditions due to the
accumulation of brush, grass, rubbish or weeds or growth of
poisonous shrubs or weeds and to protect the public health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of this Town, all owners or
occupants of property must remove such dangers to health, life and
property. All owners and/or occupants of land are required to cut,
trim or remove brush, grass, rubbish or weeds, or to spray with
herbicides, cut, trim, remove or destroy poisonous shrubs or
weeds, when ordered to do so by notice from the Town of Gates.
§ 133-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-5
120:161
Brush grass or weeds in excess of 10 inches in height on any
property shall be deemed to be unhealthful, hazardous, and a
dangerous condition. Upon default, the Town of Gates may cause
the same to be done and assess the costs against the real
properties on which such violations are found.
(7) Refrigerators and similar equipment with locking mechanisms shall
not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises accessible to
children without first removing the locking devices or the hinges of
the doors.
(8) Exterior doors, windows, skylights and similar openings shall be
maintained weathertight (as required by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(9) Exterior stairs, porches, entrance platforms, fire escapes and the
railings thereon shall be maintained in a safe and sound condition
(as required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code).
(10) Roofs shall be maintained in a watertight condition (as required by
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
Tarping of roofs for a period in excess of 30 continuous days shall
be deemed a violation of this obligation.
(11) Exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Surfaces
not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code). Exterior siding shall be of generally accepted
standard materials, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, and
shall be properly maintained so as to remain affixed to the
structure and protected from weather-related deterioration.
(12) Exterior walls, including foundations, shall be maintained so that
ground- and surface water does not penetrate into basements and
cellars.
(13)Railings shall be provided at open sides of balconies, mezzanines,
porches, decks, accessible roofs, ramps, stairways and around floor
openings (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
(14) Dust, site drainage or any other condition which may create a
nuisance to the public must be controlled during construction and
at all times.
(15) All elements and stipulations of an approved site plan must be
complied with, installed and maintained.
(16) Required handicapped parking spaces, signs or markings must be
maintained and remain unobstructed and accessible in accordance
§ 133-5 GATES CODE § 133-5
120:162
with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and any referenced standards. All handicapped parking
spaces shall be independently indicated by permanent signs
installed in accordance with aforementioned standards.
(17) All swimming pools, both in-ground and aboveground, shall be
continuously maintained so as to avoid stagnant unhealthy water
accumulation, and shall be continuously secured so as to preclude
the creation of an attractive nuisance.
B. Garbage and refuse.
(1) Storage of refuse.
(a) No person shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of
refuse upon any premises owned or occupied by him/her
except for the purpose of collection, which shall normally occur
at intervals not less frequent than once every seven days,
except for holidays, Sundays, vacations or extraordinary
weather, or except where caused by or arising out of the
construction or remodeling of a dwelling or other building on
the premises or incidental to the landscaping of said premises
or customary agricultural operations thereon, in which cases
due care shall be taken that such accumulation shall not create
an unsightly appearance or unreasonably disturb the comfort
and repose of the neighborhood and shall be removed within a
reasonable time or immediately upon completion of the work
causing such accumulation.
(b) The determination of violations related to this provision shall
be in the sole discretion of the Building Inspector (as required
by Chapter 155, Solid Waste Management, of the Code of the
Town of Gates).
(2) Keeping required number and type of receptacles. Every owner,
lessee or occupant of any building, premises or place of business
within the Town of Gates shall provide or cause to be provided and
at all times keep suitable and sufficient receptacles for receiving
and containing garbage/rubbish that may accumulate or be used
upon said premises. Every owner, tenant or occupant of any
building, premises, except vacant land, or place of business must
be able to demonstrate they are serviced by a licensed refuse
company. No such receptacles shall be kept near any public place
longer than may be necessary for the removal of the contents
thereof. Such receptacles shall be a container of sufficient capacity,
and said container shall have handles and a tight-fitting cover and
shall be watertight. All receptacles should be closed at all times.
Lawn carts, wheelbarrows, fifty-five-gallon drums, fiber barrels and
wastebaskets are not considered suitable and sufficient containers
(as required by Chapter 155, Solid Waste Management, of the Code
of the Town of Gates).
§ 133-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-5
120:163
(3) No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or
deposited any refuse, hazardous waste or recyclable materials in or
upon any portion of a public right-of-way, street or place or on any
property not owned or occupied by him/her, or in any refuse
container not owned, leased or rented by him/her within the Town
of Gates (as required by Chapter 155, Solid Waste Management, of
the Code of the Town of Gates).
(4) Preparation of recyclables for collection.
(a) Recyclables shall be prepared for collection in accordance with
guidelines provided by the refuse collectors and approved by
the Town or otherwise established by the Town. Haulers shall
provide curbside collection of recyclables. Recyclables to be
picked up must be set out in appropriate containers as
specified by the Commissioner of Public Works, or any
subsequent and pertinent ordinance or law, and be at the curb
no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection, and no material
may be placed at the curb before 12:00 noon on the day
preceding the scheduled collection day (as required by
Chapter 155, Solid Waste Management, of the Code of the
Town of Gates).
(b) All refuse haulers must be in compliance with the Monroe
County Solid Waste Recycling Law (as required by Chapter
155, Solid Waste Management, of the Code of the Town of
Gates).
(c) Prior to initial collection or transportation, such solid waste
shall be source-separated by the generator into recyclable
materials and remaining solid waste as provided in the rules
and regulations promulgated hereunder (as required by
Chapter 155, Solid Waste Management, of the Code of the
Town of Gates).
(d) Source-separated recyclable materials shall not be
commingled with other solid waste during collection,
transportation, processing or storage following collection (as
required by Chapter 155. Solid Waste Management, of the
Code of the Town of Gates).
(5) Preparation of yard waste for collection.
(a) In the fall, leaves may be collected by the Town. All leaves for
collection shall be located curbside for vacuum collection by
the Town of Gates. All leaves must not be mixed with other
refuse materials set out for pickup. Town leaf collection may
begin on or about October 15 of each year, ending on or about
December 31 of each year (as required by Chapter 155, Solid
Waste Management, of the Code of the Town of Gates).
§ 133-5 GATES CODE § 133-5
120:164
(b) Grass clippings will be collected by private refuse haulers on a
year-round basis. All grass clippings should be prepared for
collection in a method suitable for acceptance at an authorized
composting facility. Any container is not to weigh more than 60
pounds. All grass clippings must not be mixed with other
refuse materials set out for collection (as required by Chapter
155, Solid Waste Management, of the Code of the Town of
Gates).
(c) Shrubs, sod, dirt, stumps and logs may be collected by the
Town of Gates on a year-round basis. If a resident contracts
with a private lawn service or tree removal service, it is the
responsibility of the hired contractor to properly remove and
dispose of said material (as required by Chapter 155, Solid
Waste Management, of the Code of the Town of Gates).
(6) Preparation of bulky refuse.
(a) Appliances and bulky refuse shall be dismantled in such a way
so as not to pose a threat to public health and safety. For
example, refrigerator doors must be removed from their hinges
(as required by Chapter 155, Solid Waste Management, of the
Code of the Town of Gates).
(b) Pursuant to the rules of the Commissioner of Public Works, all
bulky refuse, where practicable, construction and demolition
waste shall be bagged or bundled into packages not weighing
more than 60 pounds (as required by Chapter 155, Solid Waste
Management, of the Code of the Town of Gates).
(c) Such materials are to be placed at the curb in an area five feet
by five feet square by three feet high, or an equivalent volume.
Amounts in excess of this quantity will require special
collection arrangements to be made by the person (as required
by Chapter 155, Solid Waste Management, of the Code of the
Town of Gates).
(7) Preparation of garbage/refuse.
(a) Garbage/refuse shall be stored in proper containers. Such
receptacles shall be a container of sufficient capacity, and said
container shall have handles, a tight-fitting cover and shall be
watertight. All such receptacles shall be securely closed at all
times. Wheelbarrows, lawn carts, fifty-five-gallon drums, fiber
barrels and wastebaskets are not considered suitable
containers for collection of garbage/refuse (as required by
Chapter 155, Solid Waste Management, of the Code of the
Town of Gates).
(b) Garbage/refuse to be picked up must be set out for collection
no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection, and no material
may be placed at the curb before 12:00 noon of the day
§ 133-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-5
120:165
preceding the scheduled pickup day (as required by Chapter
155, Solid Waste Management, of the Code of the Town of
Gates).
(c) Except for one-family or two-family residential uses, refuse
containers shall be stored either inside of a building or within
an enclosure which screens said containers from public view
(as required by Chapter 190, Zoning, of the Code of the Town
of Gates).
C. Storage of junk.
(1) The outdoor storage or maintenance of junk shall not be permitted
on any lot in any district (as required by Chapter 190, Zoning, of
the Code of the Town of Gates).
(2) Definition of junk. As used in this section, the term "junk" shall
mean any manufactured good, appliance, fixture, furniture,
machinery, motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, trailer or similar
object which is abandoned, demolished, discarded, dismantled or
so worn, deteriorated or in such a condition as to be generally
unusable in its existing state. This definition shall include but shall
not be limited to scrap metal, scrap material, waste bottles, cans,
paper, rubble, boxes, crates, rags, used construction materials,
motor vehicle parts and used tires (as required by Chapter 190,
Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Gates).
D. Outdoor lighting.
(1) Exterior artificial lighting shall be maintained in operating
condition (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
(2) All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be equipped and used in a
manner which causes all of the luminous flux from said fixtures to
fall upon the surface of the structure or ground which is intended
to be illuminated (as required by Chapter 190, Zoning, of the Code
of the Town of Gates).
E. House numbers.
(1) Address numbers shall at all times be affixed and mounted in a
secure fashion to the building's front wall (facing the public or
private street), entryway from a public street or main path of travel
leading to the main entrance from a public street. Such numbers
shall be no less than four inches in height and shall be Arabic in
format and style. Script or roman numerals shall not be considered
to be in compliance with this chapter and must be removed. In
residentially zoned areas, these will be a maximum of three inches
in height (as required by Chapter 73, Buildings, Numbering of, of
the Code of the Town of Gates).
§ 133-5 GATES CODE § 133-5
120:166
§ 133-6. Interior maintenance.
(2) Address numbers may also be mounted on a post in the front yard
of the premises not within the right-of-way (as required by Chapter
73, Buildings, Numbering of, of the Code of the Town of Gates).
(3) All address numbers shall be mounted at a height of not less than
four feet and not more than 10 feet above grade. The numbers shall
be mounted against a contrasting background arranged so that the
numbers may be legible from the center of the road (as required by
Chapter 73, Buildings, Numbering of, of the Code of the Town of
Gates).
(4) In all cases, address numbers shall be clearly visible at all times
from the public or private street on which the property is located
(as required by Chapter 73, Buildings, Numbering of, of the Code of
the Town of Gates).
(5) The view of said address numbers from the public or private street
shall not be interfered with by trees, shrubs, structures or other
objects (as required by Chapter 73, Buildings, Numbering of, of the
Code of the Town of Gates).
(6) Where the building upon which the number is to be displayed is
more than 150 feet from the edge of the right-of-way, whether
improved or not, of the street or road serving the building, the
number shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter,
be displayed on a sign readily visible from the road or street and in
no event further back than 25 feet from said road or street right-ofway
(as required by Chapter 73, Buildings, Numbering of, of the
Code of the Town of Gates).
(7) Builders and developers of new structures may post a temporary
weather-resistant sign on the site displaying the assigned street
address. The posting shall otherwise be in accordance with
Subsection E(1) above. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
if said numbers are not so installed (as required by Chapter 73,
Buildings, Numbering of, of the Code of the Town of Gates).
(8) Where a group of structures or buildings carry the same address,
the posting of the address number at the principal entry point to
the complex, being visible as required in Subsection E(1) above,
shall be considered in compliance (as required by Chapter 73,
Buildings, Numbering of, of the Code of the Town of Gates).
A. Structural members shall be protected and maintained to resist and
prevent deterioration (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
B. Ceilings, walls, floors and stairways shall be maintained in a safe and
sound condition (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
§ 133-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-6
120:167
C. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen or
nonhabitable space. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as
habitable space. The definitions of "habitable space," "nonhabitable
space," "kitchen" and "cellar" are those definitions in Part 606.3 of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
D. Habitable space shall have natural light provided by means of one or
more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any
combination thereof, that face directly on open space (as required by
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
E. Habitable space shall be provided with electric light appropriate for the
intended use (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
F. Habitable space shall have natural ventilation provided by means of
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that face
directly on open space, or through openable parts of skylights (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code).
G. Kitchens without windows shall be provided with mechanical
ventilation (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code).
H. Toilet room, bathroom and laundry room floors shall be maintained in a
watertight condition (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
I. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be arranged to provide privacy (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code).
J. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be provided with natural or
mechanical ventilation and light.
K. Stairs serving occupied and habitable space shall be provided with
electric light to allow safe ascent and descent.
L. Heating equipment and chimneys.
(1) Heating equipment for residential habitable space shall be
maintained so as to provide an indoor temperature of 68° F.,
measured at a distance of two feet and more from exterior walls
and at a level of five feet above the floor.
(2) Chimneys, smokestacks, flues, gas vents, smoke pipes and
connectors shall be maintained structurally safe and smoketight, so
as to safely convey the products of combustion to the outer air (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code).
§ 133-6 GATES CODE § 133-6
120:168
(3) Heating equipment shall be maintained in good condition, in order
to provide adequate and safe heat to occupied spaces, in the
opinion of the Building Inspector.
(4) Gas heating equipment shall have a shutoff valve provided at or
near the source of supply.
(5) Fuel gas piping systems shall be maintained gastight, safe and
operative under conditions of use (as required by the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(6) Fuel oil.
(a) Fuel oil shall be stored and conveyed by means of fixed liquidtight
equipment (as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(b) Tanks subject to damage by vehicles shall be protected against
such damage (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
(c) Tanks shall be maintained so as not to be a hazard to the
premises served (as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(d) Abandoned underground residential heating oil tanks under
1,100 gallons shall be removed or closed on site by first
removing the existing petroleum product and filling with a
solid, inert material, using good engineering practice.
Acceptable inert materials for closing a tank in place include
sand and concrete slurry. These tanks shall be made safe by
draining the connecting lines, disconnecting the suction inlet,
gauge and vent lines and capping the remaining piping.
M. Cooking and refrigeration.
(1) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit approved-type
cooking and approved-type refrigeration equipment located in a
kitchen or kitchenette (as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(2) Electrical cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be properly
connected to the electrical system (as required by the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(3) Gas-burning cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be
connected to the gas supply system with pipe or tubing of solid
metal or approved appliance connectors (as required by the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(4) Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition (as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code).
§ 133-6 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-6
120:169
N. Plumbing maintenance.9
(1) General plumbing systems shall be maintained in good, safe,
sanitary and serviceable condition (as required by the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(2) Water supply.
(a) Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times. The domestic water supply system of the building shall
be connected to such approved source, shall not be subject to
contamination and shall not be connected to unsafe water
supplies (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
(b) Water supply systems shall be maintained to provide at all
times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate
to enable them to function satisfactorily (as required by the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(c) Backflow prevention devices required by the Commissioner of
Public Works or other regulatory agencies, laws, rules or
regulations must be installed and maintained in good working
order to prevent contamination of the public water supply.
(3) Hot water. Hot water shall be supplied. Water heaters or central
water heating equipment shall be maintained in good operating
condition (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
(4) Drainage.
(a) Sewage and stormwater drainage systems shall be maintained
so as to function properly and be kept free from obstructions,
leaks and defects (as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(b) Stormwater drainage shall not interfere with the use of, or
cause a nuisance to, adjoining properties.
(c) Required oil separators, grease traps and other intercepting
devices must be maintained in good and operable condition.
O. Electrical maintenance.10
(1) Electrical fixtures, devices, wiring and systems shall be maintained
in safe working condition in a manner which will avoid a potential
source of ignition or shock. Deteriorated material and equipment
9. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 143, Plumbing.
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 87, Electrical Code.
§ 133-6 GATES CODE § 133-6
120:170
shall be removed and replaced, as may be required (as required by
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(2) Panel boards shall be kept free from encumbrances and shall be
accessible at all times (as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(3) Electrical systems shall comply with the National Electrical Code
(NEC) and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
P. Exits.
(1) Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit shall be maintained from
the interior of a building or structure to the exterior at a street, or
to a yard, court or passageway leading to a public open area (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code).
(2) Nothing shall be placed, accumulated or stored on any premises
which obstructs egress from stairways, passageways, doors,
windows, fire escapes or other means of exit.
(3) In multiple dwellings, exits, including vestibules, stairways,
passageways, corridors and hallways, but excluding fire escapes,
shall be lighted with natural or electric light at all times so as to
afford safe passage (as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code).
(4) Enclosed stairways shall have handrails on at least one side. Open
stairways shall have handrails on two sides.
Q. Locking devices.
(1) In every single- and two-family residence, each means of ingress
and egress shall be equipped with a locking device.
(2) In every multiple dwelling, all secondary means of egress,
basement entrances and all entrances to accessory use areas shall
be equipped with locking devices, and such locking devices shall
not prevent free escape from the inside.
(3) In multiple dwellings, where the main entrance is equipped with
separate bells to each dwelling unit, the main entrance shall
remain locked.
(4) Separate dwelling unit, studio unit and rooming unit entrances and
exits within structures shall be equipped with locking devices.
(5) The installation or use of double-cylinder dead-bolts is prohibited.
R. Smoke detectors.
§ 133-6 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-6
120:171
§ 133-7. Vacant structures.
§ 133-8. Storage and parking of motor vehicles.
(1) At least one smoke detection device per unit shall be installed
adjacent to sleeping areas in all one-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings and multiple dwellings.
(2) The smoke detection system design, location and performance shall
be subject to the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and referenced standards contained
therein.
(3) The owner of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for installing and
maintaining the smoke detection devices or systems required
herein.
S. Buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin and
rodent harborage and infestation.
A. Vacant buildings or structures. Every person owning or having charge
or control of any building or structure which has been vacant for over
60 days shall remove all combustible waste and refuse therefrom and
lock, barricade, guard continuously or otherwise secure all windows,
doors and other openings in the building to prohibit entry by
unauthorized persons in a manner approved by the Building Inspector.
B. Habitually noncompliant vacant buildings or structures. A vacant
building or structure shall be considered habitually noncompliant when
the person, business, organization or legal entity owning or having
charge or control of the building or structure has been noncompliant
with three or more notices issued by the Building Inspector or his/her
representative in accordance with § 133-14C during the same period of
vacancy.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner,
occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, of property within the
Town of Gates to store or deposit, or cause to suffer or permit to be
stored or deposited, a junked or unlicensed motor vehicle or part or
piece thereof on any private property within the Town of Gates unless:
(1) Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited in a completely enclosed
building.
(2) Such motor vehicle is under active repair, reconstruction or
refurbishing by the owner(s) thereof, who must actually be residing
upon the premises. Not more than one such motor vehicle shall be
permitted at any one time on any premises. Such motor vehicle
must be so maintained and protected as not to create any safety
hazard, nuisance or unsightliness to surrounding property owners
and shall not remain on the premises for more than 60 days.
§ 133-6 GATES CODE § 133-8
120:172
(3) Such motor vehicle has a temporary storage permit issued by the
Building Department. A storage permit may be obtained by
presenting a valid certificate of surrender of plates or proof of
transfer of plates issued by the New York State Department of
Motor Vehicles. The vehicle must display a current New York State
inspection sticker and be in condition for legal use upon the public
highway. A storage permit is valid for a period of six months from
date of issuance. Such stored motor vehicle must be at all times
covered with a fitted commercial cover. Storage permits will be
limited to one permit per dwelling unit.
B. Junked motor vehicle; definition.
(1) As used in this section, "junked motor vehicle" shall mean any
motor vehicle that:
(a) Is unlicensed or old, wrecked, stored, discarded, abandoned or
dismantled, or partly dismantled, which is no longer intended
or in condition for legal use upon the public highway.
(b) Is being held or used for the purpose of resale of used parts
therefrom or for the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all
of the materials therein or for the purpose of disposing of the
same.
(2) With respect to any motor vehicle not required to be licensed or
motor vehicle not usually used on public highways, the fact that
such motor vehicle has remained unused for more than six months
and is not in condition to be moved under its own power shall be
presumptive evidence that such motor vehicle is a junked motor
vehicle.
(3) The fact that a motor vehicle which may be licensed or registered
with the State of New York does not display a current license plate,
or is covered without a current storage permit, shall be
presumptive evidence of the fact that such motor vehicle is
unlicensed.
(4) Farm vehicles on a farm, are permitted, provided that such vehicles
comply with Subsection B(2) of this section.
C. Parking of motor vehicles, commercial vehicles and recreational
vehicles.
(1) Outdoor parking or storage. The outdoor storage or the parking of
motor vehicles or recreational vehicles shall not:
(a) Be located in any tree lawn area, except when the winter
parking provisions set forth in Chapter 131, Parking, § 131-7,
of the Town of Gates are in effect.
(b) Encroach upon a pedestrian walk, fire lane, driveway or any
parking spaces which are needed to comply with the parking
§ 133-8 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-8
120:173
§ 133-9. Filling and dumping.
§ 133-10. Maintenance of vacant lots.
regulations established for the district in which said outdoor
storage is located.
(c) Interfere with the safe use of adjoining premises or public
rights-of-way.
(d) Impact the safe use of any required exit of any building.
(2) Garages for the private noncommercial use of the residents of the
premises may be used for the storage of motor vehicles in all
garages on said premises.
(3) The parking of recreational vehicles owned by a resident of the
premises is permitted, provided that such vehicles are in condition
for their intended use and are licensed according to the regulations
of New York State.
(4) A "recreational vehicle" is defined as a device which is used as,
mounted on or pulled by a motor vehicle and which is used for
recreational purposes. For purposes of this chapter, the definition
of "recreational vehicle" shall include but shall not be limited to
travel trailers, tent trailers, pickup campers, coach motorized
dwellings (commonly known as "motor homes"), boats, boat
trailers, snow vehicles, racing vehicles, cycle trailers, utility
trailers or similar vehicles or equipment (as defined by Chapter
190, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Gates).
A. Filling with nontoxic inorganic materials. Nontoxic inorganic fill
material may be used to establish new grades, provided that the use of
said fill material, including but not limited to its composition, amount,
location and extent, are approved by the Building Inspector and the
Town Engineer.
B. Filling with other materials. Filling with or dumping of organic
materials, chemical wastes, liquid petroleum derivatives or other
deleterious substances shall not be permitted.
A. Combustible waste, refuse and large quantities of dry vegetation which,
by reason of their proximity to buildings or structures, would constitute
a fire hazard or contribute to the spread of fire shall be removed (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code).
B. Heavy undergrowth and accumulations of plant growth which are
noxious, detrimental to health or safety or unsightly shall be eliminated.
C. Lots with valid building permits are not required to maintain plant
growth during active construction.
§ 133-8 GATES CODE § 133-10
120:174
§ 133-11. Responsibility of owner, operator or agent.
The owner, operator or agent in control of the building shall be responsible
for the following:
D. Individual undeveloped lots in developed areas shall be maintained.
E. Where two or more undeveloped lots adjoin and in all other open fields
and undeveloped areas, an area of 15 feet must be maintained where
these areas adjoin developed areas or public rights-of-way.
F. On all parcels, public rights-of-way must be maintained at all times by
the owner of the adjoining parcel.
A. Limiting occupancy to the maximum number of persons permitted and
prohibiting unlawful uses (as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code).
B. Posting required statements of the maximum number of occupants
permitted (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code).
C. Maintenance of the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code).
D. Maintenance of the operation of service facilities in good order and
condition (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code).
E. Maintenance of plumbing, heating and electrical equipment and
systems, appliances and fixtures, as well as other building equipment
and facilities, in an appropriate, good, operative, clean and sanitary
condition (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code).
F. Maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings in public places in a clean and
sanitary condition (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
G. Keeping exits free and clear (as required by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
H. Disposing of garbage, refuse and junk in a safe and sanitary manner
and keeping the premises free and clear therefrom and broom-clean (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code).
I. Extermination of insects, vermin, rodents, pests and elimination of
harborage (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code).
§ 133-10 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-12
120:175
§ 133-12. Responsibility of occupants.
With respect to that part of a building which the occupant occupies, controls
or uses, the occupant shall be responsible for the following:
A. Occupancy limitations and its lawfully permitted use (as required by the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
B. Maintenance in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
C. Maintenance of plumbing, cooking and refrigeration equipment,
appliances, fixtures and facilities in a clean and sanitary condition and
providing reasonable care in the operation and use thereof (as required
by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
D. Keeping exits free and clear (as required by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code).
E. Disposing of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a sanitary
manner, and keeping the premises free and clear therefrom (as
required by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code).
F. Keeping domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control (as required by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code).
§ 133-12 GATES CODE § 133-12
120:176
ARTICLE III
Enforcement and Compliance
§ 133-13. Designation of enforcement officer.
A. This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Town of Gates
Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall be assisted by a staff
consisting of the Building Inspector, clerks, typists and any other
employee or person designated by the Town Board or Building
Inspector to assist in carrying out the duties of the Building Inspector.
When used in this chapter, the term "Town of Gates Building Inspector"
shall have the same meaning as the "Town of Gates Code Enforcement
Officer" or his designee, and the term "Fire Marshal" shall have the
same meaning as the "Town of Gates code enforcement personnel."
B. The Building Inspector and Fire Marshal may, between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. or, if different, during normal business hours,
enter any building or premises within the Town of Gates for the purpose
of making any inspection or investigation to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Uniform Code and Part 444 of the
Executive Law. Entry into legally occupied private residences or other
residential tenancies where there exists an individual privacy right
shall be permitted only when the Building Inspector or Fire Marshal has
either obtained the informed consent of the property owner or person
with a privacy right to the property, or obtained an appropriate search
warrant, or acts in the belief that there exist exigent circumstances
whereby immediate entry into a residence is required to ensure the
protection of life, safety or property (as required by the Executive Law
of the State of New York).
C. Should entrance upon a site to make an inspection required by this
chapter or the Uniform Code be denied, or if permission cannot be
obtained to make such an inspection, application may be made for a
warrant to make such inspection to any court of competent jurisdiction.
D. Identification of inspectors. The Building Inspector or his/her duly
authorized representative shall provide, upon request, proper
identification prior to conducting a routine or emergency inspection of
any building or premises.
E. Posting with placards.
(1) The Building Inspector or his/her representative shall be
authorized to affix to any building or premises a placard for the
purpose of notifying the owner, occupants and the general public
that the building or premises is subject to enforcement proceedings
by the Town of Gates. The placard may be placed anywhere on the
building or premises that the Inspector determines will be readily
noticeable and accessible.
§ 133-13 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-13
120:177
§ 133-14. Correction of violations.
(2) The nature of the placard to be used may be determined by the
Inspector based upon the nature of the problem or condition. The
placard may specify "Keep Out" or "Not To Be Occupied Until a
Certificate of Occupancy Is Issued" or "Not To Be Demolished or
Reconstructed Until a Permit Is Issued" or "Stop Work" or any other
form of notice, or any combination of the above notices deemed
appropriate by the Building Inspector.
(3) No person shall remove, deface, conceal or destroy any such
placard affixed by the Building Inspector or his/her duly authorized
representative.
A. Commencement of proceedings. Whenever the Building Inspector or
his/her duly authorized representative has inspected any building or
premises and has determined that said building or premises is in
violation of any provision of this chapter, he/she shall commence
proceedings to cause the cleanup, repair, rehabilitation, vacation or
demolition of the building or premises.
B. Routine action. Whenever the Building Inspector or his/her duly
authorized representative determines that a building, premises or land
is in violation of any provision of this chapter, he/she shall give notice of
the violation or violations as herein provided.
C. Notice.
(1) Such notice shall be given by first class mail, addressed to the last
known owner at the address as shown by the records of the Monroe
County Clerk, and within five calendar days of such mailing, such
notice shall be given by:
(a) Personal delivery upon such owner or owners of property; or
(b) Personal delivery to the occupant of the building or premises
or to the person or individual using the land or to the person or
persons allegedly responsible for such violation; or
(c) Posting the notice on the building, premises or land where the
violations are deemed to exist.
(2) The depositing of the notice into a depository, maintained under the
exclusive control of the United States Postal Service, shall be
deemed sufficient to satisfy the mailing requirement.
(3) Such notice shall be in writing and shall specify the alleged
violation and shall provide a reasonable time of not less than five
days for compliance and shall be served as stated above. Such
notice may contain an outline or mention of the remedial action
that will be taken to effect compliance in the event the owner,
occupant, agent or operator does not comply with said notice
§ 133-13 GATES CODE § 133-14
120:178
within the time period specified therein. The Building Inspector or
his/her duly authorized representative may extend the compliance
time specified in any notice issued under the provisions of this
chapter where there is evidence of intent to comply within the
period specified, provided that reasonable conditions exist which
prevent immediate compliance.
D. Emergency action.
(1) Whenever the Building Inspector or his/her duly authorized
representative has determined that a condition exists which poses
an immediate threat to life, health or safety, he/she may, without
prior notice, issue a notice citing the violation and ordering that
such action be taken as is necessary to remove or abate the hazard
or danger. Such notice may include an order to vacate, board up,
fence off or demolish. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, such an order shall be effective immediately upon mailing,
delivery or posting of the notice of the violation or violations as
herein provided.
(2) Notice.
(a) Such notice shall be given by first class mail, addressed to the
last known owner at the address as shown by the records of the
Monroe County Clerk, and within five calendar days of such
mailing, such notice shall be given by:
[1] Personal delivery upon such owner or owners of property;
or
[2] Personal delivery to the occupant of the building or
premises or to the person or individual using the land or to
the person or persons allegedly responsible for such
violation; or
[3] Posting the notice on the building, premises or land where
the violations are deemed to exist.
(b) The depositing of the notice into a depository, maintained
under the exclusive control of the United States Postal Service,
shall be deemed sufficient to satisfy the mailing requirement.
(c) Such notice shall be complied with immediately or as
otherwise provided. The Building Inspector or his/her duly
authorized representative may extend the compliance time
specified in any order issued under the provisions of this
chapter where there is evidence of intent to comply within the
period specified, provided that reasonable conditions exist
which prevent immediate compliance. Whenever the Building
Inspector or his/her duly authorized representative determines
that the condition which poses an immediate threat to life,
health or safety has not been corrected in the time specified by
§ 133-14 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-14
120:179
§ 133-15. Action in cases of noncompliance.
§ 133-16. Alternative remedies.
The Town of Gates Code Compliance Officer or his/her designee shall have
the following alternative remedies for enforcement of this chapter:
the order issued, he/she may take such direct action as is
necessary, including demolition or whatever other action may
be required to remove or abate the hazard or danger. Expenses
incurred in the execution of such orders shall be recovered as
provided herein.
A. Whenever a notice or notices referred to above have been given, and
the violations continued to exist beyond the time specified in the notice
or notices, the Building Inspector or his/her duly authorized
representative may authorize the work to be done and pay the cost
thereof out of general Town funds.
B. The Town shall be reimbursed for the costs of the work performed or
services rendered by direction of the Building Inspector or his or her
representative as hereinabove provided by assessment and levy upon
the lots or parcels of land wherein such work was performed or such
services rendered, and the expense so assessed shall constitute a lien
and charge on the real property on which it is levied until paid or
otherwise satisfied or discharged, and shall be collected in the same
manner and at the same time as other Town charges. Pursuant to the
authority of Municipal Home Rule Law, Article 2, § 10, notice of such
lien, levy and assessment may be executed by the Building Inspector
and recorded in the records of the Monroe County Clerk's Office where
it shall remain a lien upon such real property until satisfied or
discharged in full.
A. Appearance tickets. The Building Inspector or his/her representative
shall have the authority, pursuant to the New York State Criminal
Procedure Law, to issue an appearance ticket subscribed by him/her,
directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal
court at a designated future time in connection with the alleged
commission of a designated violation of this chapter or any order made
thereunder.
B. Penalties for offenses. Any person who fails to comply with any
provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any notice, order or
directive of the Building Inspector or his/her representative after
expiration of the time for compliance established in accordance with
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both, for such
violation. In the event of any failure to so comply, each and every day
that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and
the penalties prescribed above shall be applicable to each such
separate offense.
§ 133-14 GATES CODE § 133-16
120:180
§ 133-17. Due process.
C. Penalties for offenses under § 133-7B, habitually noncompliant vacant
buildings or structures. Any person who is found to be owning or having
charge or control of any building or structure that is habitually
noncompliant under § 133-7B of this chapter shall, upon conviction of
any violation of this chapter relating to said building or structure, be
punished by the maximum fine of $1,000 or by imprisonment of 15 days,
or both, for such violation. In the event of any failure to so comply, each
and every day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense, and the penalties described above shall be applicable to each
such separate offense.
A. Nothing in this chapter or elsewhere in the Uniform Code, or in any
regulation promulgated pursuant to Executive Law § 381(1), shall be
construed as authorizing the Town of Gates, or its authorized officials
responsible for administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code to
do so in a manner that deprives any person or entity of due process of
law. In particular, but not by way of limitation, nothing in this chapter
relating to posting, placarding and/or condemnation of buildings or
structures that are unsafe, unfit for human occupancy or unlawful shall
be construed as authorizing the Town of Gates or its authorized officers
responsible for administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code to
post, placard or condemn any such building or structure and/or to
remove any owner or occupant or cause any owner or occupant to be
removed from any such building or structure without providing such
notice and opportunity to be heard as may be required under the
circumstances, as follows. Prior to the Town of Gates or its authorized
officials placing a "Do Not Occupy" notice on a building, such official
shall give written notice to the record owner of such property and any
occupant thereof:
(1) That the Town of Gates intends to place a "Do Not Occupy" notice
on the building;
(2) Such notice shall state the reasons for doing so, with appropriate
citations to the specific Uniform Code provisions which are claimed
to be violated;
(3) Notice to the owner/occupant of the opportunity to be heard before
the Town of Gates Hearing Committee, and to present to the
Committee the reasons why the owner/occupant believes that the
Code Enforcement Official's proposed action should not be taken;
and
(4) Notice that the owner/occupant must, within five days of receipt of
such notice, request, in writing, to the Town Clerk, a hearing and
opportunity to be heard before the Town of Gates Hearing
Committee.
§ 133-16 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 133-17
120:181
§ 133-18. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this chapter
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 133-19. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
B. In cases of imminent danger, posting, placarding, and condemning a
building or structure and removing owners and occupants or causing
owners and occupants to be removed without first providing an
opportunity to be heard shall be permitted under this chapter, provided
that the owner/occupant shall have all the same rights and opportunity
to be heard at a post-action hearing before the Town of Gates Hearing
Committee by making such request, in writing, as hereinbefore
provided for, within five days following the imminent danger event.
C. The Town of Gates Hearing Committee shall consist of one Town Board
Member, together with any two of the following: Town Engineer, Town
Fire Marshal, and Town Assistant Building Inspector, as appointed by
resolution of the Town Board from time to time.
§ 133-17 GATES CODE § 133-19
120:182
Chapter 134
RECREATION AND PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Department — See Ch. 47.
Conservation, recreation and drainage
easements — See Ch. 79.
Tents and awnings — See Ch. 172.
§ 134-1. Title. [Amended 4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-201011]
This chapter shall be known as the "Recreation and Parks Ordinance of the
Town of Gates."
§ 134-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace and
good order in areas owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Town
of Gates and designated or operated as public parks or recreation areas
and to contribute to the safety and enjoyment of the users thereof by
regulating the hours of use, by regulating the use of motorized vehicles and
by prohibiting certain activities inimical to customary parks and recreation
uses.
§ 134-3. Regulations.
A. Unless otherwise provided by resolution of the Town Board, Town parks
and recreation areas will be open to the general public from 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m. each day. These hours are subject to change at the
discretion of the Recreation and Parks Director. Except as herein
provided, entrance to or occupancy of any such park or recreation area
is prohibited The Town Board or its designee may allow the use of such
areas at times other than those herein specified upon application to said
Board and issuance of a permit for such use. [Amended 2-5-1996 by
L.L. No. 1-1996; 4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
B. Activities sponsored by or conducted by the Recreation and Parks
Commission of the Town of Gates shall not be subject to the time
limitation herein specified. [Amended 4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
C. All organizations and their associated persons using the town parks
must provide a certificate of liability insurance naming the Town of
Gates as an additional insured regarding injuries and/or claims arising
from use of the town parks in order to obtain a facilities permit. [Added
2-5-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
11.Editor's Note: This local law also changed the title of this chapter from "Parks and
Recreation" to "Recreation and Parks."
§ 133-19 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 134-3
120:183
§ 134-4. Prohibited acts. [Amended 7-7-1987; 2-5-1996 by L.L. No.
1-1996; 4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
The following acts or activities are prohibited and no person shall:
D. Any person or organization intending to erect a tent or canopy eight
feet by eight feet or larger must obtain a tent permit from the Gates
Town Board pursuant to Chapter 172 of the Gates Town Code. [Added
2-5-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
E. Any organizations and their associated persons intending to provide,
distribute, sell and/or consume alcoholic beverages in the town parks
must have a facilities permit, including an endorsement allowing the
introduction of alcohol to the parks and, if applicable, a permit from the
New York State Liquor Authority. [Added 2-5-1996 by L.L. No.
1-1996]
A. Operate any motorized vehicle, such as an automobile, all-terrain
vehicle, minibike, motorcycle, snowmobile and the like, within the area
of the park lands; provided however, that the operation of licensed
vehicles for the transportation of the public to and from the park lands
is permitted within designated roadways, and the parking of such
vehicles is also permitted within designated parking areas.
B. Drive or park on grass areas. Vehicles must be parked in designated
parking lots unless permitted by the Recreation and Parks Director or
his/her designee.
C. Discharge any firearm, spring gun or air gun, paint ball gun, BB gun,
slingshot, crossbow or bow and arrow or carry any concealed weapons
considered to be dangerous within the park areas.
D. Injure, deface or disturb any part of the park or any building, sign,
equipment or any other property therein or remove, injure or destroy
any tree, flower, shrub, rock or mineral therein.
E. Set fire or assist others to set fire to any timber, trees, shrubs, grass,
leaves, shelters, buildings, equipment or any other combustible
material or suffer any fire upon other lands to extend onto any part of
any park. Fires within Town fireplaces and stationary or portable grills
are permitted within the park but must be completely extinguished
after use. Fireworks of any type are not allowed in the parks unless
sponsored by the Town of Gates.
F. Throw, cast, lay, drop, discharge, deposit, bring into or leave in any part
of the park land any garbage, containers for food or liquids, other waste
or other obnoxious material otherwise than in containers provided for
such purpose. No glass containers are allowed.
G. Drive or propel, or cause to be driven, any permitted vehicle at a rate of
speed greater than that speed so designated.
§ 134-3 GATES CODE § 134-4
120:184
§ 134-5. Exceptions. [Amended 4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
H. Use unreasonably loud or obscene language, fight, perform acts
intended to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or
interfere with any officer of the Town, county or state in the
performance of his or her duty; infringe on the parties of permit holders
for shelters, shelter overhangs or pavilions.
I. Under the age of 21 years, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian,
possess, transport or bring into any Town park or recreation area any
alcoholic beverage or beer as such terms are defined in § 3 of the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the State of New York.
J. Under the age of 21 years, consume any alcoholic beverage or beer in
any Town park or recreation area.
K. Become or be in an intoxicated condition while in any Town park or
recreation area.
L. Introduce into any Town park a dog, cat or other household pet or any
other animal which may be injurious or destructive to birds, fish,
animals or other wildlife, plant life or other natural features within a
park or which may be dangerous, injurious or offensive to users of a
park, except that dogs and cats shall be permitted in certain areas
within a park if controlled by a leash. Under no circumstances may
horses be permitted within any Town park, except upon the approval of
the Director of Recreation and Parks. Pet owners must clean up after
pets that are brought into the parks.
M. Cause or allow the overnight parking or storage of automobiles,
motorcycles, boats, recreational vehicles, etc., within any Town park.
N. Swim, wade in water or bring any boat or flotation device into any body
of water within any Town park.
O. Cause or permit live bands or disc jockeys to perform in any Town park
without the prior approval of the Director of the Recreation and Parks
Department.
P. Hit, strike, drive or chip golf balls on park lands.
Q. Trespass in parks when they are closed.
A. The prohibitions contained in § 134-4 shall not apply to:
(1) Members of authorized law enforcement agencies, members of the
Recreation and Parks Commission, or the agents and employees of
said Commission, while in the performance of their duties.
(2) Recreational activities sponsored conducted or authorized by the
Recreation and Parks Commission of the Town of Gates.
§ 134-4 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 134-5
120:185
§ 134-6. Administration.
The Town Board or its designee is charged with the administration of this
chapter.
§ 134-7. Enforcement.
§ 134-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-5-1996 by L.L. No.
1-1996]
B. Areas within such parks or recreation areas which are so designated
may be used for otherwise prohibited activities. If any such areas, such
as minibike trails, snowmobile trails, etc., are so designated they shall
be conspicuously posted by signs or otherwise.
A. Members of the Gates Police, State Police, Monroe County Sheriff's
Department or any other peace officer shall, in connection with their
duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Ejectment. Members of the Gates Police, State Police, Monroe County
Sheriffs Department or other peace officers, Special Police, the
Recreation and Parks Director and/or designated Town personnel shall
have the authority to eject from parklands any person acting in violation
of this chapter. [Amended 4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
A. Violations of any provisions or regulations of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and not greater than $250 or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment, for each violation. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
B. Any person convicted of a violation as set forth in this chapter shall be
subject to the provisions of § 65.10 of the New York State Penal Law and
§ 758-a of the New York State Family Court Act relative to the making of
restitution, reparation for loss or damages and the performing of
services for a public agency or for the public good, which, in such case,
shall include appropriate services for the Recreation and Parks
Department of the Town of Gates.
C. Parents or legal guardians of infants over 10 and less than 18 years of
age shall be liable for damages or destruction caused in town parks by
such infants, up to the sum of $5,000, pursuant to the provisions of
§ 3-112 of the New York State General Obligations Law. [Amended
4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
D. In addition to any penalties described herein, any persons causing
damage to park property, real or personal, shall be liable to the Town of
Gates for such damage in a civil action.
E. Persons may be banned from use of Town parks by the Recreation and
Parks Director for a time period to be determined by the Recreation and
Parks Director or his/her designee. Banned individuals must petition in
§ 134-5 GATES CODE § 134-8
120:186
§ 134-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ORGANIZATIONS — Any business, corporation, partnership, association,
school, church, benevolent order or any other group, whether created by
statute, contract or by informal arrangement.[Added 2-5-1996 by L.L. No.
1-1996]
PARKS — The grounds, buildings thereon, waters therein and any other
property necessary for the operation thereof and constituting a part thereof
which is now or may thereafter be maintained or operated and controlled
by the Town of Gates and shall include recreation areas and playgrounds.
Chapter 137
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
writing to the Recreation and Parks Director for return of park
privileges. [Added 4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
§ 134-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 134-9
137:187

ARTICLE I
Adult Uses
[Adopted 3-6-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
§ 137-1. Legislative findings, purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses,
to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens
of the Town of Gates and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the Town of Gates. The provisions of this article have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, or to deny access
by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
§ 137-2. Definitions.
The following words or phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, or projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR VIDEO STORE — A commercial establishment
which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for
any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproduction, slides or
other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities. A commercial establishment
may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the
offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be defined as an
adult bookstore so long as one of its principal business purposes is the
offering for sale or rental for consideration of the specified materials
which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
B.
§ 137-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 137-2
137:189
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
ADULT USES — Adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult
motels, adult motion-picture theaters, adult theaters, adult video stores,
escort agencies, nude model studios and sexual encounter centers.
The sale or rental of the items contained in Subsections A and B above
will be deemed a principal business purpose in cases where those items
comprise 20% or more of the business of the establishment. The twentypercent
threshold shall apply to any or all of the following as it relates
to those items: [Added 4-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
(1) Gross sales;
(2) Percentage of inventory; or
(3) Percentage of floor space dedicated to sale or rental of those items.
C.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity.
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
C.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions.
A.
Offers sleeping rooms for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours.
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 137-2 GATES CODE § 137-2
137:190
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any of the following:
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare buttocks, anus, genitals or full
female breast.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areolas of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter centers.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals and/or the female
genitals.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business.
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.
B.
The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business.
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex.
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
§ 137-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 137-2
137:191
STATE OF NUDITY — See "nudity."
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — The increase in floor areas occupied by
a sexually oriented business by more than 25% of the floor areas as it exists
on the effective date of this article.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — Includes any of the
following:
§ 137-3. Uses permitted. [Amended 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Adult uses are permitted in any Limited Industrial District and shall be
subject to the following regulations:
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts.
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy.
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A, B and C above.
D.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of a sexually oriented business.
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in a
sexually oriented business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of a sexually oriented business,
except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death
of the person possessing the ownership or control.
C.
A. An adult use may not be operated within 500 feet of: [Amended
4-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
(1) A church, synagogue or regular place of worship.
(2) A public or private elementary, secondary school or licensed child
day-care center.
(3) A boundary of any residence or residential zoning district.
(4) A public park.
B. An adult use may not be operated within 500 feet of another adult use,
or the same lot or parcel of land. [Amended 4-21-2003 by L.L. No.
1-2003]
C. An adult use may not be operated in the same building, structure or
portion thereof containing another adult use.
D. For the purposes of this article, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
§ 137-2 GATES CODE § 137-3
137:192
§ 137-4. Inspection requirements.
the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the
premises where an adult use is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of a church or public or private elementary school or
licensed child day-care center, or to the nearest boundary of an affected
public park, residential district or residential lot.
E. For the purpose of this article, the distance between any two adult uses
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in
which each business is located.
F. All adult uses shall be conducted in an enclosed building. Regardless of
location or distance, no one who is passing by an enclosed building
having a use governed by this article shall be able to visually see any
specified anatomical area or any specified sexual activity by virtue of
any display which depicts or shows said area or activity. This
requirement shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, window or
other opening.
G. Adult uses are permitted only in Limited Industrial Zoning Districts and
are hereby specifically excluded from the uses permitted in any General
Industrial District pursuant to § 190-159A of the Gates Town Code.
A. A person may operate an adult use business only within the Limited
Industrial District(s) in the Town of Gates in accordance with the
provisions of this article and Chapter 190, Zoning, of the Code of the
Town of Gates.
B. Prior to the commencement of any adult use business or upon any
transfer of ownership or control, the premises must be inspected and
found to be in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations applicable to the use and occupancy for an adult use
business and compliance with this article.
C. All code enforcement officials, including the Town Code Enforcement
Officer and Town Fire Marshal, shall complete their certification that
the premises is in compliance, or not in compliance, within 20 days of
the inspection of the premises by such officials.
D. Any owner and/or operator, employee of the owner and/or operator or
agent of the owner/operator shall permit representatives of the Gates
Police Department, Monroe County Sheriff's Office, the New York State
Police, County or State Health Department, Town Fire Marshal, Town
Code Enforcement Officer or other Town, county or state departments
or agencies that have permitting authority regarding the use and/or
premises, to inspect the premises of an adult use business for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with this article, at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
§ 137-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 137-5
137:193
§ 137-5. Nonconforming adult use.
§ 137-6. Violations.
It shall be deemed a violation of this article if the owner and/or operator, an
employee of the owner and/or operator or an agent of the owner/operator
has:
§ 137-7. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. An adult use business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not
rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
operation of the adult use business, of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, residential zoning district
or a residential lot within 500 feet of the adult business. [Amended
4-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
B. Any adult use business lawfully operating within the Town of Gates
outside the areas designated in § 137-3 hereof on the effective date of
this article shall be treated as a nonconforming preexisting use
regarding location; however, such business shall be subject to all other
requirements of this article.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article;
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the adult use business premises as
authorized in this article;
C. Allowed gambling to occur on the adult use business premises;
D. Allowed the possession, use or sale of a controlled substance to occur
on the premises;
E. Allowed prostitution to occur on the premises; and/or
F. Allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or other sexual conduct to occur on the premises.
A. A person who knowingly owns, manages, operates, conducts or
maintains any of the uses governed by these provisions in any way
which is contrary to these regulations shall be subject to prosecution
under Chapter 190, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Gates, or, in the
alternative, violation of this article may be enforced by injunction.
B. The continuation of a violation of the provisions of this article shall
constitute, for each day the violation is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this article shall subject the owner
and/or operator to a fine in the amount of $250 or imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each such
violation, in addition to any other penalties otherwise imposed
hereunder. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
§ 137-5 GATES CODE § 137-7
137:194
D. In addition to the foregoing, the Town of Gates Zoning Code
Enforcement Officer may suspend the right to conduct any adult use
established in the Town of Gates for a period not to exceed 30 days
upon a determination that any of the violations contained in § 137-6
hereof have occurred.
§ 137-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 137-7
137:195
Chapter 140
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND FOOD VENDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals and outdoor entertainment — See
Ch. 76.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 140-1. Title.
This chapter shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Peddling,
Vending and Soliciting Law of the Town of Gates."
§ 140-2. Purpose.
§ 140-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL TRAVELER — A person doing business through the act of
renting a room or suite of rooms in a hotel, motel or inn, commercial
building or private dwelling or open space, including a parking lot, for
temporary occupancy for the purpose of using said premises to sell, offer for
sale or solicit orders for goods, services, merchandise or money to or from
members of the public.
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A permanent building, store or
depository in which or where the person transacts business and deals in
goods, wares, commodities or services from where a person peddles, vends
or solicits in the ordinary and regular course of business.
A. The merchandising and/or soliciting of goods, money or services within
the Town of Gates and/or along the public highways in said Town has or
may subject its inhabitants to unscrupulous practices, annoyance and
danger. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and
regulation of persons engaged in such activities in order that the peace,
health, safety, welfare and good order of the Town and its inhabitants
shall not be endangered or unduly disturbed.
B. The parking of vehicles, carts or other receptacles and/or the placing
for display or sale of goods, wares or merchandise at or near street
intersections and/or along or in close proximity to the edge of pavement
of streets in the Town of Gates does or may create distractions to the
motoring public and others and has or may cause obstruction to traffic
and to the required clear vision zone at intersections, and cause traffic
accidents. The purpose of this chapter is to further regulate the
merchandising of goods, wares and merchandise along the public
highways in the Town of Gates.
§ 137-7 GATES CODE § 140-3
137:196
FOOD TRUCK/CART VENDOR — Any person using a large vehicle or a
portable food kiosks or food carts equipped to cook and sell food. Some,
including ice cream trucks, sell frozen or prepackaged food; others have onboard
kitchens and prepare food from scratch.
HAWKER AND PEDDLER — Except as hereinafter expressly provided, any
person, either principal or agent, who, from any public street or public place
or by going from house to house or place of business to place of business,
on foot or on or from any vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barter
or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise,
books, magazines, periodicals or any other item or items of value, except
milk, water and newspapers.
MERCHANDISING — The selling, bartering or trading of or offering to sell,
barter or trade any goods, wares, commodities or services or the taking of
orders therefor.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
unincorporated association and principal or agent thereof.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from place to place or house to house
or stands in any street or public place taking or offering to take orders for
goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals or any other
item or items of value (except newspapers or milk) or for services to be
performed in the future or for making, manufacturing or repairing any
article or thing whatsoever for future delivery. The term "solicitor" shall,
however, also mean and include any person requesting funds for any cause
whatsoever.
TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY — A store, room, building, tent, enclosure,
parking lot or structure of any kind intended to be used or occupied for
the period of time necessary to peddle, vend or solicit the merchandise sold
therein. In all prosecutions for the violation of this chapter, the intent of the
defendant to conduct an established place of business shall be a material
fact, and the burden of proving such intent shall be upon the defendant in
such prosecution.
§ 140-4. Applicability.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to:
(1) Any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
(2) Any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in
such articles.
(3) The peddling of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and
persons who produce such commodities.
(4) Any honorably discharged member of the armed forces who is
physically disabled as a result of the injuries received while in the
service of said armed forces and the holder of a license issued by
the County Clerk as provided by § 32 of the General Business Law
of the State of New York, as amended or changed.
§ 140-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-4
137:197
B. Exempt organizations.
(1) Nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit organizations and persons
working for such organizations shall be exempt from the
requirement of procuring a license. However, such organizations
shall be subject to the application fee and shall register annually by
the application process with the Town Clerk in the event that they
plan to engage in vending, hawking, peddling or soliciting and shall
indicate the type of activities to be undertaken and the time when
they will be performed. At the time of application, such
organizations shall also offer proof of their nonprofit status as
being organized under Section 501C(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended, and that such organizations maintain a
chapter or local organization within Monroe County. Proof should
be submitted in the form of evidence of nonprofit filing from the
Department of State in the state in which the organization has
incorporated.
(2) Children's, veterans' and fraternal organizations. A child residing
in the Town and regularly attending any public school district or
parochial or private school located, in whole or in part, within the
County of Monroe, or a member of a veteran's organization or
fraternal organization, provided that such organization has and
maintains a chapter, post, lodge, camp or other group within
Monroe County, is exempt from the provisions of this chapter,
provided that any person coming within the provisions of this
exemption shall only peddle, vend or solicit in connection with an
authorized activity of the organization of which he or she is a
member or of the school which he or she attends.
(3) Veterans. Any honorably discharged member of the armed forces
who is a resident of this state and a veteran of any war, or who shall
have served in the armed forces of the United States overseas, and
the surviving spouse of any said veterans, are exempt from the
application and license fees.
C. Interstate commerce. This chapter shall not apply so as to unlawfully
interfere with interstate commerce.
D. Certificate of compliance for exemptions. When the applicant shall have
established to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk that he or she is
entitled to one or more of the above exemptions, the Town Clerk shall
issue to him or her a certificate of compliance stating, among other
things, that such person has complied with the requirements of this
section. Such certificate shall be carried with the person exercising it
and shall be exhibited upon demand. All certificates issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year, nor a
shorter term than three months, but in any event shall expire on the
31st day of December following the date of issuance. The securing of
any such certificate by fraud or misrepresentation by any person not in
§ 140-4 GATES CODE § 140-4
137:198
§ 140-5. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the Town
to act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor or food truck/cart vendor as herein
defined or assist the same without first having obtained and paid for and
having in force and effect a license therefor and having received a solicitor's
permit.
§ 140-6. Application fee.
A nonrefundable application fee must be submitted to the Town Clerk prior
to receiving an application for a license. Said fee shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board. All funds are to be cash,
certified check, money order or credit card.
§ 140-7. Application for license.
fact entitled to one or more exemptions shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided is required
to furnish the appropriate application fee and file a written application
upon a form furnished by the Town Clerk. Along with submission of the
written application, the applicant(s) will be subject to a police
background check for each person to be soliciting within the Town. The
police check will be included as part of the application fee and will be
returned to the Town Clerk's office to be included with the application.
Such application shall be given to the Town Clerk at least two weeks in
advance of the first day of solicitation and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The quantity of vehicles and the vehicle identification number, copy
of the vehicle registration, plate number, model and make of each
vehicle to be used by the applicant in carrying on the business for
which the license is desired.
(2) Annual Rochester Fire Department certification and inspection for
all food truck/cart vendor vehicles and equipment.
(3) The kind of goods, wares and merchandise he or she desires to sell
or the kind of service he or she desires to perform.
(4) The method of distribution.
(5) The name, permanent business address, business telephone
number and age of the applicant.
(6) Whether or not the applicant and each solicitor associated
therewith has been charged of a misdemeanor or felony and, if so,
give the disposition of each such charge.
§ 140-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-7
137:199
§ 140-8. Issuance of license; license nontransferable.
(7) A police background check of each person to be soliciting within
the Town.
(8) An appended letter of authorization including the name and
address of the person, firm or corporation he or she represents.
(9) The length of time the applicant desires the license; such a license
shall not be issued for a longer term than one year nor a shorter
term than three months.
(10) A written, detailed description of the specified proposed plan of
operations to be used by the applicant.
(11) Any violation(s) of this chapter or any comparable laws,
ordinances, statutes, rules, orders or regulations of any other
municipality or of the State Door-to-Door Sales Protection Act,
Personal Property Law § 425 et seq., within the past 10 years, by
the applicant or any individuals employed by or on behalf of the
applicant as a vendor, solicitor or peddler.
(12) Such other information as may be required by the Town Clerk to
determine the veracity or to clarify any of the prior statements
required in this subsection.
B. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied by a certificate
from the Sealer of Weights and Measures certifying that all weighing
and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have been examined
and approved.
C. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied by proof of a
professional license held if said license must be used in conjunction
with the solicitation.
A. Application. Except for those organizations which are exempt as
outlined in this chapter, the Town Clerk shall issue a license pursuant to
a valid application for peddling and soliciting.
B. Use. A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of such license who
permits it to be used by any other person and any person who uses such
license granted to any other person shall each be guilty of a violation of
this chapter.
C. Contents. All licenses shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office and shall
state clearly the kind of vehicle, if any, to be used and the kind of goods,
wares or merchandise to be sold or service to be rendered, the dates of
issuance and expiration of the license, the fee paid and the name and
address of the licensee.
D. Display. Every licensee, while exercising his or her license, shall carry
the license with him or her and shall exhibit the same upon demand or,
if engaged in telephonic solicitation, shall, upon each completed call,
§ 140-7 GATES CODE § 140-8
137:200
§ 140-9. Term of license.
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued for a period not
to exceed one year, nor a shorter term than three months, but, in any event
shall expire on the 31st day of December following the date of issuance.
§ 140-10. License fees.
License fees, as established from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board, shall be paid to the Town Clerk for the license herein required.
§ 140-11. Regulations.
immediately state his or her name and address and number of his or
her license.
A. Unlawful sales. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not falsely or
fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or quality of any
article offered for sale or offer for sale any unwholesome, tainted or
diseased provisions or merchandise.
B. Sanitary conditions. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall keep the
vehicles and receptacles used by him or her in a clean and sanitary
condition and the foodstuffs and edibles offered for sale well covered
and protected from dirt, dust and insects.
C. A person shall not stand, hawk, peddle or solicit or solicit funds on the
premises of any business establishment, shopping center or mall
without the written consent of the owner or individual agency or
organization responsible for the management and/or operation of the
same.
D. Noises. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not blow a horn, shout or cry
out or use any other noisy device so as to create a public nuisance.
E. Obstructions. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not create or maintain
any booth or stand or place any barrel, boxes, crates or other
obstructions upon any street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or public place for
the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise.
F. Measuring devices. A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not use any
weighing or measuring device unless the same shall have been
examined and sealed by the County Sealer of Weights and Measures.
G. Hours. A hawker, peddler or solicitor may not sell or vend within 250
feet of any school property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. on school days, nor enter upon private property for the purpose of
peddling or soliciting before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 1/2 hour
before sunset of any day, except upon the prior invitation of the
householder or occupant.
§ 140-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-11
137:201
H. Prohibited places. A person shall not perform his or her respective acts
and occupations on any property owned or leased by the Town of Gates
(excluding public streets) or on any property where it is otherwise
prohibited by the owner of such property or by law unless and until an
application for a license has been submitted to the Town Clerk and such
license has been issued thereby.
I. It shall be unlawful for any hawker, peddler or solicitor to ring the bell
or knock upon or enter any building whereon there is painted or
otherwise affixed or displayed to public view any sign containing any or
all of the following words: "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," "No Agents"
or other wording, the purpose of which purports to prohibit peddling or
soliciting on the premises.
J. No person or employee thereof shall use any of the public streets within
the Town of Gates as standing places for vehicles, pushcarts, handcarts
or other receptacles for the conduct of their business or use said streets
to display goods or services offered for sale or the taking of orders
therefor.
K. Whenever a regulated activity is to be carried on or conducted on
private property, before a license is issued for such activity, the
applicant shall provide to the Town Clerk the written permission of the
owner of such property or the individual, agency or organization
responsible for the management or operation of the same.
L. Regulated activity involving the retail sales of merchandise or the
taking of orders therefor shall be permitted only in the zoning districts
designated GI, GB, and NB.
M. No licensee shall park any vehicle, cart or other receptacle used in the
conduct of his business, nor display any goods, wares or merchandise,
nor display any signs advertising the same, within 35 feet of any street
intersection.
N. No owner, lessee or tenant of corner property shall permit, and no
licensee shall park any vehicle, cart or other receptacle, or display any
goods, wares or merchandise, whether on public or private property,
within the area of the clear vision zone, as required and defined in
Article VII of Chapter 190, Zoning.
O. No licensee, his vehicle or other receptacle used in his business or any
goods, wares, or merchandise shall remain upon or otherwise
encumber the street in front of or within 50 feet of any premises if the
owner, lessee or tenant of such premises objects thereto. Such
objection may be filed with the Town Clerk or any police officer.
P. No licensee shall park his vehicle or other receptacle used in his
business, nor display or place any goods, wares or merchandise within
15 feet from the edge of pavement of any street in the Town of Gates.
§ 140-11 GATES CODE § 140-11
137:202
§ 140-12. Refusal of license.
A license may be refused if the applicant shall have been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony which, in the judgment of the Town Clerk, renders
the applicant unfit or undesirable to carry on the trade or occupation of
peddler or solicitor. The Town Clerk may also refuse a license to any person
who, in his or her judgment, shall be an undesirable person or incapable
of properly conducting such occupation. In addition, the Town Clerk, upon
consultation with the Gates Police Department and Town Attorney, where
applicable, may revoke any such license upon his or her determination
and finding that the regulations and rules herein have been violated. Any
applicant who has been refused a license by the Town Clerk may appeal to
the Town Board therefor, and the same may be granted or refused by the
Town Board.
§ 140-13. Revocation of license.
Licenses or permits issued under provisions of this chapter may be revoked
immediately by the Town Clerk upon consultation with the Gates Police
Department and Town Attorney. If the licensee has one or more employees,
agents or contractors, the revocation hereunder shall apply to all.
Revocation may occur for the following reasons:
§ 140-14. Appeals.
Q. No licensee shall operate or conduct any business within the Town of
Gates without having on his person identification, such as a driver's
license or other photo identification, other than the license issued by
the Town of Gates.
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the
application for license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business as peddler, huckster, vendor or solicitor.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral
turpitude.
E. Conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace
to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
F. Any breach of stipulations or conditions specified by the Town Board, if
any, or any deviation from the terms and agreements upon which a
special permit has been granted, as provided herein.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Town Clerk in the denial of an
application for a license or revocation of a license, as provided in this
chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the Town Board.
§ 140-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-14
137:203
§ 140-15. Eligibility for new license or registration restricted.
Any person denied a license or registration or whose license or registration
has been revoked in accordance with § 140-13 of this chapter shall be
ineligible to apply for a new license for a period of six months from the date
of such refusal or revocation, unless the applicant shows that the conditions
upon which such action was based have been remedied or removed.
§ 140-16. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 143
PLUMBING
Chapter 147
PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF DEFAULTED MORTGAGE
§ 147-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the Board to establish a process to address
the deterioration, crime and decline in value of the Town of Gates
neighborhoods caused by property with defaulted mortgages located within
the Town, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number of these
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing, within 14 days after notice of the
action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known
address, as shown on the application, a written statement setting forth
fully the grounds for the appeal.
C. The Town Board shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal,
and notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at his or her
last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing.
D. The granting, refusal, revocation or suspension of a license or permit by
the Town Board shall be subject to review pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York. Any such Article
78 proceeding must be commenced within 30 days of the mailing of
notice of the action sought to be reviewed.
A. Any offense against any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by
a fine not less than $50 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or both.
B. Each day an offense continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. In addition to the above penalties, the Town Board may also maintain an
action or proceeding in the name of the Town in a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by injunction any
offense against any provision of this chapter.
§ 140-14 GATES CODE § 147-1
143:204
properties located within the Town. It is the Board's further intent to
establish a registration requirement as a mechanism to protect
neighborhoods from the negative impact and conditions that occur as a
result of vacancy, absentee ownership, lack of adequate maintenance and
security and will to provide a method to expeditiously identify a contact
person for each property responsible for this protection.
§ 147-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a comprised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that is
unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior
space by unauthorized persons.
ANNUAL REGISTRATION — Twelve months from the date of the first action
that required registration, as determined by the Town, or its designee, and
every subsequent 12 months. The date of the initial registration may be
different than the date of the first action that required registration.
APPLICABLE CODES — To include all applicable federal, state, and local
laws, codes, rules and regulations, and specifically including, but not limited
to, the Town's Zoning Code,12 the New York State Building and Fire Code,
and the New York State Property Maintenance Code.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY —
DEFAULT — The mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the
mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the
debt, referred to in the mortgage.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any Law enforcement officer, Building
Official, Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Inspector or
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors,
walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or
A.
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in
value of the neighboring properties; or
B.
Properties cited for a public nuisance and/or building or fire code
violations, pursuant to State law or the Gates Town Code; or
C.
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated,
or violate minimum health and safety standards or lack maintenance as
required by the applicable codes.
D.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 147-1 PLUMBING § 147-2
143:205
Building Inspector, or other person authorized by the Town to enforce
applicable code provisions.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY — Any condition that on its own, or combined
with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe
that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/
or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash junk or debris; abandoned
vehicles, auto parts or materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal
items consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an
unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers and/or mail, or statements by neighbors, passers-by,
delivery agents or government agents; or the presence of boards over doors,
windows or other openings in violation of applicable laws, codes, rules, or
regulations.
FORECLOSURE — The legal process by which a mortgagee, or other lien
holder, terminates a property owner's equitable right of redemption to
obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged as security for a
debt or the real property subject to the lien. This definition shall include, but
is not limited to, public notice of default, a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, sale
to the mortgagee or lien holder, certificate of title and all other processes,
activities and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described
process. The process is not concluded until the property obtained by the
mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any
other means, is sold to a nonrelated bona fide purchaser in an arm's length
transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A property manager,
property management company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance and security of registrable real property within 20 driving
miles of the Town limits. Upon review of credentials the Town of Gates, or
its designee, may allow a nonlocal property manager to be listed.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including but not limited to, trustees;
mortgage service companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent,
servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any
assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the
mortgage agreement.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who,
individually or jointly or severally with others, holds the legal or beneficial
title to any building, facilities, equipment or premises subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of registrable real property.
REAL PROPERTY — Any improved residential or commercial land,
buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or
portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number,
located in the Town limits. Developed lots are considered improved land.
§ 147-2 GATES CODE § 147-2
143:206
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY —
RENTAL PROPERTY — Property that contains a single-family rental
dwelling unit or multifamily rental dwelling units for use by residential
tenants including but not limited to the following: mobile homes, mobile
home spaces, townhomes and condominium unit(s). A rental dwelling unit
includes property that is provided to an individual or entity for residential
purposes upon payment of rent or any other consideration in lieu of rent,
regardless of relationship between lessor and lessee.
VACANT — Any parcel of land in the Town that contains any building
or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings
as evidenced by the conditions set forth in the definition of "evidence of
vacancy" above which is without lawful tenant or lawful occupant or without
a certificate of occupancy. "Vacant property" does not mean property that is
temporarily unoccupied while the residents are away on vacation, personal
matters or business, or is not intended by the owner to be left vacant, so
long as the period does not exceed 30 days.
§ 147-3. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional
remedy available to the Town above and beyond any other state or local
provisions for same.
§ 147-4. Establishment of registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 147-5 herein the Town of Gates, or its
designee, shall establish a registry cataloging each registrable property
within the Town, containing the information required by this chapter.
§ 147-5. Registration of defaulted mortgage real property.
Any real property located in the Town, whether vacant or occupied,
that is encumbered by a mortgage in default, is subject to an ongoing
foreclosure action by the mortgagee or trustee, is subject to an
application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor's lien sale, or has
been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred
to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any
properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
A.
The designation of a default/foreclosure property as "registrable" shall
remain in place until such time as the property is sold to a nonrelated
bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the foreclosure
action has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been
cured.
B.
A. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the Town shall perform an inspection of the property to determine
vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The mortgagee
shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the
§ 147-2 PLUMBING § 147-5
143:207
Town, or its designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and
indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate
registration is required for each property, whether it is found to be
vacant or occupied.
B. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct
mailing address, a direct contact name, telephone number, and e-mail
address for the mortgagee/trustee, and the servicer, and the name and
twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the local property
management company responsible for the security and maintenance of
the property who has the authority to make decisions concerning the
abatement of nuisance conditions at the property, as well as any
expenditure in connection therewith.
C. Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective
date of this chapter have 30 calendar days from the effective date to
register the property with the Town, or its designee, on forms or other
manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is vacant or
occupied. A separate registration is required for each property, whether
it is vacant or occupied.
D. If the mortgage on a registrable property is sold or transferred, the new
mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this chapter and within 10 days
of the transfer must register the property and pay a registration fee in
accordance with this chapter. Any previous unpaid annual registration
fees are the responsibility of the new mortgagee or trustee and are due
and payable with their initial registration.
E. If the mortgagee owner of a foreclosed real property sells or transfers
the property to a non-arm's length related person or entity, the
transferee is subject to all the terms of this chapter and within 10 days
of the transfer register the property and pay a registration fee in
accordance with this chapter. Any previous unpaid annual registration
fees are the responsibility of the new registrable property owner and
are due and payable with their initial registration.
F. As long as the property is registrable it shall be inspected by the
mortgagee, or designee, monthly. If an inspection shows a change in the
property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within 10 days of that
inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration.
G. A nonrefundable annual registration fee established by resolution by
the Board shall accompany each registration pursuant to this section.
H. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, trustee,
servicer, or owner. Third-party registration fees are not allowed without
the consent of the Town of Gates and/or its authorized designee.
I. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section, as long as they are registrable.
§ 147-5 GATES CODE § 147-5
143:208
§ 147-6. Maintenance requirements.
J. Until the mortgage or lien on the property in question is satisfied, or
legally discharged, the desire to no longer pursue foreclosure, the filing
of a dismissal of lis pendens and/or summary of final judgment and/or
certificate of title, voluntary or otherwise, does not exempt any
mortgagee holding the defaulted mortgage, from all the requirements
of this chapter as long as the borrower is in default.
K. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
L. Failure of the mortgagee to properly register or to modify the
registration form from time to time to reflect a change of circumstances
as required by this chapter is a violation of the article and shall be
subject to enforcement and any resulting monetary penalties.
M. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this chapter, the Town may take the
necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and
bring it into compliance.
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building
materials, any accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices,
except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal
items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material or any other items that give the
appearance that the property is abandoned.
B. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by
removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the
color of the exterior structure.
C. Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained
in accordance with the applicable laws, codes, rules, and regulations at
the time registration was required.
D. Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or
bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential
installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall
not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
E. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation,
cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and removal
of all trimmings.
§ 147-5 PLUMBING § 147-6
143:209
§ 147-7. Security requirements.
§ 147-8. Public nuisance.
All registrable property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Town of
Gates.
§ 147-9. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this chapter does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent
from any other obligations set forth in any applicable laws, codes, rules, or
regulations, which may apply to the property.
§ 147-10. Additional authority.
F. Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear
of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in the applicable code(s).
G. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the
property may result in a violation of applicable laws, codes, rules, and
regulations and issuance of a citation or notice of violation in
accordance with same. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the
Town of Gates or a court of competent jurisdiction, the Town may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section.
H. In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the applicable laws, codes, rules, and regulations of
the Town of Gates and State of New York.
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure.
Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure must be
repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing of the window.
C. If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or
blighted, a local property manager shall be designated by the
mortgagee or owner to perform the work necessary to bring the
property into compliance with the applicable code(s), and the property
manager must perform regular inspections to verify compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable laws.
A. If the enforcement officer has reason to believe that a property subject
to the provisions of this chapter is posing a serious threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, the code enforcement officer may
§ 147-6 GATES CODE § 147-10
143:210
§ 147-11. Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer.
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any
person authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as
provided in this chapter shall be punishable as provided by applicable state
law or by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 147-12. Immunity of enforcement officer.
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the Town to enforce
the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal,
for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge
of duties imposed by this chapter.
§ 147-13. Penalties for offenses.
temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee or
owner, and may bring the violations before the Town Court as soon as
possible to address the conditions of the property.
B. The Town shall have the authority to require the mortgagee or owner
affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or
security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all
doors, windows or other openings, or other measures as may be
reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property.
C. If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious
threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the Town may abate
the violations and charge the mortgagee or owner with the cost of the
abatement.
D. If the mortgagee or owner does not reimburse the Town for the cost of
temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by the
Code Enforcement Officer or court, within 30 days of the Town sending
the mortgagee or owner the invoice, then the Town may lien the
property with such cost, along with an administrative fee as determined
in the Town's fee ordinance to recover the administrative personnel
services. In addition to filing a lien, the Town can pursue financial
penalties against the mortgagee or owner.
A. Enforcement. The requirements of this chapter may be enforced as
follows:
(1) By citation for civil penalties pursuant or to appear in court
pursuant to the authority granted by applicable state law;
(2) By an action for injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both, through a
court of competent jurisdiction;
(3) By exercise of the Town's powers of eminent domain, or by
condemnation and demolition pursuant to Chapter 70 of this Code,
or by the nuisance abatement process;
§ 147-10 PLUMBING § 147-13
143:211
Chapter 151
SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The amount a seller can expect to obtain for the
merchandise in an open market from a willing buyer.
SECONDHAND DEALER —
(4) By revocation or temporary suspension of necessary permits and/or
certificates or occupancy and/or licenses;
(5) By any other process permitted at law or equity; and
(6) Use of one enforcement process or theory does not preclude the
Town from seeking the same, different, or additional relief through
other enforcement methods.
B. Separate offenses. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense for each day it shall continue or recur. Each condition which
exists in violation of this chapter is a separate violation.
C. Each day a property remains unregistered when required to be
registered by this chapter is a separate offense for each day it shall
continue or recur.
D. Each day a property is not inspected as required by this chapter is a
separate offense.
E. Each day a property is not secured as required by this chapter is a
separate offense.
F. Each day a condition violating the Town's minimum housing codes or
property maintenance codes exists on a property subject to registration
under this chapter is a separate offense.
G. Persons responsible for violations. The owner, mortgagee, trustee or
servicer, as those terms are defined in this chapter, and their duly
authorized officers, employees or agents employed in connection
therewith who have assisted in the commission of the violation or failed
to perform as required by the chapter shall be guilty of the violation.
H. Violations of any part of this chapter shall result in penalties of up to
$100 per day as long as the violation exists, and shall not exceed $5,000
per year.
Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, any person, corporation,
partnership, limited liability corporation or any other legal entity in
A.
§ 147-13 GATES CODE § 151-1
143:212
USED GOODS — Any item that has been used, exchanged and/or sold at
retail on at least one prior occasion. Used goods may also be referred to as
"secondhand goods."
§ 151-2. License required.
New York State who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates
the trade or business of buying and/or selling used goods, including but
not limited to precious gems, gold, silver, platinum or other precious
metals, jewelry, coins, watches, clocks, any tools, television sets,
bicycles, radios, record or stereo sets, firearms, cameras and camera
equipment, video equipment, furniture, appliances, toys, any
electronics such as VCRs, games, CDs, CD players, computers, paging
equipment, calculators and office equipment, stamps, coins, antiques
and collectibles such as but not limited to Hummel figurines, military
service medals, swords, automotive parts or equipment.
"Secondhand dealer" shall not be deemed to include:
(1) Judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators.
Occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from private
homes.
(2)
(3) Auctions of real estate.
The occasional sale, purchase or exchange of coins or stamps by
a person at his permanent residence or in any municipally owned
building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting coins or stamps
and who does not solicit the sale, purchase or exchange of such
coins or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign,
handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, Internet or other
form of printed or electronic advertising.
(4)
B.
A. No individual, person, partnership or corporation, association, trust or
any other type of business permitted under the laws of the State of New
York shall engage in the business as a secondhand dealer without first
obtaining a license from the Town Clerk of the Town of Gates.
Advertising in any print, electronic media or by sign that any of those
articles or goods referred to in Subsection A of the definition of
"secondhand dealer" in § 151-1 herein are being bought and sold in any
location within the Town of Gates shall constitute engaging in business
as a secondhand dealer for purposes of this chapter. Notwithstanding
the above, any of the aforementioned entities which establish a
presence within the Town for the purposes of buying and selling used or
secondhand goods, with or without the use of advertising, is engaging
in business as secondhand dealer for the purposes of this chapter.
B. No person shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for
purposes of such articles or goods or commence as a business dealing
in bought and sold secondhand goods without stating in said
§ 151-1 PLUMBING § 151-2
143:213
§ 151-3. Application process; approval or denial; appeal.
advertising the license number issued to the individual or entity by the
Town of Gates.
C. The license or a photocopy of the license shall be posted and
permanently displayed on the site of the premises at which the business
is to be conducted.
D. In print advertisement, the license number shall appear in type no
smaller than A- in the lower right-hand comer of the advertisement. In
any advertisement in the electronic media, the license number shall be
visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the license
number shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
penalty set forth in § 151-11 of this chapter. Failure to post the license
in a conspicuous place at the place of business so that it is visible to the
general public or any enforcement officer or representative of the Town
of Gates shall also constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 151-11 of this chapter.
E. Additional grounds for recommending denial of a license may be the
revocation of a prior secondhand dealers license within the last 10
years.
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the
Town Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police or his
designee who shall conduct an investigation of the prospective license
pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of determining the suitability
of the applicant for licensing. Said investigation shall include but shall
not be limited to the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in Subsection A of the
definition of "secondhand dealer" in § 151-1 herein, although
nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant denial of a
license solely on the basis of a lack of experience.
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license.
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of those articles and
goods referred to in Subsection A of the definition of "secondhand
dealer" in § 151-1 herein and other factors bearing upon whether
the licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section, however, shall not be construed to require denial of any
§ 151-2 GATES CODE § 151-3
143:214
license solely on the grounds that the business is not conducted
from a fixed location.
B. The Chief of Police or his designee shall complete any investigation
commenced pursuant to this chapter within 30 days of the submission
of the application to the Town Clerk, fully completed by the applicant.
C. The Chief of Police or his designee shall, upon completion of the
investigation, recommend granting or denial of the requested license or
revocation of the conditional license to the Town Clerk, who shall grant
or deny the license or revoke the conditional license. Any
recommendation of the Chief of Police or his designee shall be in
writing and, in the case of a recommendation of denial, shall state fully
and specifically the reasons for said recommendation. If the Town Clerk
accepts the recommendation of the Chief of Police or his designee to
deny the license or to revoke the conditional license, he/she shall notify
the applicant within 10 days of such denial or revocation and forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason(s) for such denial. The applicant
shall have 10 days thereafter to request consideration by the Clerk and
may provide the Clerk with any relevant information and response as
set forth in the Clerk's notice of denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of a license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to the business for which the applicant seeks a license pursuant
to this chapter. The license may be denied if the investigation
conducted by the Chief of Police or his designee reveals conviction of
the applicant or any of its principal officers or employees of any crime
or disorderly persons offense in which deceit or misrepresentation is an
element or any conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense
involving theft or receiving stolen goods, whether such conviction was
as a principal, accessory before or after the fact or coconspirator.
E. The applicant will submit fingerprints and fees to DCJS in the form and
manner prescribed by DCJS. If an applicant has been convicted of a
felony and/or misdemeanor, any decision regarding such prospective
employee's fitness for a position must be made upon a review of the
factors contained in New York State Correction Law §§ 701-703-b and
§§ 751-753.
F. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Chief of Police or his
designee, the Town Clerk shall issue or deny the license accordingly,
contingent upon the receipt from the applicant of a bond of $10,000
pursuant to § 151-7. In the event of a denial of a license by the Clerk,
the applicant shall be entitled to a public hearing before the Town
Board of the Town of Gates, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such denial. After a public hearing thereon, at which the licensee shall
have an opportunity to be heard, the Town Board may sustain the
decision of Town Clerk, reverse the decision of Town Clerk and direct
§ 151-3 PLUMBING § 151-3
143:215
§ 151-4. Identification of seller; required information.
that a license be issued or remanded to the Town Clerk for further
consideration.
G. Additional grounds for recommending denial of a license may be the
revocation of a prior secondhand dealer's license within the last 10
years.
A. All licensees shall keep a record book in which they will enter at the
time of purchase of any item:
(1) A detailed description of the item, including but not limited to
identifying marks of the item, a brief description of the item,
initials, names, dates, social security numbers engraved thereon,
serial numbers, series numbers or any other information appearing
calculated to set apart the particular object purchased from others
of like kind; the name, date of birth and description of the person
from whom the purchase was made, the date the purchase was
made, and the address where such purchase was made for such
item(s).
(2) If the item is purchased by weight, the troy ounce weight of the
item.
(3) The name of the clerk or employee of the licensees making the
transaction, legibly set forth.
(4) The name, permanent business address and license number of the
purchaser-licensee.
(5) The name and address of the seller which shall be verified by the
proof of photo identification in the form of a drivers license, valid
drivers license, New York State nondrivers identification, military
identification, or other adequate proof of identification. Said
receipt book shall be a record kept in the regular course of
business of the licensee.
(6) The actual price paid for the purchase of said item.
B. The record book shall be open to inspection by any member of the Town
of Gates Police Department or any other law enforcement agency. The
record book shall be securely bound, not less than six inches in either
length or width, legibly written in the English language. No entry in
such book shall be erased, obliterated, altered or defaced. Every
secondhand dealer and his/her employee shall, at the time of making
any purchase, attach a tag or otherwise legible number and date to
each item bought and make corresponding entry to such number in the
aforementioned record book. In the event of an error, a single red line
shall be made through the entry, but not in such a way as to prevent
legibility.
§ 151-3 GATES CODE § 151-4
143:216
§ 151-5. Issuance of license; annual fee.
§ 151-6. Retention of articles; minimum age; revocation of license;
change of location.
§ 151-7. Bond.
C. The dealer will have the responsibility to report any and all sales to the
Gates Police Department. The method of reporting will be determined
by the Gates Police Department.
A. The license shall be issued for one year from the date of issuance by the
Town Clerk.
B. The annual fee for a secondhand dealers license shall be fixed from time
to time by the Town Board of the Town of Gates.
A. No licensee under this chapter shall sell, alter or dispose of in any way
any of those articles or goods referred to in § 151-1 herein until 10 days
have elapsed after the purchase of the same by such licensee. At certain
times the Chief of Police may specify a list of items that must be held for
longer than 10 days or certain items that may not be purchased at all by
a dealer. It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution or
administrative proceeding brought for a violation of this section if
retention for the time period required were to result in a serious and
substantial economic loss to the dealer or the probability of such loss
was significant due to rapid and highly fluctuating market conditions,
provided that the person so charged shall prove the existence of the
market conditions giving rise to the aforesaid defense by a
preponderance of the evidence. Market conditions, in order to be
defense hereunder, must be such that financial analysts would
characterize trading as at or approaching a level or occurrence so as to
clearly distinguish trading conditions from normal variations and
market movement in response to economic news or other events. In the
event that this type of situation occurs, the secondhand dealer will
notify the Gates Police Department by telephone, advising the
department of the disposal. The Gates Police Department will have one
hour to respond to the dealers address to view the property should the
department decide to do so.
B. No licensee under this chapter shall purchase any item covered by this
chapter from any person under the age of 17.
C. The Town Board of the Town of Gates may, after notice and hearing,
revoke the license issued to any licensee convicted of robbery, burglary,
theft, receiving stolen goods or any other crime involving moral
turpitude after the license is granted.
D. The licensee shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he notifies the Town Clerk, in writing, of the
street address of said new location.
§ 151-4 PLUMBING § 151-7
143:217
§ 151-8. Exempted activities.
The following activity shall be exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
§ 151-9. Hours of operation.
No secondhand dealer shall have his place of business open for the
transaction of business, nor shall be/she purchase any secondhand items
from persons other than secondhand dealers except between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Each licensee shall deliver a bond to the Town Clerk executed by the
applicant as principal with a surety company authorized to do business
under the laws of the State of New York as surety. The bond, to be
approved by the Town Attorney, shall be in the penal sum of $10,000
conditioned for the due and proper observance of and compliance with
the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of the Town in force
or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of this business and
condition also that the bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any
person or persons who shall receive judgment against a licensee,
license under this chapter by reason of any damage sustained by any
such person as a result of the operations of the licensee under this
chapter, which damage shall be established by a judgment of a court of
proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain the following language:"
The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to the Town of Gates, inure
be and remain for the benefit of any person who shall obtain a judgment
against obligor as a result of damage sustained in the operation
pursuant to any license granted under Chapter 151 of the Code of the
Town of Gates."
B. Said bond shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of
issuance of the license and must be renewed annually along with the
license.
A. The purchase of motor vehicles.
B. Garage sales, basement sales, porch sales, yard sales or other such
events at which a person desires to sell or trade his personal used
items, household goods and/or furniture equipment upon his/her
premises, said premises not being a regular place of business for
purchase or sale of secondhand items; three such sales shall be
conducted by the same person or persons where upon the same
premises within one calendar year and each such sale shall not exceed
10 consecutive days.
C. This chapter shall not apply to the return of secondhand items for
credit, exchange or refund to the person from whom said items were
originally obtained, provided that the items were not secondhand items
when originally obtained.
§ 151-7 GATES CODE § 151-10
143:218
§ 151-10. List of employees.
Every secondhand dealer shall keep on file a current list of employees which
shall be available to the Town of Gates Police Department or any other law
enforcement agency upon reasonable request.
§ 151-11. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
§ 151-12. Effective date.
This Local Law shall take effect February 1, 2011, subject to filing with the
New York Secretary of State in accordance with the Municipal Home Rule
Law.
Chapter 152
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
A. Any member of the Town of Gates Police Department shall have the
authority, pursuant to New York State Criminal Procedure Law, to issue
an appearance ticket subscribed by him/her directing a designated
person to appear in a designated local criminal court at a designated
future time in connection with the alleged violation of this chapter or
any order made thereunder.
B. Any individual person, partnership or corporation, limited-liability
corporation or any other legal entity found in violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to fine not to exceed $1,000 or
imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days, or both.
C. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Town
of Gates also may maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the
Town of Gates in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to restrain by
injunction any offense against this chapter.
D. Any violation of this chapter is grounds for revocation of any license
granted hereunder. Before revoking any license granted herein, the
Town Clerk shall give the licensee 10 days' notice by certified mail to
the licensee's address on the application of a hearing before the Town
Clerk. The Town Clerk shall consider any relevant evidence and then, at
the Clerk's sole discretion, based upon the violation, may revoke any
license granted under the law.
§ 151-10 SEWERS § 151-12
152:219

ARTICLE I
Stormwater and Surface Drains
[Adopted 5-2-1928]
§ 152-1. Prohibitions.
Whenever stormwater or surface drains shall have been established and
constructed or exist in the Town of Gates, no sewage or other drainage from
sinks, toilets, bathtubs or lavatories or other sewage or drainage commonly
termed "sanitary sewage" shall be allowed to pass into or to be carried away
in such stormwater or surface drains.
§ 152-2. Uses of drains allowed.
The owner of every dwelling house or other premises located in close
proximity to an established or existing stormwater or surface drain, or who
has a legal right to drain the surface water of his said dwelling house or
premises into such established or existing stormwater or surface drain,
shall cause all of the surface water from said dwelling house or premises to
drain into such established or existing stormwater or surface drain.
§ 152-3. Septic tanks or cesspools not to be used.
No owner of such dwelling house or premises, and no other person, shall
drain surface water into any septic tank or cesspool if a stormwater or
surface drain has been established or exists in close proximity to such
dwelling house or premises, provided that such owner or other person has
legal right to drain such surface water into such stormwater or surface
drain.
§ 152-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Any and all persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this article,
or who shall fail to comply with any order or regulation made thereunder,
shall severally and for each and every such violation and noncompliance,
respectively, forfeit and pay a penalty of not more than $250 or be subject
to imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, said penalty to be
sued for and recovered for the benefit of the General Town Fund. The
imposition of one penalty, if in violation of this article, shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violation within a reasonable time. Each 10 days
that prohibited conditions are maintained shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
§ 152-1 SEWERS § 152-4
152:221

ARTICLE II
Well Sewage Disposal
[Adopted 5-13-1942]
§ 152-5. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Well Sewage Disposal
Ordinance."
§ 152-6. Definitions.
Definition of words used herein shall be as such words are defined in the
Public Health Law of the State of New York, insofar as the words used
herein are therein defined.
§ 152-7. Provisions and prohibitions. [Amended 10-29-1953]
No person shall drill or dig or have drilled or dug or maintain upon any
real property in the Town of Gates any well or similar opening which shall
be drilled, dug or solely maintained for the purpose of sewage disposal
or for any other purpose by means of which underground, percolating
or subterranean waters may be contaminated or rendered less potable
or unfit or dangerous for human consumption, or injurious to the public.
This section is not to be construed to prohibit the drilling of wells for the
drainage of surface water in public highways, provided that such highway
is free of sewage, wash water or any other unnatural drainage which might
prove dangerous for human consumption or injurious to public health. Also,
any wells drilled for the drainage of surface water in streets must be
recommended and approved by the Town Engineer, and then only after any
other reasonable plan of disposing of surface water is proven impracticable.
Further, it shall be unlawful for any tile to be installed in front of homes,
with the exception of that placed for ingress and egress purposes, until
such times as sanitary sewers are installed in the affected area; and that
developers resorting to this type of street drainage must make the foregoing
paragraph a part of deed restrictions on property involved.
§ 152-8. Penalties for offenses; when effective.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
of a violation and punishable by a fine of not to exceed $250 or
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both, to be recovered by the
town in any court of competent jurisdiction. [Amended 9-7-1999 by
L.L. No. 2-1999]
B. This article shall become effective at the expiration of 10 days from the
date of its adoption and publication and posting as required by law.
§ 152-5 SEWERS § 152-8
152:223
Chapter 155
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 4. Dumping and littering — See Ch. 83.
§ 152-8 GATES CODE § 152-8
155:224
Part 1
G[Aadrboapgteed A 2n-d3 -R1e9f6u1s]e
ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 155-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known as the "Garbage and Refuse Ordinance of the
Town of Gates."
§ 155-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 shall be to protect and promote the health, safety
and welfare of the people of the Town of Gates by controlling the storage,
collection and disposal of garbage and refuse within the Town of Gates.
§ 155-1 SOLID WASTE § 155-2
155:225

ARTICLE II
Storage of Garbage and Refuse
§ 155-3. Prohibitions.
No household waste, institutional waste, commercial waste or building
waste shall be stored or accumulated on any premises within the Town of
Gates except as permitted by this Part 1.
§ 155-4. Receptacles required.
Every owner, leasee or occupant of any building, premises or place of
business within the Town of Gates shall provide or cause to be provided
that at all times suitable and sufficient receptacles are kept for receiving
and containing offal, garbage, ashes, refuse or noxious substances that may
accumulate or be used upon said premises. No such receptacles shall be
kept near any public place longer than may be necessary for the removal
of contents thereof. All receptacles used for the reception of garbage and
noxious substances shall be provided with proper covers and such
receptacles shall at all times be securely closed and all above mentioned
receptacles shall be watertight.
§ 155-5. Collection of waste required. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Every owner, lessee or occupant of any building, premises or place of
business within the Town of Gates shall provide or cause to be provided
regular collection of all refuse, waste, garbage or noxious substances that
may exist upon the premises.
§ 155-6. Accumulation and burning prohibited.
No person shall allow accumulation of garbage, offal or noxious substances
upon the premises owned or occupied by him, except for the purpose of
being collected, and no garbage or mixed refuse shall be burned in an open
fire or in a metal basket, can or drum in any part of the town.
§ 155-3 SOLID WASTE § 155-6
155:227

ARTICLE III
Licenses
§ 155-7. License required for collecting. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L.
No. 2-1999]
No person shall engage in the business of collecting garbage, offal, ashes,
refuse, rubbish or noxious substances within the Town of Gates without first
obtaining a license from the Town Clerk. A fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board shall be charged for any such license.
§ 155-8. Conditions for licensing.
Every license issued by the Town Clerk, pursuant to this article, shall be
subject to the following conditions and to such other reasonable conditions
as may be imposed by the Town Board.
A. Vehicles used by licensed waste collectors in the collection and
transportation of garbage, mixed refuse or any other kind of waste
within the area of the Town of Gates shall have watertight enclosed
bodies equipped with a compaction unit.
B. Any firm having two or more such vehicles shall be allowed to use one
service truck.
C. All vehicles used by licensed waste collectors shall be available for
inspection by the Gates Town Clerk or any other person or persons
whom he may designate as his agent prior to the issuance of any license
pursuant to the provisions of this Part 1.
D. Upon payment of the license fee for vehicles used in such collections
and transportation as set forth in this Part 1, the approval by the Town
Board of the application therefor, the Town Clerk shall issue a license to
the owner together with a metal plate which shall be affixed to a
conspicuous and an indispensable part of each and every such vehicle,
on which shall be set forth clearly the official number of such license
with the words "Town of Gates Refuse Collection License."
E. Renewal licenses shall be issued in the same manner and subject to the
same conditions as original licenses and also subject to any additional
requirements for renewal of the license applied for.
F. No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Part 1 shall be
transferable.
G. The Town Board shall have the power to suspend or revoke a license,
granted or renewed, pursuant to this Part 1 for any of the reasons as
may be hereinafter set out in this Part 1.
H. All trucks must have a minimum liability insurance for personal injury
of $100,000 per person and $200,000 per accident and for property
damage, $10,000.
§ 155-7 SOLID WASTE § 155-8
155:229

ARTICLE IV
Collection of Garbage and Refuse
§ 155-9. Consent required for collection.
No vehicle used by the licensed waste collector shall travel into a residential
driveway for the purpose of collecting garbage or refuse without the
consent of the homeowner.
§ 155-10. Transportation by collector.
All receptacles with garbage or household refuse shall be transported to the
curb by the licensed waste collector at the time it is to be collected, and
such receptacles are to be returned from the curb by the licensed waste
collector within a reasonable time of any said collection.
§ 155-11. Transportation by owner.
The property owner shall have the right to transport his or her refuse
receptacles to his property line, but said receptacle must be placed within
said property line, and returned as soon as practical.
§ 155-9 SOLID WASTE § 155-11
155:231

ARTICLE V
Further Regulations in Regard to Vehicles
§ 155-12. Standing.
No vehicle used in the collection or transportation of garbage, refuse or
waste matter shall stand longer than 24 hours with said matter in or on it.
§ 155-13. Parking.
No vehicle used in the collection or transportation of garbage, refuse or
waste matter shall be parked or stored in a residential district when not
being used in the actual collection or transportation of said matter.
§ 155-14. Prevention of spillage and leakage by collector.
Vehicles used in the transportation of garbage, mixed refuse or any kind of
waste within the area of the Town of Gates, regardless of place of origin,
shall be so equipped as to prevent the leakage or spillage of their contents.
§ 155-15. Prevention of spillage and leakage by residents.
All vehicles and conveyances used by residents in the transportation of
garbage, refuse and any other waste matter shall be watertight and so
covered so that no part of the load shall blow, leak or spill.
§ 155-12 SOLID WASTE § 155-15
155:233

ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
§ 155-16. Violations; penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by
L.L. No. 2-1999]
Any violation of this Part 1 shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding
$250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. A violation shall constitute disorderly conduct and the
person violating shall be a disorderly person. After two successive violations
of any of the provisions of this Part 1 by a licensed waste collector, it shall
be discretionary in the judgment of the Town Board to revoke the license of
said violating collector.
§ 155-16 SOLID WASTE § 155-16
155:235

Part 2
[AdoptSedol 7id- 1W-1a9s9te1 MBya nLa.Lg.e Nmoe.n 5t-1991]
ARTICLE VII
Recycling
§ 155-17. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known as the "Solid Waste Management Local Law."
§ 155-18. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Gates finds that:
§ 155-19. Purposes; statutory authority.
This Part 2 is adopted pursuant to Chapter 541 of the Laws of 1976, as
amended, and Chapter 552 of the Laws of 1980 of the State of New York, as
amended,13 to:
§ 155-20. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Solid Waste Administrator of Monroe County.
AUTHORIZED HAULER — Any person licensed by the municipality under
contract with the county to collect and transport recyclable materials
generated or originated within the county.
A. Removal of certain materials from the solid waste stream will decrease
the flow of solid waste to landfills, aid in the conservation of valuable
resources and reduce the required capacity of existing and proposed
resource facilities.
B. The New York Solid Waste Management Act of 1988 requires that
municipalities adopt a local law or ordinance by September 1, 1992, to
require that solid waste which has been left for collection or which is
delivered by the generator of such waste to a solid waste management
facility shall be separated into recyclable, reusable or other
components for which economic markets for alternate uses exist.
A. Institute a plan for the management of recyclable materials generated
or originated in the Town of Gates to promote the safety, health and
well-being of persons and property within Gates; and to
B. Implement the express policy of the State of New York encouraging
solid waste reduction through recycling.
13.Editor's Note: See § 120-w of the General Municipal Law and Title 1 of Article 27 of the
Environmental Conservation Law, respectively.
§ 155-17 SOLID WASTE § 155-20
155:237
AUTHORIZED RECYCLING FACILITY OR FACILITIES — A permitted
facility or facilities for processing recyclable materials specified in the rules
and regulations promulgated pursuant to § 155-21 of this Part 2. This term
shall exclude incinerating facilities, waste-to-energy facilities and landfills.
CONTAINER — A county-provided blue box container with a county logo for
recyclable materials or any other durable container for recyclable materials
readily identifiable by the hauler as a container for recyclable materials.
COUNTY — The County of Monroe.
EXECUTIVE — The County Executive of Monroe County.
FACILITY — Any solid waste management/resource recovery facility
employed beyond the initial solid waste collection process which is to
be used, occupied or employed for or is incidental to the receiving,
transporting, storage, processing or disposal of solid waste or the recovery
by any means of any material or energy product or resource therefrom,
including recycling centers, transfer stations, processing systems, resource
recovery facilities, sanitary landfills, plants and facilities for composting or
landspreading of solid wastes, secure land burial facilities, reprocessing
and recycling facilities, surface impoundments and waste oil storage,
incinerators and other solid waste disposal, reduction or conversion
facilities.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any "hazardous waste" as defined under the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., or
"hazardous substance" as defined under Environmental Conservation Law
§ 27-0901 et seq., as each such law may be amended from time to time, and
the regulations promulgated thereunder, and any analogous or succeeding
federal, state or local law, rule or regulation and any regulations
promulgated thereunder and any other material which any governmental
agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time
to time cannot be processed at the facility because it is harmful, toxic or
dangerous.
OTHER RECOVERABLE MATERIALS — Any material, substance, byproduct,
compound or any other item generated or originated within the
county and separated from solid waste at the point of generation for
separate collection, sale, external reuse or reprocessing and/or disposition
other than by disposal in landfills, sewage treatment plants or incinerators.
"Other recyclable materials" do not include recyclable materials as defined
herein.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, estate, trust, association, county, city, town, village,
improvement district, governmental entity or other legal entity.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes but is not limited to the following:
ALUMINUM — Aluminum products and containers fabricated primarily
of aluminum and commonly used for soda, beer, beverages or other food
or drink products and other aluminum products.
A.
§ 155-20 GATES CODE § 155-20
155:238
RECYCLING or RECYCLED — Any method, technique or process utilized to
separate, process, modify, convert, treat or otherwise prepare solid waste
BOXBOARD — Wood-pulp-based material which is usually smooth on
both sides but with no corrugated center. Excludes material with wax
coating.
B.
CORRUGATED — Wood-pulp-based material which is usually smooth
on both sides with a corrugated center. Commonly used for boxes.
Excludes material with wax coating.
C.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Material resulting
from the construction, renovation, equipping, remodeling, repair and
demolition of structures and roads and material consisting of
vegetation resulting from land clearing and grubbing, utility line
maintenance and seasonal and storm-related cleanup. Such material
includes but is not limited to bricks, concrete and other masonry
materials, soil, rock, wood, wall coverings, plaster, drywall, plumbing
fixtures, nonasbestos insulation, roofing shingles, asphaltic pavement,
glass, plastics, electrical wiring and components, carpeting, foam
padding, linoleum and metals that are incidental to any of the above.
D.
GLASS BOTTLES — New and used glass food and beverage containers
which have been rinsed and are free of food contamination, including
clear (flint), green and brown (amber) colored glass bottles. "Glass"
shall not include ceramics, plate auto glass, Pyrex, leaded glass,
mirrored glass or flat glass.
E.
F. MAGAZINES — Magazines, glossy catalogs and other glossy paper.
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — White and colored office bond, duplicating
paper, computer paper and other high-quality paper.
G.
LARGE APPLIANCES — Stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers,
washing machines, water heaters and other large appliances and scrap
metal and excluding air conditioners, microwaves and televisions.
H.
METAL CANS — Containers fabricated primarily of steel or tin or
bimetal cans of steel, tin and/or aluminum but not including aluminum
cans.
I.
NEWSPRINT — Common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made
chiefly from wood pulp and used for newspapers. This term excludes
magazines.
J.
PLASTICS — Including high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density
polyethylene (LDPE), polystyrene and polyethylene terephthalate
(PET). Commonly used for soda, milk and other containers.
K.
L. WOOD WASTE — Including logs, pallets and other wood materials.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves, branches up to four inches in
diameter and other like vegetative garden materials.
M.
§ 155-20 SOLID WASTE § 155-20
155:239
so that its component materials or substances may be beneficially used or
reused as raw materials.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes generated
or originated within the county, including but not limited to materials
or substances discarded or rejected, whether as being spent, useless,
worthless or in excess to the owners at the time of such discard or rejection
or for any other reason, or which are being accumulated, stored or
physically, chemically or biologically treated prior to being discarded, have
served their intended use or are a manufacturing by-product, including
but not limited to garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials,
including solid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial and
agricultural operations and from community activities, sludge from air or
water pollution control facilities or water supply treatment facilities,
rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous material, incinerator residue, demolition
and construction debris and offal, but not including sewage and other highly
diluted water-carried materials or substances and those in gaseous form or
hazardous waste as defined in this Part 2.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation of recyclable materials and other
recoverable materials from solid waste at the point of generation for
separate collection, sales or other disposition.
WASTE STREAM REDUCTION PROGRAM — Includes source separation,
recycling programs, changes to the packaging portion of the waste stream
to reduce solid waste generated, the activities and enterprises of scrap
dealers, processors and consumers and other programs designed to reduce
the volume of solid waste or enhance reclamation and recovery of solid
waste or recyclable materials otherwise destined from the municipal waste
stream. For purposes of this section, such reduction programs shall not
include the processing of waste for incineration or disposal by other means.
§ 155-21. Source separation and preparation of recyclables.
A. Solid waste generated or originated within the Town of Gates which has
been left for collection or which is delivered by the generator of such
waste to a solid waste management facility shall be disposed of as
follows:
(1) Prior to initial collection or transport, such solid waste shall be
source-separated into recyclable, reusable or other components for
which economic markets exist as provided in the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder.
(2) Recyclable materials shall not be commingled with other solid
waste during collection, transportation or storage following
collection. The Director of Public Works may order such exceptions
as he determines are in the public interest.
(3) All recyclable materials generated or originated within the Town of
Gates must be delivered to an authorized recycling facility or
handled through a waste stream reduction program.
§ 155-20 GATES CODE § 155-21
155:240
§ 155-22. Collection of recyclables from curbsides.
§ 155-23. Authorized haulers; license required; stickers.
(4) No authorized recycling facility or waste stream reduction program
shall receive recyclable materials generated or originated within
the Town of Gates except as permitted by law.
B. Disposal of solid waste which is barred from all authorized facilities by
rules, regulations or orders promulgated pursuant to this section of this
Part 2 or by any other law, regulation or ordinance shall not otherwise
be regulated by this Part 2.
C. No hazardous waste may be delivered to an authorized recycling
facility.
A. Only persons who are acting under authority of the county or an
authorized hauler shall collect, pick up, remove or cause to be
collected, picked up or removed any solid waste recyclable materials so
placed for collection. Each such unauthorized collection, pickup or
removal shall constitute a separate violation of this Part 2; provided,
however, that where the county or any authorized hauler has refused to
collect certain recyclable materials because they have not been
separated, placed or treated in accord with the provisions of this Part 2,
the person responsible for initially placing those materials for collection
may and shall remove those materials from any curb, sidewalk or street
side.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from making arrangements for
the private collection, sale or donation of recyclable materials, provided
that recyclable materials to be privately collected, sold or donated shall
not be placed curbside on or immediately preceding the day for
collection of such recyclable materials. Any and all recyclable materials
placed in a county-supplied container at curbside or at any designated
collection place shall immediately become the property of the county.
A. All authorized haulers must either obtain a solid waste collection
license from the Gates Town Board or enter into an authorized hauler
contract with the county.
B. An authorized hauler sticker shall be prominently displayed on each
vehicle operated by or on behalf of the authorized hauler.
C. Authorized hauler applications may be denied if the applicant or
licensee been adjudged or administratively determined to have
committed one more violations of this Part 2 during the preceding
calendar year.
D. All authorized haulers licensed by the Town of Gates shall indemnify
and hold harmless the town, its officers and employees for any pending,
threatened or actual claims, liability or expenses arising from waste
disposal by the authorized hauler in violation of this Part 2.
§ 155-21 SOLID WASTE § 155-23
155:241
§ 155-24. Suspension or revocation of solid waste license.
E. Authorized haulers shall offer collection services for all recyclable
materials to all residential customers for whom they provide solid waste
collection services at the same times and on the same days as services
are provided to their customers for solid waste collection.
F. Each hauler shall develop and submit for county approval a generic
collection plan for collecting recyclable materials from its commercial,
industrial and institutional customers.
G. Authorized haulers shall not accept for collection solid waste which has
not been source-separated in conformity with the regulations
promulgated under Monroe County's Solid Waste Management Local
Law.
A. When the Director of Public Works determines that a failure to comply
with this Part 2 may have occurred, he shall recommend to the Town
Board that the authorized hauler application be denied or the solid
waste license be suspended, revoked or its holder subjected to a
reprimand or that the generator or originator of the solid waste or
recyclable materials be subject to sanctions or penalties as described
herein. Notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided prior to
the denial of a solid waste license or authorized hauler application, the
suspension or revocation of a solid waste license or the issuance of a
sanction, fine or penalty.
B. Notification.
(1) The Director of Public Works shall notify the affected generator,
applicant or licensee of the alleged failure in writing. The notice
shall include:
(a) A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing;
(b) A statement of the condition allegedly violated, referring to the
pertinent ordinance, law, rule or regulation; and
(c) A short and plain statement of the alleged misconduct.
(2) The notice shall be personally served or sent by registered mail to
the generator's, applicant's or licensee's last known address at
least 10 days before the hearing date, with a copy to the
Administrator.
C. Hearings.
(1) Hearings shall be held before the Town Justice within a reasonable
period, which shall be at least 10 days after service of notice.
(2) The generator, applicant or licensee may be represented by counsel
at the hearing and may offer evidence and cross-examine
witnesses.
§ 155-23 GATES CODE § 155-24
155:242
§ 155-25. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(3) Within 20 days after the close of the hearing, the Town Justice
shall:
(a) Determine whether the alleged failure to comply with this Part
2 has occurred; and
(b) If the Town Justice determines that such a failure has occurred,
decide whether the generator or applicant shall be subject to
fine or penalty, the application shall be denied or an existing
solid waste license or authorized hauler status be suspended or
revoked or its holder subjected to a reprimand and issue an
order carrying out this decision.
D. Determinations, decisions and orders.
(1) Disposition may be made by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent
order, default or other informal method.
(2) The Town Justice shall promptly notify the applicant or licensee, in
writing, of the final determination, decision or order.
A. Inspections and appearance tickets.
(1) All portions of vehicles and containers used to haul, transport or
dispose of recyclable materials, including such containers placed
outside of residences, shall be subject to inspection to ascertain
compliance with this Part 2, the County Solid Waste Management
Law and the rules, regulations or orders promulgated pursuant to
the county law by any police officer,peace officer, Town Director of
Public Works, Code Officer and any other public official designated
by the county or town.
(2) Police officers, peace officers, code officers and the specified public
servants are hereby authorized and directed to issue appearance
tickets for violations of this Part 2.
B. Penalties.
(1) Civil sanctions. The Town of Gates may commence a civil action to
enjoin or otherwise remedy any failure to comply with this Part 2.
(2) Criminal penalties. In addition to the civil sanctions provided
herein, failure to comply with this Part 2 or the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder shall be a violation as defined
in § 55.10 of the Penal Law, and penalties may be imposed
thereunder.
(3) Any penalties or damages recovered or imposed under this Part 2
are in addition to any other remedies available at law or equity.
§ 155-24 SOLID WASTE § 155-25
155:243
(4) No penalties, fines, civil sanctions or other enforcement actions will
be commenced prior to June 1, 1992, in order to permit persons
regulated hereunder to come into compliance with this Part 2.
§ 155-25 GATES CODE § 155-25
155:244
Chapter 156
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation, recreation and drainage
easements — See Ch. 79.
Excavations — See Ch. 90.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 100.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 157.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 155-25 SOLID WASTE § 155-25
155:245

ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges and Connections
[Adopted 1-7-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
§ 156-1. Purpose/intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of
watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with
the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) by:
§ 156-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to SPDES Construction
Permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
DISCHARGER — Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity discharging stormwater to the municipal
storm sewer.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 156-7 of this article, and
A. Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent
practicable;
B. Prohibiting nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain system; and
C. Prohibiting stormwater discharges to sanitary sewers.
§ 156-1 SOLID WASTE § 156-2
155:247
any stormwater discharges to the sanitary sewer except as permitted by the
Town of Gates.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to SPDES Industrial Permits,
as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, gaseous or solid substance or a
combination thereof which is an undesired by-product waste resulting from
any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the
development or recovery of any natural resources, except garbage.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinance and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A facility serving one or more
parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater and wash water, to
enter the storm drain system and any connection to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a
government agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in
plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the Town of Gates.
B.
Any stormwater discharge to a sanitary sewer unless approved by the
Town of Gates.
C.
§ 156-2 GATES CODE § 156-2
155:248
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which transports sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be
inadvertently present. The admixture of sewage with industrial wastes, as
defined above, or other wastes also shall be considered sewage within the
meaning of this definition.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by NYSDEC [under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that authorizes the
Discharge compliance with water quality standards: the condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater, authorized under their municipal separate storm sewer
(MS4) permit, may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause
or contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard.
Under this condition, the Town of Gates must take all necessary actions
to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of
water quality standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters: the condition in the Town of Gates' MS4 permit
that applies where the Town of Gates discharges to a 303(d) listed
water. Under this condition, the stormwater management program
must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d)
listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the Town of
Gates' MS4 permit where a TMDL, including requirements for control
of stormwater discharges, has been approved by EPA for a water body
or watershed into which the Town of Gates discharges. If the discharge
from the Town of Gates did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocation
prior to September 10, 2003, the Town of Gates was required to modify
its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the Town of Gates' MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed
into which the Town of Gates discharges: under this condition the
Town of Gates must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes
requirements for control of stormwater discharges. If the Town of Gates
is not meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the Town of Gates
must, within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater
management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of
concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
D.
§ 156-2 SOLID WASTE § 156-2
155:249
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit
is applicable on an individual or general area-wide basis.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage channels (i.e., ditches), reservoirs and
other drainage structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff or drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site
and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum
extent practicable.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department of
Environmental Conservation as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean
Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are estuaries, lakes and streams that fall
short of state surface water quality standards and are not expected to
improve within the next two years.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — The maximum amount of a
pollutant to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair
uses of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — Waters of the United States as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — Surface watercourse and water
bodies, as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, including all natural waterways and
definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even
though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and
may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
§ 156-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by the Town of Gates. The article also applies to stormwater
entering the sanitary sewers.
§ 156-2 GATES CODE § 156-4
155:250
§ 156-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Town of Gates shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Town of
Gates may be delegated, in writing, by the Director of the Town of Gates to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the
agency.
§ 156-5. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will not be contamination,
pollution nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 156-6. Access to facilities and records; inspections.
A. The Town of Gates bearing proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
records examination and copying, observation, measurements,
sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge or potential to discharge,
and for repair and maintenance to the municipal separate storm sewer
system.
B. Information and data on a nondomestic source obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction, unless the nondomestic
source specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Town of Gates that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled
to protection as confidential information according to the criteria set
forth in 40 CFR 2.208 and 2.302, as may be amended from time to time.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose confidential information shall not be made
available for inspection by the public. Stormwater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
Information accepted by the Town of Gates as confidential shall be
made available, upon request, to any agency meeting the requirements
of Section 308 of the Clean Water Act, including officers, employees or
authorized representatives of the United States concerned with
carrying out the Clean Water Act, bound by the confidentiality rules in
40 CFR Part 2, as may be amended from time to time.
C. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 156-6A, the Town of Gates shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the person, and the person shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the authorized representative(s), and the
Town of Gates shall indemnify the person against loss or damage to its
property by Town of Gates employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
§ 156-4 SOLID WASTE § 156-6
155:251
§ 156-7. Discharge and connection prohibitions; exceptions.
person by Town of Gates employees and growing out of the inspection
and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town of Gates access to the
premises or other interference with the activities of the Town of Gates
shall be a violation of this article. Access to property and/or records of a
nondomestic source may not be refused on the basis that the Town of
Gates refuses to sign any waiver, access agreement, or similar
document.
E. If the Town of Gates has been refused access to a building, structure or
property or any part thereof, and if the Town of Gates has demonstrated
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or
that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of
the Town of Gates to verify compliance with this article or any permit or
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety
and welfare of the community, then the Town of Gates will make an
application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a search and/or
seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the
warrant. The warrant application shall specify what, if anything, may be
searched and/or seized on the property described. If granted by the
court, such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the Town of
Gates in the company of a uniformed officer of the law enforcement
agency with jurisdiction over the property. In the event of an emergency
affecting public health and safety, inspections may be made without the
issuance of a warrant.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials,
including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater. Such activities
include failing private sewage disposal systems, as defined in
§ 156-2, improper management of animal waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) SPDES permit
authorization.
(2) Upon notification to a person that it is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions
to correct such activities such that it no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
§ 156-6 GATES CODE § 156-7
155:252
B. Prohibition exceptions. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated and nonsediment laden pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, airconditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of
vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools
(if dechlorinated, typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting
activities and any other water source not containing
pollutants. Regardless of exemption, best management practices
should be implemented to reduce impacts from the above activities.
(2) Discharges specified, in writing, by the Town of Gates as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the Town of Gates prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under SPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system by the Town of
Gates.
C. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a pipe or line conveying sewage to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) or allows such a connection to continue.
D. Waste disposal prohibitions. No person shall throw, deposit, leave,
maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained,
in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street,
alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drainage system, or water of
§ 156-7 SOLID WASTE § 156-7
155:253
§ 156-8. Suspension of MS4 access.
the U.S. any refuse, rubbish, yard/lawn waste, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that
the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in
streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are
exempted from this prohibition.
E. Prohibition against failing private sewage disposal systems. No person
shall construct or maintain any cesspool, sewage disposal system, pipe
or drain so as to expose or discharge the sewage contents or other
deleterious liquids or matter therefrom to the atmosphere or on the
ground surface or into any storm sewer or drain or as to endanger any
watercourse or body of water, unless a permit for such discharge shall
have been issued by the Monroe County Department of Public Health or
by the State Department of Health or the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, and such discharge shall be made in
accordance with the requirements thereof. Owners or operators of
private sewage disposal systems shall operate, maintain and inspect
such systems in accordance with the Monroe County Sanitary Code.
F. Prohibition of stormwater discharge to sanitary sewer. Stormwater
shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer without written
permission to do so from the Town of Gates.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Town
of Gates may, without prior notice, suspend discharge access into the
MS4 to a person when such a suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment; to the health or welfare of
persons; to the storm drainage system, including but not limited to
pipes, manholes, outfall structures and storm laterals; or the waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order,
the Town of Gates may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent
or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States or to
minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have his or her
MS4 access suspended or terminated if such action would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The Town of Gates will notify a violator of
the proposed suspension or termination of its MS4 access. The violator
may petition the Town of Gates or designee to reconsider the
suspension or termination of MS4 access by requesting a hearing.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to reinstate MS4 access to premises
suspended or terminated pursuant to this section without the prior
approval of the Town of Gates.
§ 156-7 GATES CODE § 156-9
155:254
§ 156-9. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any Town of Gates person subject to an industrial or construction activity
SPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of
such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Town of Gates prior to discharge or as a condition of a
subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement
plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or
action; or for any other reasonable cause.
§ 156-10. Monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the Town of Gates
must inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the
Town of Gates has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially
exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a
violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Town of Gates shall be permitted to enter and inspect, at any
time, facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the Town of Gates.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Town of Gates ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling and
examination of the private storm drainage system. Persons or
facility operators must supply copies, if requested by the Town of
Gates, of all records kept under the conditions of the SPDES
stormwater discharge permit. Persons or facility operators must
also identify the performance of any additional duties as defined by
state and federal law.
(3) The Town of Gates shall have the right to place or position on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of
the Town of Gates to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's discharge to the storm sewer system.
(4) The Town of Gates has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated as necessary and recommended by the manufacturer to
ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the facility which
allows for unsafe access or difficulty in monitoring, inspecting or
§ 156-9 SOLID WASTE § 156-10
155:255
§ 156-11. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
sampling of the storm drainage system shall be promptly removed
by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the Town of
Gates and shall not be replaced. All costs associated with clearing
such access restrictions shall be borne by the discharger in full.
(6) Unreasonable delays, as determined by the Town of Gates, in
allowing the Town of Gates access to a facility, which is permitted
under the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation SPDES program, for the purposes of conducting any
activity authorized or required by the permit, is considered a
violation of said program and of this article.
(7) If the Town of Gates has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which a discharge or conveyance to the storm sewer
system exists, and the Town of Gates is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to further inspect and/or sample the
private stormwater system to verify compliance with this article or
any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Town of Gates may
seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. Best management practices. Town of Gates will adopt requirements
identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any activity,
operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the
United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through
the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person
responsible for a property or premises which is or may be the source of
an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm drainage system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the maximum extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant
with the provisions of this section. Appropriately designed structural/
nonstructural BMPs shall be included as part of a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the SPDES permit.
B. Private sewage disposal systems. Where private sewage disposal
systems are contributing to the Town of Gates being subject to the
special conditions, as defined in § 156-2 of this article, the owner or
§ 156-10 GATES CODE § 156-11
155:256
§ 156-12. Watercourse protection.
§ 156-13. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in the
illegal discharge of pollutants into stormwater, the public or private storm
drain system or waters of the United States, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of any
such release. In the event a release of hazardous materials occurs, said
person shall immediately notify the NYSDEC Region 8 Spill Response Team
and/or call the NYS Spill Hotline within the time frame established by law
as well as notify the Town of Gates of the occurrence. In the event of a
release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Town of
Gates in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the Town of Gates, post-marked within
operator of such private sewage disposal system shall be required to
maintain and operate the system as follows:
(1) Private sewage disposal systems should be operated, maintained
and inspected in accordance with the Monroe County Sanitary
Code.
(2) Septic tank additives shall not be used.
(3) Repair or replace private sewage disposal systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with Monroe County sewage design standards.
(b) No person shall alter, repair or extend a private sewage
disposal system unless a permit is obtained from the Monroe
County Public Health Director or his authorized
representative.
A. No person shall alter a stormwater practice on private or publicly
owned land such that it alters the stormwater practice from its intended
use.
B. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property in a manner which prevents illicit
discharges and keeps the watercourse free of trash, debris, yard/lawn
waste, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 156-11 SOLID WASTE § 156-13
155:257
three business days of the date of the in-person or phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years.
§ 156-14. Enforcement.
§ 156-15. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by
law any violation of this article is punishable by a fine not to $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for conviction
of a first offense; a second violation of this article, committed within a
period of five years, is punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more
than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both;
and a third or subsequent violation of this article, within a period of five
years, is punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 156-16. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the Town of Gates. The notice of appeal must be received within 10
A. Whenever the Town of Gates finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Town of
Gates may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(2) The elimination of illicit connection or discharges.
(3) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 156-13 GATES CODE § 156-16
155:258
calendar days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the appropriate authority or his or her designee shall take place
within 15 calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be made within
15 calendar days and be final.
§ 156-17. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five
calendar days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the Town of Gates, its representatives and/or employees may
enter upon the subject private property with the consent of the owner or
with a valid search and/or seizure warrant, and are authorized to take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property.
§ 156-18. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protection claim objecting to the amount
of the assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner, as determined by the decision of the municipal authority, or
by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien
on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any
of the provision of this article shall become liable to the Town of Gates by
reason of such violation.
§ 156-19. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Town of Gates may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 156-20. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this article, the Town of Gates may impose upon a violator alternative
compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 156-21. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
§ 156-16 SOLID WASTE § 156-21
155:259
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 156-22. Criminal prosecution.
For the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers
generally, violations of this article shall be deemed misdemeanors and, for
such purpose only, all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply
to such violations. Any person that has violated or continues to violate this
article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law
and, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a penalty
as set forth in § 156-15 of this article. The Town of Gates may recover all
attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement
of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 156-23. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Town of Gates to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 156-21 GATES CODE § 156-23
155:260
Chapter 157
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 70.
Conservation, recreation and drainage
easements — See Ch. 79.
Excavations — See Ch. 90.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 100.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 156.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 156-23 SOLID WASTE § 156-23
155:261

ARTICLE I
Construction Site Stormwater Pollution Prevention and Sediment
Control
[Adopted 1-7-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 157-1. Introduction; purpose.
A. Land disturbance activities and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion
by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by
reducing water quality, and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for
fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates
maintenance and/or repair of sewers and ditches, and the dredging of
waterways. In addition, clearing and/or grading during construction
tends to increase soil erosion and causes the loss of native vegetation
necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat, and to provide a healthy
living environment for citizens of the Town of Gates. Improper design
and construction of stormwater management practices can increase the
velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby increasing streambank erosion
and sedimentation. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate
into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream
base flow. Regulation of land disturbance activities by means of
performance standards governing stormwater management and site
design will produce development compatible with the natural functions
of a particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the
adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
C. As a result, the purpose of this article is to safeguard public health,
protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the
public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design,
construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other
activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement
of earth on land in the Town of Gates. It seeks to meet those purposes
by achieving the following objectives:
(1) Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal
Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02
or as amended or revised;
(2) Require land disturbance activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
§ 157-1 SOLID WASTE § 157-1
155:263
§ 157-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land disturbance activity.
CLEARING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) directed by the Town of Gates to
conduct site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
EARTHWORK — Construction activities, including clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that result in land
disturbance.
EARTHWORK PERMIT — A permit issued by the Town of Gates Department
of Public Works for projects involving construction activities, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, resulting
in land disturbance of an area of less than 25,000 square feet.[Added
1-4-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with density of 80%
(SPDES) General Permit for Construction Activities or as amended
or revised;
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land disturbance
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
land disturbance activities which would otherwise degrade local
water quality;
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management practices and to ensure that these management
practices are properly maintained and eliminated threats to public
safety.
§ 157-1 GATES CODE § 157-2
155:264
has been established or equivalent measures such as the use of mulches or
geotextiles have been employed on all unpaved areas and areas not covered
by permanent structures.
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet,
or activities disturbing less than 25,000 square feet of total land area that is
part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though multiple
separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different
times on different schedules.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or
a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication which
is commonly known as the "Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, most recent
version, including applicable updates, that serves as the official guide for
stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the
stabilization of each section before the clearing of the next.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment controls, such as a licensed
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified professional
in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction
site erosion controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the
principles and practices of erosion and sediment control, stormwater
management and the proper procedures and techniques for the installation
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment,
growth, composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SITE — A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The examination and subsequent authorization to
proceed with a project based upon a drawing prepared to specifications and
containing necessary elements which show the arrangement, layout and
design of the proposed use of a single parcel of land as shown on said plan.
§ 157-2 SOLID WASTE § 157-2
155:265
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate
storm sewers for compliance with EPA established water quality standards
and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land disturbance activity
associated with a development, including: land preparation such as
clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways;
excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of
temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 157-2 GATES CODE § 157-3
155:266
§ 157-3. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all land disturbance activities that will
disturb greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet of land unless exempted
under § 157-7C of this article. This article also applies to land disturbance
activities that are less than 25,000 square feet disturbance if such activities
are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will disturb
greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet, even though multiple separate
and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
§ 157-4. Compatibility with other permits and local law
requirements.
§ 157-5. Legislative authority.
In accordance with Article 9 of the Town Law of the State of New York,
the Town of Gates' Board has the authority to enact laws for the purpose
of promoting the health, safety, or general welfare of the Town, including,
the protection and preservation of the property of its inhabitants. By the
same authority, the Town of Gates' Board may include in any such law
provisions for the appointment of any municipal employees to effectuate
and administer such law.
§ 157-6. Standards for construction activities.
A. Compliance with this article does not relieve the applicant of the
obligation and responsibility to obtain separate coverage under the
NYSDEC SPDES General Permit for Construction Activities if required.
For projects also applying for coverage under the NYSDEC SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity,
the applicant shall submit a copy of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP), a notice of intent (NOI) with a certification
statement, including the date demonstrating submission to the
NYSDEC, a letter of permission from the NYSDEC granting approval to
disturb five acres or greater of land at one time (if applicable) and any
related documents to the Town of Gates for review and approval.
B. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other federal, state, or
local law, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provisions
that are more restrictive or impose more stringent requirements shall
take precedence.
C. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or
local laws such as the local law for Design and Management of
Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution Prevention Measures.14
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 157, Art. II, Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution Prevention.
§ 157-3 SOLID WASTE § 157-6
155:267
§ 157-7. Land disturbance activity approval process; exemptions.
A. The Town of Gates requires the use of technical standards for erosion
and sediment controls. These are detailed in the Town of Gates design
criteria and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation's Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control. For the design of water quality and water quantity controls
(postconstruction stormwater runoff control practices), the NYSDEC's
technical standards are detailed in the New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
B. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with
the aforementioned technical standards, the applicant or developer
must demonstrate equivalence to these technical standards and the
SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed/certified professional.
A. Requirements of application.
(1) Any applicant requesting site plan approval or a permit for land
disturbance activity which would require the disturbance of
greater than equal to 25,000 square feet of land shall also include
with a submission a SWPPP that shall be reviewed and approved by
the Town of Gates prior to issuance of the final site plan approval or
a permit.
(2) No applicant shall be granted site plan approval or a permit which
would require the disturbance of greater than equal to 25,000
square feet of land without the review and approval of a SWPPP by
the Town of Gates.
(3) Furthermore, prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan
approval, all projects that would result in the disturbance of
greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet of land will be required
to comply with all applicable provisions of the Local Law for Design
and Management of Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Measures.15 As part of the SWPPP, the applicant shall
include a signed statement that all applicable requirements of the
Local Law for Design and Management of Postconstruction
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Measures have been met to the
satisfaction of the Town of Gates.
(4) Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing
fee as set forth in § 157-13.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 157, Art. II, Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution Prevention.
§ 157-6 GATES CODE § 157-7
155:268
§ 157-8. Financial guarantees.
The Town of Gates may, at its discretion, require the applicant to submit
a financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the Town, prior to issuance
of site plan approval or a permit, in order to insure that the stormwater
pollution prevention and erosion and sediment control practices are
implemented and maintained by the applicant as required by the approved
SWPPP. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be the total estimated
construction cost of the stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and
sediment control practices approved, plus a contingency. The financial
guarantee shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work
(5) Each application shall include a comprehensive and complete
SWPPP that shall be prepared in accordance with § 157-9 of this
article.
(6) Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing,
construction, or development involving the movement of land shall
be in accordance with the submitted SWPPP.
(7) All land disturbance activities, as defined in § 157-2 of this article,
not subject to site plan or permit approval shall be required to
submit a SWPPP to the Stormwater Management Officer
designated by the Town of Gates who shall approve the SWPPP if it
complies with the requirements of this article.
B. Review and approval of application. Where a site plan approval is
required, the review and approval of the SWPPP shall be conducted as
part of the site plan approval process by the Planning Board. Where no
site plan is required, the review and approval of the SWPPP shall be
conducted as part of the building permit approval process by the
Building Inspector. See § 157-9E(5) for requirements related to the
informal review of the SWPPP's for projects that have had no activity on
them within the past two years.
C. Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from review under this
article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of public health, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Town of Gates.
§ 157-7 SOLID WASTE § 157-8
155:269
specified in the SWPPP. The financial guarantee shall be released in full only
upon satisfaction of the requirements listed in § 157-11 of this article. At its
discretion, the Town of Gates may allow for a partial release of the financial
guarantee based on the completion of various development stages.
§ 157-9. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
A. The Town of Gates shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer
who shall accept and review all SWPPPs and forward such plans to the
applicable municipal board. A consultant cannot be appointed as a
Stormwater Management Officer. The Stormwater Management Officer
may review the plans; upon approval by the Town Board, engage the
services of a New York State licensed professional engineer to review
the plans, specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed
a fee schedule established by said governing board; or accept the
certification of a licensed/certified professional that the plans conform
to the requirements of this article.
B. Prior to final approval of a land disturbance activity, a SWPPP shall be
prepared by the applicant in accordance with the specifications
outlined by the Town of Gates and submitted to the Stormwater
Management Officer designated by the Town for review by the
appropriate board. This plan must be prepared in accordance with
sound engineering practices by a qualified professional as defined in
§ 157-2 of this article. The final plan must be signed by a New York
State licensed professional engineer (PE), who will certify that the
design of all stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment
control practices meet the requirements outlined in the Town of Gates
design criteria and the New York Standards and Specifications for
Erosion and Sediment Control and shall be adequate to prevent
transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the Town.
C. The requirements to have a SWPPP prepared by a qualified professional
and to have the final plan signed and certified by a New York State
licensed professional engineer (PE) are not applicable to land
disturbance activities that meet technical standards and are five acres
or less occurring on a single-family residence which is not part of a
larger common plan of development or an agricultural property. In
addition, these land disturbance activities must not discharge directly
to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be located in a total
maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
D. Minimum requirements. All SWPPPs shall provide the following
background information and erosion and sediment controls:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project and contact information that
includes the name, address, and telephone number of all persons
having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference
number and parcel number of the subject property or properties.
§ 157-8 GATES CODE § 157-9
155:270
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map and a one-inch-equals-fifty-feet topographic
base map of the site which extends a minimum of 100 feet beyond
the limits of the proposed development. At a minimum, the site map
should show the total site area; all improvements; areas of
disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation;
on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s), including receiving
waters, streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands as well as
drainage patterns that could be affected by the construction
activity; existing and final slopes; locations of utilities, roads, soils
types, forest cover, and significant natural and man-made features
not otherwise shown; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow
or equipment storage areas, proposed concrete clean out basin(s)
and construction entrance; and location(s) of the stormwater
discharges(s); and resources protected under other chapters of this
Code or by easements.
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site.
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation, final grading
and landscaping, and any other activity at the site that results in
soil disturbance. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin and the estimated duration of exposure of
cleared areas. Consistent with the New York State Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control, not more than five
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP and a letter of permission from the NYSDEC.
(5) A description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control litter and prevent construction chemicals and
construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in the
stormwater discharges; a description of construction and waste
materials expected to be stored on-site with updates as
appropriate; a description of controls that will be implemented to
reduce pollutants from these materials, including storage practices
to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater; and a
description of spill prevention and response measures.
(6) A description of the temporary and permanent structural and
vegetative measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control
and sediment control for each stage of the project, from initial land
disturbance to project closeout, including who will be responsible
for the maintenance and implementation of said features at the site
and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate
vegetative cover is established and preserved. For temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures, the seeding mixtures and
rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, depth of
topsoil, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching shall be provided.
§ 157-9 SOLID WASTE § 157-9
155:271
(7) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice.
(8) Illustration of all necessary erosion and sediment control
measures, including the siting and sizing of any temporary
sediment basins and provide the dimensions, material
specifications and installation details for each throughout all
phases of construction and completion of development of the site.
Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of
intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season.
(9) Identification of all temporary practices that will be converted to
permanent control measures.
(10) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in place.
(11) Identification of the parts or components of the SWPPP that require
maintenance. Furthermore, it shall also provide a schedule of
required maintenance and identify the party responsible for such
work.
(12) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable.
(13) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
(14) Assurance that all other applicable environmental permits have
been acquired for the site prior to initial land disturbance. Copies
of the applicable environmental permits shall be provided to the
Town of Gates.
(15) Assurance that the applicant or their responsible individual shall
be on site at all times when earthwork takes place and shall inspect
and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices.
(16) Assurance that all contractors and subcontractors involved in soil
disturbance and/or stormwater management practice installation
and maintenance shall be identified in the SWPPP. All such
contractors and subcontractors shall sign a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land disturbance
activity at the site: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand
and agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the SWPPP. I
also understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or
contribute to a violation of the water quality standards." The
certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
§ 157-9 GATES CODE § 157-9
155:272
§ 157-10. Inspections.
the site; and the date the certification is made. The certification
statement must be included in the SWPPP.
E. Modifications to the plan after approval.
(1) Major amendments of the SWPPP shall be submitted to the Town of
Gates and shall be approved or disapproved.
(2) The applicant shall amend the SWPPP whenever:
(a) There is a significant change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance which may have a significant effect
on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the waters of
the United States and which has not otherwise been addressed
in the SWPPP; or
(b) The SWPPP proves to be ineffective in providing the proper
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment
control as required by this article. Amendments to the SWPPP
may be reviewed by the Town of Gates. A copy of the newly
amended SWPPP must be provided to the Town of Gates within
five business days.
(3) Additionally, the SWPPP shall be amended to identify any new
contractor or subcontractor that will implement any measure of the
SWPPP. The Town of Gates may request copies of signed contractor
certification statements from new contractors/subcontractors
working on the site.
(4) Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by Town of
Gates by written authorization to the applicant.
(5) SWPPP's for previously approved projects that have had no activity
on them within a two-year period are subject to an informal review
process by the Town. No development work shall be commenced or
recommenced until the satisfactory completion of the informal
review process and written authorization to proceed has been
provided by the Town of Gates.
A. Town of Gates inspections.
(1) The Town of Gates or designated agent, as defined in § 157-2, shall
make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve
that portion of the work completed or shall notify the applicant that
the work fails to comply with the SWPPP. In addition, the Town of
Gates reserves the right to enter the work site at any reasonable
time for purposes of inspection. The SWPPP and the records of any
inspections completed by the owner or his/her agent shall be
maintained at the site in the site logbook from the date of initiation
of construction activities to the date of final stabilization. To obtain
§ 157-9 SOLID WASTE § 157-10
155:273
inspections, the applicant shall notify the Town at least 48 hours
before the following activities occur:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Erosion and sediment control measures have been installed
and stabilized.
(c) Site clearing has been completed.
(d) Rough grading has been completed.
(e) Final grading has been completed.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Final landscaping.
(h) Closeout inspection.
(2) The above inspection timetable does not relieve the owner of the
obligation under this or any other permit or regulation to conduct
regular inspections as set forth in said permit and/or regulation.
(3) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified, in writing, of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further earthwork shall be conducted on the
site, except for site stabilization until the violations are corrected
and approved by the Town of Gates.
B. Property owner/developer inspections.
(1) The applicant shall employ a responsible individual, as defined in
§ 157-2 of this article, who will oversee the implementation of the
SWPPP on a daily basis. The responsible individual shall be on site
at all times when construction or grading activity takes place and
shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The applicant shall also employ the
services of a qualified professional in erosion and sediment control
who will inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site
logbook. Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and
within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of
precipitation or more. A monthly summary of reports will be copied
to the site logbook and delivered to Town of Gates within five days
after the month's end.
(2) The requirement to employ a qualified professional to inspect and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices is not applicable to land disturbance activities five acres
or less occurring on a single-family residence which is not part of a
larger common plan of development or on an agricultural property.
In addition, these land disturbance activities must not discharge
§ 157-10 GATES CODE § 157-10
155:274
§ 157-11. Duration, maintenance and closeout.
directly to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be located in
a total maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
A. Duration.
(1) For a project that requires a NYSDEC SPDES Permit, the SWPPP
approved by the Town of Gates shall be in effect until:
(a) The site has been finally stabilized;
(b) A notice of termination (N.O.T) is submitted to the NYSDEC in
accordance with the general permit; and
(c) A final inspection has been completed by the Town.
(2) For projects that do not require a NYSDEC N.O.T., the SWPPP is in
effect until a final inspection is conducted and the Town of Gates
has issued the applicant written approval.
B. Maintenance.
(1) The applicant shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
stormwater management facilities and erosion and sediment
control measures which are installed or used by the applicant to
achieve compliance with the conditions of this article. Sediment
shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever
their design capacity has been reduced by 50%. The land
disturbance activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in
surface waters of the State of New York.
(2) At the end of the construction season when soil disturbance
activities will be finalized or suspended until the following spring, it
may be desirable to reduce the frequency of the required weekly
site inspections to monthly inspections. In order to reduce
inspection frequencies, the applicant must complete stabilization
activities before proper installation is precluded by snow cover or
frozen ground. If vegetation is used as a stabilization method,
seeding, planting, and/or sodding must be scheduled to avoid fall
frosts and to allow for proper germination/establishment.
Installations and maintenance must be done according to the New
York State Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control.
C. Closeout. The applicant must satisfy the following project closeout
requirements:
(1) Reestablish grade of all permanent stormwater facilities;
(2) Inspect grading of all drainage structures and provide elevation asbuilts
to the Town of Gates;
§ 157-10 SOLID WASTE § 157-11
155:275
§ 157-12. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(3) Establish perennial vegetative cover to a density of 80% over 100%
of the site;
(4) Removal of all debris and temporary erosion and sediment control
practices;
(5) Provide a written certification by a New York State licensed/
certified professional that the site has undergone final stabilization
(as defined in § 157-2) and that all temporary erosion and sediment
controls not needed for long-term erosion control have been
removed;
(6) Complete any other measure deemed appropriate and necessary by
the Town of Gates to stabilize the project site.
A. Stop-work order. The Town of Gates may issue a stop-work order for
violations of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be
required to halt all land disturbance activities, except those activities
that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The stopwork
order shall be in effect until the Town of Gates confirms that the
land disturbance activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
B. Notice of violation. When the Town of Gates determines that an activity
is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this
article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this article and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
C. Violation and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be
§ 157-11 GATES CODE § 157-12
155:276
§ 157-13. Fees.
The Town Board shall, by resolution, establish fees for the administration of
this article.
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this article. Violations
of any provision or requirement of this article or violation of any
statement, plan, application, permit or certification approved under the
provisions of this article shall be considered an offense punishable by
a fine and/or imprisonment, as provided for in § 55.10 of the Town
Law of the State of New York. Each day on which any violation of
any of the provisions of this article occurs shall constitute one offense
and each successive day of violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person,
partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $250 for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized
by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of
violating any of the provisions of this article shall be required to bear
the expense of such restoration. [Amended 1-4-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
D. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. Occupation permits may not be
granted until corrections to all stormwater management practices have
been made and accepted by the Town of Gates.
§ 157-12 SOLID WASTE § 157-13
155:277

ARTICLE II
Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution Prevention
[Adopted 1-7-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
§ 157-14. Introduction; purpose.
§ 157-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a stormwater management permit.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
A. Land development projects and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in the
watersheds within the Town of Gates. Therefore, the Town of Gates
establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies to provide
reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff and to, in
addition to the above, safeguard persons, protect property, prevent
damage to the environment in Town, and comply with the NYSDEC
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems (MS4s), for the purpose of protecting local water resources
from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater
runoff discharges from land development projects and other
construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel
erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater
runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health
and safety.
§ 157-14 SOLID WASTE § 157-15
155:279
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) directed by the Town of Gates to
conduct site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
FEE IN LIEU — A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the
stormwater performance standards required by this article.
HOTSPOT — An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate
rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc).
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet,
or activities disturbing less than 25,000 square feet of total land area that is
part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though multiple
separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different
times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LETTER OF CREDIT — A document issued by a bank which guarantees the
payment of a customer's drafts for a specified period and up to a specified
amount.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or
a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATION FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication which
is commonly known as the "Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The most recent version of the New York State Stormwater Management
Design Manual, including applicable updates, that serve as the official guide
for stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
§ 157-15 GATES CODE § 157-15
155:280
OFF-SITE FACILITY — A stormwater management measure located outside
the subject property boundary.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A bond underwritten by a surety in the contract
amount to guarantee that the contractor will perform the required work
according to the contract specifications.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment controls, such as a New York State
licensed professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified
professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Reconstruction or modification to any existing,
previously developed land, such as residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional or road/highway, which involves soil disturbance.
Redevelopment is distinguished from development or new development
in that new development refers to construction on land where there had
not been previous construction. Redevelopment specifically applies to
construction areas with impervious surface.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction
site erosion controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the
principles and practices of erosion and sediment control, stormwater
management and the proper procedures and techniques for the installation
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment,
growth, composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES). A nationally approved
program with permits issued in accordance with the Environmental
Conservation Law that authorizes stormwater discharges from certain
construction activities to waters of the United States.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES — Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means
§ 157-15 SOLID WASTE § 157-15
155:281
of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs
to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
WATER QUALITY STANDARD VIOLATION — An increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface
waters of the State of New York.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 157-16. Applicability; exemptions.
A. This article shall be applicable to land disturbance activities, as defined
in § 157-15 of this article, and those activities meeting Condition A, B, C
or D below shall include water quantity and water quality controls
(postconstruction stormwater runoff controls), as set forth in § 157-22,
as applicable unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by
the Town of Gates in accordance with § 157-20 of this article:
(1) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a
total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment.
(2) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
disturbing five or more acres.
(3) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activity
disturbing between 25,000 square feet and five acres of land
during the course of the project, exclusive of the construction of
single-family residences and construction activities at agricultural
properties.
(4) Condition D: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activity that
are smaller than 25,000 square feet disturbance if such activities
are part of a larger common plan of development, even though
multiple separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take
place at different times on different schedules.
B. All plans, documents and information required by this article must be
reviewed by the Town of Gates to ensure that established water quality
standards will be maintained during and after development of the site
and that postconstruction runoff levels are consistent with any local and
regional watershed plans.
§ 157-15 GATES CODE § 157-16
155:282
§ 157-17. Compatibility with other permits and local law
requirements.
§ 157-18. Legislative authority.
In accordance with Article 9 of the Town Law of the State of New York,
the Town of Gates' Board has the authority to enact laws for the purpose
of promoting the health, safety, or general welfare of the Town, including
the protection and preservation of the property of its inhabitants. By the
same authority, the Town of Gates' Board may include in any such law
provisions for the appointment of any municipal employees to effectuate
and administer such law.
C. When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a
redevelopment project, as defined in § 157-15 of this article, decisions
on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed
by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current New York
State Stormwater Management Design Manual. Final authorization of
all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the
Town of Gates. This applies to all redevelopment projects that are
greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet.
D. The following activities may be exempt from the requirements of this
article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Town of Gates.
A. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other local law, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other local law, rule or
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health and/
or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
B. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or
local laws.
§ 157-16 SOLID WASTE § 157-19
155:283
§ 157-19. Compliance.
§ 157-20. Waivers and mitigation requirements.
A. No person(s) shall receive any of the building, grading or other land
disturbance approvals or permits required for land disturbance
activities without first meeting the requirements of this article to the
satisfaction of the Town of Gates.
B. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or operator
desiring approval or a permit for a land disturbance activity shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this article and shall submit all
required plans, documentation and information as required under this
article to the Town of Gates for review and approval.
C. Unless otherwise accepted by this article, the following items shall be
submitted prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan approval.
(1) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) (see § 157-23).
(2) Maintenance easement(s) (see § 157-24).
(3) Maintenance agreement(s) (see § 157-24).
(4) Any applicable fees (see § 157-29).
D. The SWPPP shall be prepared to meet the requirements of §§ 157-22
through 157-24 of this article. The maintenance agreement shall be
prepared to meet the requirements of § 157-24 of this article, and
applicable fees shall be those as set forth in § 157-29 of this article.
E. The SWPPP and all other documents required by this article must be
reviewed by the Town of Gates to ensure that established water quality
standards will be maintained after development of the site and that
postconstruction runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional
watershed plans. Information shall be submitted as a single, logical
package, with all information bound together.
F. Where a site plan approval is required, the review and approval of the
SWPPP shall be conducted as part of the site plan approval process by
the Planning Board. Where no site plan is required, the review and
approval of the SWPPP shall be conducted as part of the building permit
approval process by the Building Inspector.
A. The waivers and mitigation requirements outlined below are subject to
the approval of the Town of Gates and are only applicable to land
disturbance activities that disturb less than one acre of land and do not
directly discharge to a 303(d) water body or are located in a total
maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
B. All person(s) shall comply with the requirements of this article, unless a
written request is filed to waive the requirements in part or whole for
land disturbance activities that disturb less than one acre of land.
§ 157-19 GATES CODE § 157-20
155:284
Requests to waive any requirements of this article shall be submitted to
the Town of Gates for approval.
C. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be
waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant,
provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
(1) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this article.
(2) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater
pollution prevention plan that has been approved by the Town of
Gates and the implementation of the plan is required by local law.
These practices are encouraged in order to minimize the reliance
on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the
amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned
through the use of nonstructural practices that reduce the
generation of stormwater from the site. These nonstructural
practices are explained in detail in the manual, Better Site Design:
A Handbook for Changing Development Rules in Your Community.
Applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural
practices must ensure that these practices are documented and
remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
(3) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and
adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is
equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site
practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for
long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
(4) The Town of Gates finds that meeting the minimum on-site
management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or
existing physical characteristics of a site.
(5) Nonstructural practices will be used on the site that reduce:
(a) The generation of stormwater from the site;
(b) The size and cost of stormwater storage; and
(c) The pollutants generated at the site.
D. In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the Town of
Gates may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater
management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are
provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town of Gates that the variance
will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures;
§ 157-20 SOLID WASTE § 157-20
155:285
§ 157-21. Fee in lieu of; dedication or easement of land.
The fee in lieu of and dedication or easement of land outlined below are
subject to the approval of the Town of Gates and are only applicable to land
disturbance activities that disturb less than one acre of land and do not
directly discharge to a 303(d) water body or are located in a total maximum
daily load (TMDL) watershed.
(2) Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
(3) Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(4) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property.
E. Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for
stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the
minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures
selected by the Town of Gates. Mitigation measures may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of
an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation
(Dedication or easement of land, see § 157-21B below). These lands
should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to
provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and
aquatic habitat;
(2) The creation of a stormwater management facility or other
drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public
or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities
designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and
standards of this article;
(3) Monetary contributions (Fee in lieu of, see § 157-21A below) to a
dedicated fund for stormwater management activities.
F. No waivers or mitigation plans will be considered for land disturbance
activity that disturbs one acre or greater of land.
A. Fee in lieu of. Where the Town of Gates waives all or part of the
minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver
is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided
downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be
required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the Town. All
monetary contributions shall be made to a dedicated fund for
stormwater management activities. The fee structure shall be based on
the cubic feet of storage required for stormwater management of the
development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be
made by the applicant prior to the issuance of any permit or approval
for the development.
§ 157-20 GATES CODE § 157-21
155:286
§ 157-22. General design and performance criteria for stormwater
management.
B. Dedication or easement of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an
applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management
by entering into an agreement with the Town of Gates for the granting
of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for
the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. The
agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the Town of Gates
prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to
the issuance of the permit.
A. The applicant shall consult the Town of Gates design, criteria, the New
York State Stormwater Management Design Manual and the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control for
standards and specifications related to stormwater management design
criteria. Stormwater management practices that are designed and
constructed in accordance with these technical documents shall be
presumed to meet the standards imposed by this article. If there is a
conflict between any of the standards, the more stringent standard shall
apply. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance
with technical standards, the applicant or developer must demonstrate
equivalence to the technical standards set forth in this section and
§ 157-23 of this article and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed/
certified professional.
B. The following design and performance criteria shall be addressed for
stormwater management at all sites:
(1) All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices
to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated
with specified design storms and reduce the generation of
stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas
for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from
driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas
to the maximum extent practicable to provide treatment for both
water quality and quantity.
(2) All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not
discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional
wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where
such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on
wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method
acceptable to the Town of Gates. In no case shall the impact on
functional values be any greater than that allowed by the Army
Corp of Engineers (C.O.E) or the NYSDEC responsible for natural
resources.
(3) An attempt shall be made to maintain annual groundwater
recharge rates, by promoting infiltration through the use of
structural and nonstructural methods. At a minimum, an attempt
§ 157-21 SOLID WASTE § 157-22
155:287
§ 157-23. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
shall be made for annual recharge from the postdevelopment site
to mimic the annual recharge from predevelopment site conditions.
(4) In order to protect stream channels from degradation, a specific
channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the
Town of Gates design criteria and/or the New York State
Stormwater Management Design Manual.
(5) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources
may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to
utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices.
(6) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots," may require the
use of specific structural stormwater treatment practices and
pollution prevention practices.
(7) Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the Town of
Gates to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater
design requirements.
(8) The calculations for determining peak flows (WQv) as found in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual shall be
used for sizing all stormwater management practices.
A. A SWPPP is required as part of the compliance with this article. This
plan must be prepared by a qualified professional and must indicate
whether stormwater will be managed on site or off site and, if on site,
the general location and type of practices and shall also include
sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to
evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the
potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present
and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and
acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater
generated at the project site. The plan must be signed by a New York
State licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal
requirements outlined in the New York State Stormwater Management
Design Manual. No building or grading permit or site plan approval
shall be issued until a satisfactory stormwater pollution prevention
plan, or a waiver thereof, has undergone a review and been approved
by the Town of Gates after determining that the plan or waiver is
consistent with the requirements of this article.
B. The applicant shall employ a responsible individual, as defined in
§ 157-15 of this article, who will oversee the implementation of the
SWPPP on a daily basis. The applicant shall also employ the services of
a qualified professional in erosion and sediment control who will
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
§ 157-22 GATES CODE § 157-23
155:288
control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site logbook.
Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and within 24
hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more.
A monthly summary of reports will be copied to the site logbook and
delivered to Town of Gates within five business days after the month's
end. The Town, at its discretion, may require submission of the weekly
inspection reports. If requested, they shall be submitted within three
business days after the competition of the inspection.
C. All SWPPPs shall provide the following minimum information:
(1) All information listed in § 157-9 of the Local Law for Construction
Site Stormwater Pollution Prevention and Erosion and Sediment
Control.16
(2) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with
tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to
various uses. A written description of the site plan and justification
of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms, including calculations such as a description of the design
storm frequency, intensity and duration; time of concentration; soil
curve numbers or runoff coefficients; peak runoff rates and total
runoff volumes for each watershed area; infiltration rates, where
applicable; culvert capacities; flow velocities; data on the increase
in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, and
documentation of sources for all computation methods and field
test results.
(5) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with
predevelopment conditions.
(6) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(7) The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities
shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures,
including a schedule to ensure their continued function. These
plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater
management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment
and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 157, Art. I, Construction Site Stormwater Pollution Prevention and
Sediment Control.
§ 157-23 SOLID WASTE § 157-23
155:289
§ 157-24. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program
and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures
shall be included in the plan.
(8) The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment
practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by
securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent
basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will
remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. See
§ 157-24 of this article for additional information.
(9) The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and
maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by the on-site stormwater management measure(s) in
accordance with the specifications of this article. See § 157-24 of
this article for additional information.
(10) The SWPPP shall be prepared by a qualified professional and the
final plan must be signed by a New York State licensed professional
engineer who shall certify that the design of all stormwater
management practices meet the requirements in this article.
(11) A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site
and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the
project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the
project site. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native
vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to
environmentally sensitive features that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(12) The Town of Gates may also require a concept plan to consider the
maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning,
regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop
the site to its maximum potential.
(13) The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of
vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who
will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site
and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate
vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a
registered landscape architect or by the soil and water
conservation district and in compliance with landscaping
specifications outlined in the New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
(14) The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental
permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the
final stormwater design plan.
§ 157-23 GATES CODE § 157-24
155:290
A. Maintenance easement. The applicant or owner of the site must execute
a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all
subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management
facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at
reasonable times for periodic inspection by the Town of Gates or their
contractor or agent to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this article and to if necessary implement emergency
repairs to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The
easement dimensions shall be as directed by the Town of Gates and the
easement agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk,
with a copy provided to the Town of Gates.
B. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes, as
a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the stormwater management practices shall not
exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality
standard violations in accordance with § 157-15 of this article.
C. Maintenance agreements.
(1) The maintenance and proper operation of all privately owned
stormwater management facilities, including nonstructural
practices, shall be ensured through the creation of a formal and
enforceable maintenance agreement that must be approved by the
Town of Gates and recorded in the office of the County Clerk as a
deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval. This
agreement will include any and all maintenance easements
required to access and inspect the stormwater management
practices, and will outline the procedures and schedule to be
followed to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure
proper functioning of the stormwater management practice. In
addition, the legally binding agreement shall identify the parties
responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater
treatment practices and include plans for periodic inspections by
the owners, or their designated agent, to ensure proper
performance of the facility. The maintenance agreement shall be
consistent with the terms and conditions of the stormwater control
facility maintenance agreement.
§ 157-24 SOLID WASTE § 157-24
155:291
§ 157-25. Inspection and right of entry.
(2) The Town of Gates, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, may accept
dedication of any existing or future stormwater management
facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the
requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual
access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection
and regular maintenance.
D. Requirements of maintenance agreements. All stormwater
management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual
inspection to document maintenance and repair needs to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of
its purposes. These needs may include: removal of silt, litter and other
debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting
and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape
vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be identified, in writing,
along with the schedule and methods to be employed to complete the
maintenance. The maintenance repairs and restoration schedule are to
be approved by the Town of Gates prior to commencing the work, and
the Town shall inspect the facility upon completion of the work. The
inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased by the Town
of Gates as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the
stormwater management facility.
E. Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible
for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility
shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and
repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five years. These
records shall be made available to the Town of Gates during inspection
of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
F. Maintenance guarantees for privately owned stormwater facilities.
Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities are to be operated and maintained by the applicant, or by a
corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility,
the applicant, prior to construction, may be required to provide the
Town of Gates with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved
financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities, both during and after construction, and until the Town of
Gates acknowledges compliance with all details of approved site plan. If
the applicant or landowner fails to properly operate and maintain
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities,
the Town of Gates may draw upon the account to cover the costs of
proper operation and maintenance, including engineering and
inspection costs, until the Town of Gates acknowledges compliance with
all details of the approved site plan.
A. The Town of Gates or designated agent shall make inspections at any
reasonable time for purposes of inspecting the construction of the
§ 157-24 GATES CODE § 157-25
155:292
§ 157-26. As-built plans and project closeout.
All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans in a format
acceptable to the Town of Gates for any stormwater management practices
located on site after final construction is completed. The plan must show
the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and
must be certified by a New York State licensed professional engineer. A
final inspection by the Town of Gates is required before the release of any
performance securities can occur.
§ 157-27. Landscape alterations.
All applicants are responsible for maintaining the grading of the site so
that it is consistent with the certified as-built plans. Any postconstruction
alterations to the landscape shall receive prior approval from the Town
of Gates. Temporary landscape alterations, such as those associated with
utility excavations and landscaping activities, must be restored to
conditions that are consistent with the certified as-built plans.
§ 157-28. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
stormwater management facilities. Inspections may include but are not
limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based
upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of
drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge
to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality
standards or the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with
other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws.
Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance
and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater,
and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating
the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices. The applicant must notify the Town of Gates
in advance before the commencement of construction. If any violations
are found, the property owner shall be notified of the nature of the
violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall
proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously
completed has received approval by the Town of Gates.
B. Furthermore, when any new drainage control facility is installed on
private property, or when any new connection is made between private
property and a public drainage control system or combined sewer, the
property owner shall grant to the Town of Gates the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when
it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is
occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement
of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article.
§ 157-25 SOLID WASTE § 157-28
155:293
A. Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to
meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the Town of
Gates shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the
stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice,
the responsible person shall have 14 calendar days to affect
maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After
proper notice, the Town of Gates may correct a violation of the design
standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to
place the facility in proper working condition, and the Town of Gates
may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and
any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or
prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed
on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the county. If the Town
of Gates determines that the condition of the stormwater management
facility is a danger to public safety or public health, then they shall have
the right to make all necessary repairs to the facility in question prior to
notification of the owner.
B. Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted
contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise
abated in a manner provided by law.
C. Notice of violation. When the Town of Gates determines that an activity
is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this
article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant;
(2) The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this article and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
D. Stop-work orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation will be
required to halt all construction and/or maintenance activities. This
stop-work order will be in effect until the Town of Gates confirms, in
writing, that the activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a
§ 157-28 GATES CODE § 157-28
155:294
§ 157-29. Fees.
The Town Board shall, by resolution, establish fees for the administration of
this article.
timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
E. Civil and criminal penalties. Violations of any provision or requirement
of this article or violation of any statement, plan, application, permit or
certification approved under the provisions of this article shall be
considered an offense punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment, as
provided for in § 55.10 of the Town Law of the State of New York. Each
day on which any violation of any of the provisions of this article occurs
shall constitute one offense and each successive day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. Upon conviction of any such
violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $250 for each offense. In addition to any other
penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or
corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration.
F. Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits may not be granted
until corrections to all stormwater management practices have been
made and accepted by the Town of Gates.
§ 157-28 SOLID WASTE § 157-29
155:295
Chapter 158
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 157-29 GATES CODE § 157-29
158:296
ARTICLE I
Highway Protection
[Adopted 2-10-1937]
§ 158-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Highway Protection Ordinance of the
Town of Gates, Monroe County, New York."
§ 158-2. General provisions.
It shall not be lawful for any person or corporation to dig or cause to be
dug any trench or ditch in or upon any portion of any public highway, or
otherwise disturb any pavement or any other portion of any public highway
in the Town of Gates, Monroe County, New York, unless written permission
for the same has been granted by the Town Board of the Town of Gates,
Monroe County, New York. Before any person or corporation desiring to do
any of the acts mentioned in this article shall commence operations, such
person or corporation shall make a written application therefor to the Town
Board of the Town of Gates, and file the same with the Town Clerk of the
Town of Gates who shall refer it to the Building Inspector and the Town
Engineer for their investigation to enable them to make a report upon the
merits of the same to the Town Board.
§ 158-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article, or fail to comply with any order or regulation made thereunder, shall
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively
forfeit and pay a penalty not to exceed $250 or 15 days' imprisonment, or
both such fine and imprisonment, said penalty to be sued for and recovered
for the benefit of the General Town Fund.
§ 158-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 158-3
158:297

ARTICLE II
Sidewalks
[Adopted 3-21-1939]
§ 158-4. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Sidewalk Ordinance of the Town of
Gates."
§ 158-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the safety and convenience of the
residents of the Town of Gates, Monroe County, New York, and to assist in
preventing accidents to pedestrians by motor vehicles in said town.
§ 158-6. Provisions.
§ 158-7. Notification of officials.
No sidewalk or sidepath shall be constructed upon a public highway without
first notifying the Town Clerk who, in turn, shall notify the Town Engineer
who will thereupon establish the levels and grade of such proposed
sidewalk or sidepath and such sidewalk or sidepath shall thereafter be
constructed and laid under the supervision of the Town Engineer.
§ 158-8. Wooden or plank sidewalks prohibited.
No wooden or plank sidewalks shall be laid or constructed hereafter upon
any part of a highway in the Town of Gates.
§ 158-9. Procedure by Town Board for construction.
In the event that the Town Board shall decide that it is proper and necessary
to construct a sidewalk or sidepath upon any portion of a highway, the
owner or owners of the real property in front of which said sidewalk or
sidepath is to be constructed shall be notified of the action of the Town
Board and said owner or owners shall within 30 days thereafter commence
A. The Town Board in its discretion, either with or without the
recommendation of the Town Engineer or the Planning Board of the
Town, may direct and order the construction or repair of sidewalks or
sidepaths upon any public highway in the town and adjoining any
privately owned real property.
B. Such sidewalks are to be constructed of stone or cement in accordance
with the specifications prescribed by the Town Engineer and which
specifications are to be filed by him in the office of the Town Clerk. All
sidepaths constructed on public highways and provided for by the
terms of this article shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications laid down by the Town Engineer and filed by him in the
office of the Town Clerk.
§ 158-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 158-9
158:299
the construction of said sidewalk or sidepath, weather and other conditions
permitting. In the event of the failure of such owner or owners to commence
the construction of said sidewalk or sidepath within such period, the town
may proceed to construct said sidewalk or sidepath and when completed to
charge the expense of the same upon the owner or owners of the abutting
real property and if necessary bring an action at law in any proper court to
collect the same.
§ 158-10. Procedure by Town Board for repairs.
In the event that the Town Board shall decide that it is proper and necessary
to repair any sidewalk or sidepath upon any portion of a highway, the owner
or owners of any real property in front of which said sidewalk or sidepath
is to be constructed shall be notified of the action of the Town Board and
said owner or owners shall within 10 days thereafter commence operations
for the repair of said sidewalk or sidepath, weather and other conditions
permitting. In the event of the failure of such owner or owners to commence
the repair of said sidewalk or sidepath within such period, the town may
proceed to repair such sidewalk or sidepath and when completed to charge
the expense of the same upon the owner or owners of the abutting real
property and if necessary bring an action at law in any proper court to
collect the same.
§ 158-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Any and all persons or corporations violating any of the provisions of this
article or failing to comply with any order or regulation made thereto
shall severally and for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively forfeit and pay a penalty of not more than $250 or be subject
to imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, said penalty to be sued
for and recovered for the benefit of the General Town Fund.
§ 158-9 GATES CODE § 158-11
158:300
ARTICLE III
Notice of Defects or Obstructions
[Adopted 5-16-1977 by L.L. No. 1-1977]
§ 158-12. Prior notice required.
No civil action shall be maintained against the town or Town
Superintendent of Highways for damages or injuries to person or property
sustained by reason of any highway, bridge or culvert being defective,
out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed unless written notice of
such defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition of such highway,
bridge or culvert was actually given to the Town Clerk or Town
Superintendent of Highways, and there was a failure or neglect within a
reasonable time after the giving of such notice to repair or remove the
defect, danger or obstruction complained of; but no such action shall be
maintained for damages or injuries to person or property sustained solely
in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any highway, bridge or
culvert, unless written notice thereof, specifying the particular place, was
actually given to the Town Clerk or Town Superintendent of Highways and
there was a failure or neglect to cause such snow or ice to be removed or
to make the place otherwise reasonably safe within a reasonable time after
the receipt of such notice.
§ 158-13. Submission of notices to Clerk; presentation to Town
Board. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
The Town Superintendent of Highways shall transmit in writing to the Town
Clerk within 10 days after the receipt thereof all written notices received by
him pursuant to this article and Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of the Town Law. The
Town Clerk shall cause all written notices received by him or her pursuant
to this article and Subdivision 2 of § 65-a of the Town Law to be presented
to the Town Board within five days of the receipt thereof or at the next
succeeding Town Board meeting, whichever shall be sooner.
§ 158-14. Indexed record. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
The Town Clerk shall keep an indexed record, in a separate book, of all
written notices which he or she shall receive of the existence of a defective,
unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition in or upon or of an accumulation
of snow or ice upon any town highway, bridge or culvert, which record shall
state the date of the receipt of the notice, the nature and location of the
condition stated to exist and the name and address from whom the notice is
received. All such written notices shall be indexed according to the location
of the alleged defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition or the
location of accumulated snow or ice. The record of each notice shall be
preserved for a period of five years after the date it is received.
§ 158-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 158-15
158:301
§ 158-15. Effect on statutory provisions.
This article shall supersede in its application to the Town of Gates
Subdivisions 1 and 3 of § 65-a of the Town Law.
§ 158-15 GATES CODE § 158-15
158:302
Chapter 161
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Chapter 164
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Electrical Code — See Ch. 87.
Plumbing — See Ch. 143.
Zoning - See Ch. 190.
§ 164-1. Purpose and title.
§ 164-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABOVEGROUND SWIMMING POOL — All swimming pools having all or any
section of their exterior wall above the surrounding ground level.
BUILDING LINE OF THE POOL — Shall be considered to be its inside wall.
IN-GROUND SWIMMING POOL — All swimming pools having their entire
water surface below the level of the surrounding ground.
PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION — The installation of an above- or belowground
swimming pool which requires more than a one-foot excavation for
any part of the pool, and/or constructed of concrete, wood, metal or other
material and/or encircled or partly encircled by a deck or platform, any part
of which cannot be dismantled for storage.
SAFETY LADDER — One that is capable of being raised and fastened when
not in use.
SWIMMING POOL — All private or semiprivate swimming, bathing and
wading pools, ponds or tanks above or below the ground of a permanent
A. The Town Board of the Town of Gates in the County of Monroe and the
State of New York, in pursuance of the authority conferred by the Town
Law in the State of New York in order to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Gates, enacts the
following ordinance, which shall be known as the "Swimming Pool
Ordinance of the Town of Gates."
B. All construction and operation referred to in this chapter must be in
accordance with federal, state and local laws and codes. All sanitation
conditions must comply with the rules of the State and County Boards
of Health.
§ 158-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 164-2
161:303
or temporary nature, which have a depth of more than 24 inches and/or
a water surface of more than 100 square feet and which are excavated,
erected, constructed or created by damming of a stream, whether out of
doors or inside a structure or building.
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION — The installation of an aboveground
swimming pool which requires less than a one-foot excavation for any part
of the pool, with no platform encircling or partly encircling the pool, other
than an entrance platform four feet by four feet maximum size, all of which
can be dismantled and stored.
§ 164-3. Permits.
A swimming pool shall be deemed to be a structure under Chapter 190,
Zoning, and, where applicable, all work must be done in accordance
with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
A.
A swimming pool may be permitted only as an accessory structure to a
principal building used for residential purposes. Said pool shall be for
the exclusive use of the occupants of the principal building and their
guests.
B.
A swimming pool may be permitted, when said use is not as an
accessory structure to the principal building, only upon application to
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with this chapter. Pools used
normally by the public, such as clubs, etc., must comply with the New
York State Board of Health regulations.
C.
A. Before any swimming pool is moved, placed, erected, assembled,
excavated upon a lot or created by damming a stream, a building permit
shall be required.
B. A building permit shall be required for any enlargement of an existing
pool, for a dressing shelter, a pump house, a filter house, an enclosure
for the pool or any other structure erected in conjunction with the
swimming pool. Such structures shall conform to all provisions of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and
regulations and ordinances of the Town of Gates and shall not unduly
interfere with the use or enjoyment of the adjacent property.
C. Application.
(1) Each application for a building permit to erect, construct, dam a
stream or excavate a swimming pool or to enlarge an existing pool
or to build an ancillary structure must be accompanied by a
building permit fee and by plans in sufficient detail to show the
following:
(a) A plot plan of the property on which the swimming pool is to be
constructed or placed showing the location of the swimming
pool in reference to the side lines, rear lines, grades, basement
§ 164-2 GATES CODE § 164-3
164:304
§ 164-4. Location.
The location of a permanent or temporary swimming pool on the property
must:
§ 164-5. Construction and equipment.
and other structures on the property and existing electrical
service lines and electrical lines.
(b) The pool dimensions and depths.
(c) The location and dimensions of the fence and any structures or
appurtenances built or that are to be built in conjunction with
the swimming pool.
(d) The estimated cost of the proposed swimming pool.
(e) The location and type of waste disposal and drainage system of
the property.
(f) The location and source of water supply.
(g) The location, size and description of all proposed electrical
connections, lighting (both above and below the ground) and
any pool-heating device.
(2) These plans, along with structural calculations and details, must be
prepared and signed by either the owner of the property or a
licensed professional engineer or a registered architect, or a
recognized pool contractor, who is an accredited member of the
National Swimming Pool Institute.
A. Not be placed in the front yard.
B. Be at least 10% of the lot width distant from any side yard line and rear
yard line, but in no event less than five feet distant from either the side
yard line or rear yard line.
C. Be at least 15 feet from any house basement.
D. Be at least 20 feet from any active well, septic tank, leach bed, etc.,
unless conditions warrant a lessening of this distance.
E. Not endanger the health and/or safety of its users and not unduly
interfere with the use and enjoyment of the adjacent property.
A. The swimming pool shall be deemed and constructed in such a manner
as not to endanger the health and/or safety of its users or nonusers and
to not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjacent property.
B. The swimming pool shall be required to have adequate equipment to
properly recirculate, filter, algacide and germicide the water of the
pool, with provisions and instructions for maintenance of the same.
§ 164-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 164-5
164:305
§ 164-6. Water supply and drainage.
§ 164-7. Fence.
C. The swimming pool must be equipped with proper safeguards for users
of the pool. At least one ladder, no more than two feet from the bottom
of the pool, must be provided at a location to facilitate quick exit.
D. Safety equipment.
(1) All swimming pools must have a rescue pole made of aluminum,
fiberglass, bamboo or equal material, stored within 15 feet of the
swimming pool's interior edge. The rescue pole shall be in length at
least 1/2 of the swimming pool's diameter, depending on the type of
the pool.
(2) All swimming pools must have a ring buoy with at least 25 feet of
attached rope or cord prominently stored within 10 feet of the
pool's interior edge. The type of ring buoy must meet the
specifications as set forth by the National Swimming Pool Institute
or the American Red Cross.
E. The Superintendent of Building or Commissioner of Public Works shall
pass upon the safety and adequacy of the design, materials,
construction and equipment of all swimming pools. In doing so, they
may be guided by the Minimum Standards for Residential Pools of the
National Swimming Pool Institute.
F. No part of the pool structure, with the exception of deck fencing, shall
project more than 4 1/2 feet above the surrounding existing grade
except by special permit.
G. Where applicable, all plumbing must conform to the plumbing
regulations of the Town of Gates. If connections are to be made to a
public water or storm sewer, work must be done under the supervision
of a licensed plumber.
A. Water supply. There shall be no fixed or direct connection to any
nonpotable water supply.
B. Drainage.
(1) There shall be no drainage connection to a sanitary sewer.
(2) It must be possible to drain all pools into a storm sewer or a natural
waterway, either by gravity, syphon or through the filter-pump
system.
(3) There shall be no drainage over adjoining property without
permission or consent of owners.
§ 164-5 GATES CODE § 164-7
164:306
§ 164-8. Lighting and electrical work.
§ 164-9. Maintenance.
Every swimming pool presently constructed or installed or hereafter
constructed or installed shall be maintained at all times in such manner as
A. Every in-ground swimming pool shall be entirely encircled by a fence,
which fence shall comply with the requirements as set forth in
Subsection D.
B. Every aboveground swimming pool having all or any section of its
exterior wall less than 3 1/2 feet, measured in a vertical line from the
top of the exterior wall to the ground level, shall be entirely encircled by
a fence.
C. Every aboveground swimming pool having an exterior wall 3 1/2 feet or
more above the ground using an entrance device other than a safety
ladder for entrance and exit to the pool or its surrounding deck or
platform shall have a fence encircling the entrance device at least five
feet from the point where such permanent ladder or entrance device
touches the ground or would touch the ground if extended downward.
D. The fence shall be at least four feet in height and not more than six feet
in height. The fence shall be of rigid construction and not be easily
climbed or crawled under. The fence shall have a gate capable of being
locked when unattended.
E. Portions of exterior walls of the structures on the property or lot line
fences may be used for these fencing requirements.
F. An aboveground swimming pool with a deck must have a fence of at
least 30 inches, but not to exceed four feet in height on the outside edge
of the deck.
G. The use of a safety ladder as an entrance device is required for an
aboveground swimming pool, but it must be removed and stored when
the swimming pool is unattended.
A. All lighting and electrical work shall conform to the Electrical Code of
the State of New York and be inspected and approved by an inspection
agency approved by the town. Also, all underground-wiring lighting
shall be of low voltage. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
B. No lighting shall be installed in such a manner that it may be an
annoyance to the owners of adjacent property. Under normal
circumstances, floodlighting, the illumination of adjacent property,
among other things, will be sufficient to constitute an annoyance.
C. No pool shall be erected within 10 feet of existing electrical service
lines, nor shall electrical lines be strung over the water surface nor
within four feet of the outer edge of the pool.
§ 164-7 SWIMMING POOLS § 164-9
164:307
never to constitute a public nuisance, a hazard or a menace to health or
safety. Any such hazard which may exist or develop in or in consequence
of or in connection with any such swimming pool shall be forthwith abated
and/or removed by the person in possession, owning or having jurisdiction
over such pool, upon receipt of notice from the Department of Public Works.
§ 164-10. Reasonable use.
Use of a swimming pool shall be in a reasonable manner and at reasonable
times so as not to cause undue discomfort and/or annoyance to adjacent
residents
§ 164-11. Existing pools.
§ 164-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
A person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter or who fails to
comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order
or regulation made thereunder shall be subject to a maximum fine of
$250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 166
TAXATION
A. All sections of this chapter shall apply to existing pools except
§§ 164-3A, 164-4, 164-5E, 164-5G and 164-8.
B. Existing pool owners shall have 30 days after this chapter becomes
effective to comply with § 164-5D.
C. Existing pool owners shall have 120 days after this chapter becomes
effective to comply with § 164-7.
§ 164-9 GATES CODE § 164-12
164:308
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 11-21-1966]
§ 166-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Gates, ever mindful of its responsibilities
and obligations to provide for the welfare and financial independence of the
senior citizens of this community, intends, by the enactment of this article,
to provide for the protection of the elderly low-income homeowner from
the increased cost of living. It is the intention of the Town Board of the
Town of Gates to provide tax exemptions of real property to a certain of
our qualifying senior citizens so as to better enable them to enjoy their
retirement.
§ 166-2. Property exempt. [Amended 11-6-1974]
All real property in the Town of Gates owned by one or more persons, each
of whom is 65 years of age or older or, in the case of a husband and wife,
one of whom is 65 years of age or older, shall be exempt to the extent of
50% of the assessed value as shown on the assessment roll, provided that
the requirements set forth in § 166-3 below are complied with.
§ 166-3. Statutory qualifications. [Amended 9-21-1970; 9-5-1972;
11-6-1974]
In order to qualify for an exemption, the following requirements must be
met by the applicant:
A. Title to the real property shall have been vested in the owner or one of
the owners of the property for at least 12 consecutive months prior to
the date of making application for the exemption. [Amended 2-5-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
B. Commencing with assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable
status dates occurring on or after January 1, 1987, the income of the
owner or the combined income of the owners or, where the title to the
property is vested in either the husband or wife, the combined income
of the husband and wife for the income tax year immediately preceding
the date of making application for the exemption shall not exceed the
income limits herein set forth, together with the applicable percentage
of assessed valuation:17 [Amended last 2-5-2007 by Res. No. 70-07]
C. The property is used exclusively for residential purposes and is the
legal residence and is occupied in whole or in part by the owner or by
all of the owners of the property.
D. In addition to the requirements of this article and the amendments
thereto, the applicant for an exemption shall meet all the other
17.Editor's Note: Current income limits are on file in the Assessor's office.
§ 166-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-3
164:309
§ 166-4. Application for exemption. [Amended 11-6-1985 by L.L. No.
4-1985]
§ 166-5. Amount of exemption.
Upon the determination by the Assessor that the requirements of this article
have been met, the exemption shall be allowed in the amount of 50% of
assessed value of the property which so qualifies. The exemption does not
apply to special ad valorem or special assessments.
§ 166-6. Burden of proof.
The burden of proof is upon the applicant to show eligibility pursuant to this
article.
§ 166-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any conviction of having any willful, false statement in the application for
exemption under this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$100 and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption
for a period of five years.
§ 166-7.5. Amendments. [Added 2-5-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
The Town Board may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this article in any manner prescribed by the provisions
of the Town Law, the Municipal Home Rule Law, the General Municipal
Law and the Real Property Tax Law of New York State applicable thereto,
including, but not limited to, by Town Board resolution.
requirements and conditions as may be set forth in § 467 of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, as amended.
A. An application for exemption, pursuant to this article, must be made by
the owner or all of the owners of the property on forms furnished by the
Town Assessor's office, and the application must be filed in the
Assessor's office at least 90 days before the date for filing the final
assessment roll. An application for such an exemption by the owner or
owners must be filed annually. An application for renewal of exemption,
granted pursuant to Real Property Tax Law §§ 467 and/or 467-d,18 may
be filed on or before the date for the hearing of complaints in the Town
of Gates. The Assessor or Assessors of the Town of Gates are authorized
to accept such renewal applications.
B. The Town Board approves the amendment to the Real Property Tax Law
permitting late aged exemption applications to be filed after the taxable
status date (March 1) due to a hardship condition. [Added 1-4-1993]
18.Editor's Note: Former § 467-d of the Real Property Tax Law was repealed by L. 1985, c.
440, § 3, effective January 2, 1986. See now Real Property Tax Law § 467.
§ 166-3 GATES CODE § 166-7.5
164:310
ARTICLE II
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 4-22-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
§ 166-8. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Alternative Veterans Exemption Law of
the Town of Gates."
§ 166-9. Purpose and intent. [Amended 10-3-2005 by Res. No.
212-05; 1-5-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
§ 166-10. Provisions adopted by reference.
All applicable provisions of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of New
York State, including all subsections, together with any and all appropriate
amendments thereto, are hereby approved and adopted as and for law and
procedures of the Town of Gates except where provisions of this article
or any other local law or ordinance of the Town of Gates shall prescribe
differently. In such event, compliance with the provisions of such local law
or ordinance shall constitute proper compliance with this article.
§ 166-11. Maximum exemption granted. [Amended 10-3-2005 by
Res. No. 212-05]
The Assessor of the Town of Gates is hereby directed to increase the
maximum exemption allowable for the alternative veterans exemption
under § 458-a, Subdivisions 2(a), 2(b) and 2(c), of the Real Property Tax
Law of New York State to $36,000, $24,000 and $120,000, respectively,
and to make appropriate adjustments to all alternative exemptions on the
assessment roll of the Town of Gates to accurately reflect said increase.
§ 166-12. Amendments.
The Town Board may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this article in any manner prescribed by the provisions of
the Town Law, the General Municipal Law and the Real Property Tax Law
of New York State applicable thereto, including, but not limited to, by Town
Board resolution.
A. It is the purpose and intent of this article to implement legislation which
increases the maximum exemption allowable for the alternative
veterans exemptions, as set forth by the Real Property Tax Law of New
York State, § 458-a, Subdivisions 2(a), (b) and (c), to $36,000, $24,000
and $120,000, respectively.
B. For the purposes of this section, real property owned by a Gold Star
Parent (as defined by New York State Department of Taxation) shall be
deemed a qualifying residence and a Gold Star Parent shall be deemed
a qualified owner for the purposes of eligibility for the alternative
veterans exemption.
§ 166-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-13
164:311
§ 166-13. When effective; applicability.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the Secretary
of State and shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable
status dates occurring on or after January 1, 1997.
§ 166-13 GATES CODE § 166-13
164:312
ARTICLE III
Exemption for Persons With Disabilities and Limited Incomes
[Adopted 2-2-1998; amended in its entirety 2-5-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
§ 166-14. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Town Board of the Town of Gates by the enactment of
this article to provide for the protection of low-income disabled homeowners
living within the Town of Gates. It is the intention of the Town Board of
the Town of Gates to provide tax exemptions of real property to certain
of our qualifying senior citizens so as to better enable them to enjoy their
retirement.
§ 166-15. Property exempt.
All real property in the Town of Gates owned by one or more persons, each
of whom is disabled, or, in the case of a husband and wife, one of whom is
disabled, shall be exempt as to the extent provided by New York State Real
Property Tax Law § 459-c.
§ 166-16. Statutory qualifications.
In order to qualify for an exemption, the following requirements must be
met by the applicant:
A. Title to the real property shall have been vested in the owner or one of
the owners of the property for at least 12 consecutive months prior to
the date of making application for exemption.
B. The entitled amount of exemption commencing with assessment rolls
prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after
January 1, 2001. The income of the owner or the combined income of
the owners, or, where the title of the property is vested in either the
husband and wife, the combined income of the husband and wife for the
income tax year immediately preceding the date of making application
for the exemption shall not exceed the income limits herein set forth
together with the applicable percentage of assessed valuation.19
[Amended 10-7-2002 by Res. No. 259-02; 2-5-2007 by Res. No.
70-07]
C. The property is used exclusively for residential purposes and is the
legal residence and is occupied in whole or in part by the owner or by
all of the owners of the property.
19.Editor's Note: Current income limits are on file in the Assessor's office.
§ 166-14 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-17
164:313
§ 166-17. Application for exemption.
An application for exemption pursuant to this article must be made by
the owner or all owners of the property in compliance with all of the
requirements of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 166-18. Amendments.
The Town Board may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this article in any manner prescribed by the provisions
of the Town Law, the Municipal Home Rule Law, the General Municipal
Law and the Real Property Tax Law of New York State applicable thereto,
including, but not limited to, by Town Board resolution.
§ 166-17 GATES CODE § 166-18
164:314
ARTICLE IV
Partial Exemption for Living Quarters for Parent or Grandparent
[Adopted 2-5-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 166-19. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Parent or Grandparent Living Quarters
Tax Exemption Law of the Town of Gates."
§ 166-20. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to implement § 469 of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York to direct the Town Assessor
to provide for an exemption from taxation to the extent of any increase in
assessed value of residential property resulting from the construction or
reconstruction of such property for the purpose of providing living quarters
for a parent or grandparent who is 62 years of age or older.
§ 166-21. Qualifications for exemption.
The exemption shall be granted upon the following conditions:
§ 166-22. Application.
An exemption from taxation based on this article shall be granted upon an
application made annually upon a form to be obtained from the Assessor's
office.
§ 166-23. Amendments.
The Town Board may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this article in any manner prescribed by the provisions
of the Town Law, the Municipal Home Rule Law, the General Municipal
Law and the Real Property Tax Law of New York State applicable thereto,
including, but not limited to, by Town Board resolution.
A. The property is located within the Town of Gates.
B. The residential property so constructed or reconstructed is the
principal place of residence of the owner.
C. The construction shall have occurred subsequent to August 30, 2000.
D. The parent or grandparent who is 62 years of age or older will reside in
the premises.
§ 166-19 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-23
164:315

ARTICLE V
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Resolution No. 297-07, adopted 12-3-2007, authorized a real
property tax exemption for Cold War veterans in the Town of Gates.
Consult municipal records for the amount of the exemption.]
§ 166-24. (Reserved)
§ 166-24 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-24
164:317

ARTICLE VI
Home Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 2-3-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
§ 166-25. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Home
Improvement Tax Exemption Law of the Town of Gates."
§ 166-26. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide a partial exemption from taxation
imposed by the Town of Gates upon real property situated in the Town of
Gates where there would be an increase in the assessed value attributable
to reconstruction, alterations or improvements made to residential property,
pursuant to the authority vested in the Town by § 421-f of the Real Property
Tax Law of the State of New York, as amended or changed.
§ 166-27. Incorporation of statute.
Provisions of § 421-f of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York,
as amended or changed, through the effective date of this article, together
with any further acts of the legislature amendatory thereof or supplemental
thereto, shall apply to and govern the determination of the exemption of
taxation permitted by this article to the extent specified in this article as if
such § 421-f had been more particularly set forth herein and as the same
may be determined from time to time by Town Board resolution.
§ 166-28. Qualifications for exemption.
The exemption shall be granted upon the following conditions:
A. To be eligible for the exemption authorized by such § 421-f and
implemented by this article, the following criteria must be met:
(1) The property for which exemption is sought must be a one- or twofamily
residence.
(2) The greater portion of the residence (as measured by square
footage) after the capital improvement must be at least five years
old.
(3) The capital improvement must be commenced after the date this
article is enacted.
(4) The initial exemption percentage will be received only after the
certificate of occupancy is obtained.
(5) Unless limited by this article, the exemption applies to
reconstruction, alterations or improvements; it does not apply to
ordinary maintenance or repairs, only to any additional value
attributable to new construction.
§ 166-25 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-28
164:319
§ 166-29. Termination of exemption.
Although the exemption normally ends after five years, it will end sooner if
the property is sold within the exemption period. If the property is sold, the
exemption is not transferable to the new buyer. The exemption will end the
day the house is sold, and the new owner will be required to pay the taxes
which would have been exempted through the end of the Town's tax year
(December 31).
§ 166-30. Amendments.
The Town Board may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this article in any manner prescribed by the provisions
of the Town Law, the Municipal Home Rule Law, the General Municipal
Law and the Real Property Tax Law of New York State applicable thereto,
including, but not limited to, by Town Board resolution.
(6) The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement must
exceed the sum of $3,000 and is limited to $50,000 in increased
market value.
B. The value of an improvement qualifying for exemption should receive
the following exemption percentages for a total of a five-year period:
Year Exemption Percentage
1 100%
2 80%
3 60%
4 40%
5 20%
§ 166-28 GATES CODE § 166-30
164:320
ARTICLE VII
Tax Grievance Day
[Adopted 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 3-201720]
§ 166-31. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Tax Grievance
Day Law of the Town of Gates."
§ 166-32. Tax Grievance Day restored.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Gates did heretofore adopt Local Law
No. 2 of the year 2014, which local law amended the first date on which
the Gates Board of Assessment Review meets, commonly known as “Tax
Grievance Day,” to the first Tuesday in June of each year.
B. Pursuant to § 512(1)(a) of the Real Property Tax Law, such previous
local law, as adopted by the Town Board of the Town of Gates, is now
rescinded and that “Tax Grievance Day” is restored and shall hereafter
be the fourth Tuesday in May of each year.
20.Editor’s Note: This local law also repealed former Article VII, Tax Grievance Day, adopted
3-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014.
§ 166-31 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-32
164:321
Chapter 172
TENTS AND AWNINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals and outdoor entertainment — See
Ch. 76.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 134.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 140.
§ 172-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Regulating the Use of Tents and Awnings."
§ 172-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the use of tents and awnings
for the assembly of people, displaying of wares or for any other purpose
and prohibiting the use of any property or other premises for the aforesaid
purposes which do not comply with such regulations.
§ 172-3. Permit required. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
No person, firm or corporation shall erect or install a tent or awning
covering an area greater than 120 square feet without obtaining a permit
therefor.
§ 172-4. Application for permit.
The application for each permit shall be in writing and signed by the owner
or occupant of the premises. It shall state:
§ 172-5. Regulations.
All tents and awnings erected on any premises shall be subject to the
following regulations:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of each owner of the premises.
C. A description of the premises sufficient to readily identify the same.
D. A statement setting forth the type of proposed structure to be erected,
tent or awning, the size, the location on the property, the use to which it
is to be put and the number of people expected to visit the premises.
E. Proof that the material used for the tent or awning is flameproof.
F. The length of time said awning or tent is to remain on said premises.
§ 166-32 GATES CODE § 172-5
164:322
§ 172-6. Issuance of permit. [Amended 7-1-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
Upon approval of the Fire Marshal and the filing of prerequisites, the Fire
Marshal shall issue a permit; any permit so issued shall be effective from
and after the date of issuance and shall expire two weeks thereafter. All
permits shall expire on the expiration date thereof unless, for good cause
shown, the time is extended by the Fire Marshal.
§ 172-7. Permit fee. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
Before the issuance of a permit the applicant shall pay the Town Clerk a fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 172-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine of not more than $250
or to imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment; and, in addition, the violation of this chapter or any of the
provisions thereof shall subject the person, firm or corporation violating
the same to a civil penalty in the sum of $50 to be recovered by the Town
of Gates in a civil action. When a violation of this chapter or any of the
provisions thereof is continuous, each 24 hours thereof shall constitute a
separate, distinct and additional violation.
Chapter 176
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
A. 21The design, construction, flameproofing, location, maintenance and
use of tents and awnings shall be approved by the Fire Marshal of the
Town of Gates by written consent thereof.
21.Editor's Note: Former Subsections A and B, regarding fire watchers, were repealed
9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999.
§ 172-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 172-8
164:323

ARTICLE I
Speed Limits
[Adopted 5-4-1964 by L.L. No. 1-1964]
§ 176-1. Maximum speed on town highways.
Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which
vehicles may proceed within the boundaries of the Town of Gates on all town
highways.
§ 176-2. Maximum speed on county highways. [Amended 7-15-1968
by L.L. No. 1-1968; 2-17-1969 by L.L. No. 1-1969; 5-3-2010 by L.L.
No. 2-2010]
The following is hereby established as the maximum speeds at which
vehicles may proceed within the boundaries of the Town of Gates on all
county highways:
§ 176-3. Speed control signs.
All presently located signs posting speed limits on town and county
highways established by the State Traffic Commission prior to January 1,
1964, shall be retained where located except for the deletion of that portion
of the sign bearing the name "State Traffic Commission."
A. Thirty-five miles per hour:
Beahan Road
Coldwater Road
Elmgrove Road from Spencerport Road south to Lyell Road
Hinchey Road
Lee Road
Long Pond Road
Pixley Road
Wegman Road
West Side Drive
Trolley Boulevard
Lyell Road
B. Forty miles per hour:
Elmgrove Road from Lyell Road to Buffalo Road
Manitou Road from Buffalo Road north to the Gates Town Line
§ 176-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 176-3
164:325
Chapter 179
VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping and littering — See Ch. 83. Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 155, Part 1.
§ 179-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Junked and Abandoned Motor Vehicle
Ordinance of the Town of Gates."
§ 179-2. Purpose.
The storage of junk motor vehicles and the abandonment of motor vehicles
on privately owned property within the Town of Gates is a threat to the
health, safety and general welfare of the community. Junked and abandoned
vehicles are a safety hazard to members of the community and especially
younger children. These vehicles oftentimes are replete with broken glass,
gasoline fumes and gasoline still existing in tanks, and harmful acids which
can cause injury. Such vehicles are unsightly and depreciate the property on
which they are located as well as the property in the community in general.
They destroy the aesthetic quality of the town as a whole and constitute the
town a less safe and pleasant place in which to live and do business. The
control of the storage of junked motor vehicles outdoors on privately owned
property as well as abandoned vehicles on privately owned property is
therefore a necessity for the preservation for the health, safety and welfare
of the community. The intent of this chapter is to establish procedures for
the control and the removal of junked and abandoned motor vehicles found
in the town in violation of this chapter.
§ 179-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Building Inspector of the town unless
the Town Board, by resolution, designates some other town officer as
enforcement officer.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE —
Any motor vehicle that:
Is unlicensed, old, wrecked, stored, discarded, abandoned or
dismantled or partly dismantled, which is not intended or in any
condition for legal use upon the public highway.
(1)
A.
§ 176-3 GATES CODE § 179-3
179:326
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle originally designed and intended to be
operated, drawn or driven, or capable of being operated, drawn or driven,
on a public highway by any power other than muscular power.
OWNER OF MOTOR VEHICLE — A person, firm or corporation having the
property in or title to a motor vehicle, including a person entitled to the use
and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person,
and also including any lessee or bailee of a motor vehicle having the use
thereof under lease or otherwise.
OWNER OF PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any person, firm, partnership or
corporation, whether business or membership, or religious, charitable or
otherwise, any purchaser, tenant, lessee, occupant, undertenant, receiver or
assignee of private premises or private property or any other unit or entity
owning real property in the Town of Gates.
PREMISES or PROPERTY — Includes all parcels of privately owned real
property located within the boundaries of the Town of Gates, whether
occupied or vacant, irrespective of size or topography.
§ 179-4. Outdoor storage on private property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Town of Gates to store or
deposit, or cause, suffer or permit to be stored or deposited, a junked
vehicle or part or piece thereof on any private property within the Town of
Gates unless:
Is being held or used for the purpose of resale of used parts
therefrom or for purposes of reclaiming for use some or all of the
materials therein for the purpose of disposing of the same.
(2)
Is in such condition as to cost more to repair and place in operating
condition than its reasonable market value at that time before such
repair.
(3)
With respect to any motor vehicle not required to be licensed or motor
vehicle not usually used on public highways, the fact that such motor
vehicle has remained unused for more than six months and is not in
condition to be removed under its own power shall be presumptive
evidence that such motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle.
B.
The fact that a motor vehicle may be licensed or registered with the
State of New York, but does not display a current license plate, shall be
presumptive evidence that such motor vehicle is unlicensed.
C.
The use of the term in the singular herein is intended, where applicable,
to include the plural.
D.
A. Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited in a completely enclosed
building.
B. Such motor vehicle is under repair, reconstruction or refurbishing by
the owners thereof who must actually be residing on the premises. Not
more than one such motor vehicle shall be permitted at any one time on
§ 179-3 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 179-4
179:327
§ 179-5. Removal procedure.
Any junked motor vehicle, as defined herein, may be removed from the
premises on which it is located by the Town of Gates in the manner
hereinafter provided:
§ 179-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
A violation of this chapter or any provision or part thereof by any person,
firm or corporation is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable by a fine
not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both
such fine and imprisonment. A violation of this chapter shall also subject
the violator to a civil penalty of the greater of $50 per separate violation,
or the town's costs of inspection, service of notice, removal, towing and
permanently disposing of such vehicle, less any penal monetary fine which
may have been imposed. Any person who shall resist or obstruct the duly
authorized agents, servants, officers and employees of the Town of Gates
or other duly authorized law enforcement officers in removal and disposal
of motor vehicles, as provided in this chapter, shall be in violation of this
chapter and subject to the fines and penalties provided herein. Each day's
continued violation shall constitute a separate and additional offense. For
the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers
generally, violations of this chapter or any provisions or parts thereof shall
any premises. Such motor vehicle must be so maintained and protected
as to not create any safety hazard or nuisance to surrounding property
owners, and shall not remain on the premises more than 90 days.
C. Such motor vehicle is temporarily stored on the premises of a duly
authorized motor vehicle service station or a body repair shop within
the town or is the inventory or part of the inventory of a new or used
motor vehicle dealer or a duly licensed junk dealer located in
compliance with the laws and ordinances of the Town of Gates.
A. The enforcement officer upon detecting a junked car shall serve written
notice on the person owning the premises on which the same is located,
ordering such person to remove the same or cause the same to be
removed therefrom within 10 days of the date of said service. The
enforcement officer may determine ownership of any parcel of land in
the Town of Gates from the current assessment roll.
B. In the event that said junked motor vehicle or vehicles are not removed
from the premises within the time required in the notice, the Town of
Gates shall have the right to enter upon the premises and to remove
and dispose of the junked motor vehicle or vehicles. The expense of
such removal and disposal shall be a lawful charge against the owner
and occupant of the premises and may be collected, if necessary, in a
civil action instituted in the name of the town or in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 179-4 GATES CODE § 179-6
179:328
be deemed misdemeanors, and for such purpose only all provisions of law
relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violation.
§ 179-7. Removal of violations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Town of Gates may
serve such notices and do such other and further things as set forth in
§ 179-5 hereof, and may at the same time or at any other time, without prior
notice, proceed under § 179-6 concerning the imposition of penalties.
§ 179-8. Legislative authority.
The provisions of § 1224 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York shall govern removal and disposition of abandoned motor vehicles.
Chapter 190
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 70.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 120.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 161.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 164.
§ 179-6 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 179-8
179:329

ARTICLE I
Introductory Provisions
§ 190-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Gates Zoning Ordinance of
1975."
§ 190-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article 16 of the Town Law of the State
of New York.
§ 190-3. Purposes and objectives.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage appropriate and orderly
physical development; promote in all possible ways public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare; classify, designate and
regulate the location and use of buildings, structures and land for
agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial or other uses in
appropriate places; and for said purpose, to divide the Town of Gates
into districts of such number, shape and areas as may be deemed best
suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement.
B. The objectives of this chapter are to conserve and stabilize the value of
property; provide adequate open space for light and air; provide
desired levels of population density; secure safety from fire, flood, panic
and other dangers; provide assurance of opportunities for effective
utilization of land; provide adequate community and public utility
facilities; provide workable relationships of land uses to the
transportation system and lessen congestion in the streets.
C. The regulations contained in this chapter have been developed in
accordance with a Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Gates and have
been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, as to
the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular
uses.
§ 190-1 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-3
179:331

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 190-4. Word usage.
As used in this chapter, the following shall apply:
§ 190-5. Definitions.
Unless the context of this chapter otherwise requires, the following
definitions of words and phrases shall be used in the interpretation and
construction of this chapter:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A structure or use incidental and
subordinate to the principal structure or use on the same lot.
AGENT — For purposes of the Airport Overlay District, airport manager,
airport engineer or person or persons in charge of the airport.
AGRICULTURE OR FARMING — The use of the land for agricultural
purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, apiaries and animal and poultry husbandry, and the
necessary accessory uses for storing produce; provided, however, that the
operation of any such accessory use shall be incidental to that of normal
agricultural activities, and provided further that the above uses shall not
include the operation of a feed lot or other commercial feeding of animals
or the manufacturing or processing of agricultural products as a principal
use.
AIRPORT DISTRICT or FLIGHT HAZARD AREA (as certified August 5,
1949, by the Federal Civil Aeronautics Administration) — The area of land
surrounding the airport, upon which an airport hazard might be established.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure, building, tower, pole, wire, tree or
other thing, or portion thereof, or use of land which obstructs the air space
required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport, or is
otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
A. The masculine includes the feminine, the singular includes the plural
and the present tense includes the future tense.
B. The word "person" includes an individual, firm or corporation.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
D. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
E. The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied."
F. Any reference to a residence or residential district shall be interpreted
to mean any district with the word "residence" in its title.
G. A building or structure includes any part thereof.
§ 190-4 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-5
179:333
ALLEY — A public or private way not more than 30 feet wide affording only
secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERED — A building renovation that causes an overall change in
character, area, or composition. Refer to the "structurally altered" definition
in this section for additional information.[Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are given medical
or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.
Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only
incidental to such hospital use.
APPURTENANT ACTIVITIES — For the purposes of excavations, all onsite
operations involved in the treatment, processing or further fabrication
of soil, sand, gravel or natural deposits, including washing, sedimentation
ponds, grading, sorting, grinding operations, concrete batching plants,
asphalt mixing plants and aggregate dryers.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly below grade level
and that has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling,
above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
BUFFER AREA — An area bordering the zoning district boundary between
any two zoning districts and designated by the Planning Board as an area
reserved for plantings, fencing, and/or other similar screening devices for
the purpose of creating a transition area wherein adjoining uses do not
detract from one another.[Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons or animals.
BUILDING LOT COVERAGE — The aggregate area of the lot, expressed as
a percentage, covered by the principal buildings or structures, plus each
accessory building or structure measured at the foundation line.[Added
5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
CELLAR — A story whose floor level is more than 1/2 of its story height
below the average level of the surrounding ground.
CLUB — A membership recreational building, but not including a club the
chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business.
COMMON AREA — Space reserved for use by any and all residents of
a housing development, including but not limited to halls, stairways and
landings in apartment houses.
CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION — A use which:
Is carried on wholly within the enclosed walls of the principal building
exclusive of accessory structures and does not use more than 25% of
the floor area.
A.
Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit.
The business shall have no employee who is not a resident of the
dwelling unit. [Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
B.
§ 190-5 GATES CODE § 190-5
179:334
DILIGENTLY PROSECUTED — A valid building permit has been issued and
construction of the principal building is underway.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed or used as the
residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.
DWELLING GROUP — A group of three or more dwelling units located on a
parcel of land in one ownership and having any yard or court in common.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping unit for ownership or lease or rent, designed for
occupancy by one family and physically independent of any other group of
Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes. There shall be no exterior evidence that the
building, structure, or premises is being used for any purpose other
than as a residential dwelling such as artificial lighting, advertisements,
signs, displays, exterior storage of materials or goods or similar such
conduct. [Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
C.
Shall not generate traffic beyond that normally expected in a residential
neighborhood. Any need for parking generated by such use shall be
provided in an off-street area, other than in a front yard.
D.
Shall not create noise, dust, vibration, odor, glare, fumes or electrical
interference detectable by the normal senses of persons off the
premises. In the case of electrical interference, there shall be no radio
or television disruptions or fluctuations in line voltages off the
premises.
E.
There shall be no commercial delivery of goods or stock-in-trade to, or
from, the premises and no goods, commodities, or stock-in-trade may
be sold on the premises. [Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
F.
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed or used
for residence purposes by not more than one family, containing one
dwelling unit only.
A.
DWELLING UNIT, TWO-FAMILY, or DUPLEX — A building designed
or used for residence purposes by not more than two families, and
containing two dwelling units which may be attached side by side and
which individually meet the floor area requirements established for
single-family dwellings.
B.
DWELLING UNIT, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof
designed to be used as a residence by three or more families and
containing three or more dwelling units.
C.
IN-LAW AREA/APARTMENT — A residential accessory use that is
located in a one-family dwelling, is clearly incidental, secondary, or
subordinate to the primary one-family residential use; and is occupied
by a resident member of the family that resides in such dwelling, or by
an in-law of such family. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
D.
§ 190-5 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-5
179:335
rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing
independent cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EFFICIENCY APARTMENT — One room, plus bath facilities, which room
also contains facilities for sleeping, cooking, eating and living purposes and
is occupied by not more than two persons.[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
EXCAVATION — The removal of soil, sand, gravel or other natural deposits
by excavating, stripping or other means for the principal purpose of
marketing these deposits. It does not include excavation primarily for
purposes other than those of marketing natural deposits, such as for
grading an approved subdivision, for constructing housing or other
structures or for laying out public utilities, pipes or mains, all of which
require building or other permits before commencement of work.
FAA — The Federal Aeronautics Administration or its successor.
FAMILY —
Includes: [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999; 5-6-2019 by L.L.
No. 1-2019]
(1) One, two, or three persons occupying a dwelling unit; or
Four or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living together
as a traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional
family.
(2)
A.
It shall be presumptive evidence that four or more persons living in a
single dwelling unit who are not related by blood, marriage, or legal
adoption do not constitute the functional equivalent of a traditional
family.
B.
In determining whether individuals are living together as the functional
equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria must be present:
The group is one which, in theory, size, appearance, structure and
function resembles a traditional family unit.
(1)
The occupants must share the entire dwelling unit and live and
cook together as a single housekeeping unit. A unit in which the
various occupants act as separate roomers may not be deemed to
be occupied by the functional equivalent of a traditional family.
(2)
The group shares expenses for food, rent, or ownership costs,
utilities and other household expenses.
(3)
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such permanency
and stability may include:
The presence of minor dependent children regularly residing
in the household who are enrolled in a local school.
(a)
(4)
C.
§ 190-5 GATES CODE § 190-5
179:336
FENCE — Any freestanding wall or structure located in buffer areas, as
required by this chapter, or along lot lines, as permitted in this chapter, and
made of wood, metal, wire, concrete or other material.
FENCE, CLOSED — Any type of fence where the ratio of transparent area
to opaque area is less than 3 to 1.
FENCE, DECORATIVE — Any fence made of decorative or ornamental
material such as split rail, redwood, pine and the like, excluding, however,
materials such as steel, wire, wire mesh, chicken wire, chain-link, concrete
and the like.
FENCE, OPEN — Any type of fence where the ratio of transparent area to
opaque area is 3 to 1 or greater.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The highest level of flood that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year). "Flood, one-hundred-year" is analogous to
the one-hundred-year floodplain.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of
streams, rivers or other inland areas of water.
FLOODPLAIN AREA HAVING SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARDS — That
maximum area of the floodplain that, on the average, is likely to be flooded
once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of being flooded
each year).
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-control works, and land
use and control measures.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREAS — A land area adjoining a river,
stream or watercourse, which area is likely to be flooded.
Members of the household having the same address for the
purpose of voter registration, driver's license, motor vehicle
registration and filing of taxes.
(b)
(c) Members of the household are employed in the area.
The household has been living together as a unit for a year or
more, whether in the current dwelling unit or other dwelling
units.
(d)
Common ownership of the furniture and appliances among the
members of the household.
(e)
(f) The group is not transient or temporary in nature.
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the group is
the functional equivalent of a family.
(5)
§ 190-5 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-5
179:337
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures which
reduces or eliminates flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and contents of buildings.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas required to carry and discharge a flood of a given magnitude.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floors of a building,
excluding unenclosed or unheated porches, basement areas and garages,
measured from the interior face of the exterior walls.
FRONTAGE — That portion of a parcel of property which abuts a street or
highway.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Buildings and premises used for the
conduct of a business, the primary purpose of which is the selling and
dispensing at retail of gasoline and other motor fuel, grease, oil, automobile
accessories, and the servicing of motor vehicles including the greasing,
oiling and minor repairs to such vehicles. Excluded from the use of such
premises are the following: major mechanical and body work, welding,
painting, open storage of unlicensed or junk vehicles and the storage of
parts and accessories, except when stored in an enclosed building.
GRADE LEVEL — The final grade level of the ground at the front line of the
building.
GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA — The total floor area designed for
nonresidential tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements,
mezzanines and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured
from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. It is the
area which the tenant pays rent on and is exclusive of the common mall or
gathering areas between stores.
HEDGE — Any type of bush, plant or other natural growth which serves or
can serve the same purpose as a fence.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance from grade plane to the
average height of the highest roof surface.[Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L.
No. 1-2019]
INTERIOR PROJECT ROAD — A road wholly within a project or
development, whether dedicated or not, which is designed solely to provide
access to the residences, lots or development therein.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used for the
collecting, storage or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
material; or the collecting, dismantling, storage, processing or salvaging
of machinery or vehicles not in running condition or for the sale of parts
thereof, all when operated as a business on a site where an employee is
in attendance for the entire working day to receive deliveries and to be
responsible for ensuring that materials brought to the site are stored in a
manner that will not result in any sort of a nuisance to property or persons
of the site.
§ 190-5 GATES CODE § 190-5
179:338
LOT — A parcel of land under separate ownership or parcel, as designated
on a plot plan recorded in the Monroe County Clerk's office.
LOT AREA — The computed area contained within the lot lines, said area to
be exclusive of street or alley rights-of-way or future rights-of-way, if such
have been determined.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or portion of a lot at the junction of and abutting on
two intersecting streets.
LOT DEPTH — The distance between the midpoints of straight lines
connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost
points of the side lot lines in the rear.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot other than a corner lot fronting on two streets or
upon a street and a right-of-way of more than 25 feet in width.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between straight lines connecting front and
rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the front
yard.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, Town or village and the County of Monroe.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of land or of a building or structure,
which use lawfully existed at the time of the adoption of this chapter or
of any amendment thereto, but which use does not conform to the use
regulations imposed by this chapter or such amendments thereto.
NURSING CARE HOME — Any place or institution for the aged, infirm,
senile, chronic or convalescent, established to render, for compensation,
domiciliary care, custody, treatment and/or lodging of two or more persons
who require or receive special diet; assistance in feeding, dressing, walking,
administering medicines or carrying out the treatment of a doctor licensed
by the State of New York in any other ordinary daily activities of life; or are
confined to bed or a chair. This item does not include institutions for the
treatment of the mentally ill, hospitals, sanitariums, boardinghouses and
the like.
OPEN SPACE — Area unoccupied by any building, structure or parking
area, whether paved or unpaved, and shall be exclusive of any required yard
areas.
PARKING SPACE — A permanently surfaced and marked area for the
parking of a motor vehicle.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
trustee, receiver or assignee or person acting in any other representative
capacity.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Gates, New York.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of any activity or service licensed
pursuant to the provisions of the Education Law of the State of New York.
PUBLIC BUILDING AND GROUNDS — Any one or more of the following
uses, including grounds necessary for their use and accessory buildings:
§ 190-5 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-5
179:339
RESERVATION FOR HIGHWAY PURPOSES — A strip of land between the
existing right-of-way line and the future right-of-way line of a highway
as determined by the agency having jurisdictional responsibility over the
maintenance and construction of the highway.
RESTAURANT — A permanent building used for the serving of meals, where
customers are seated principally at a table and are waited on when seated;
where a full line of meals is offered; where the main portions of the meals
are not precooked, prepackaged or prepared in any manner such as this,
in anticipation of customers; and further where, under proper authority,
alcoholic beverages may be served; and where the meal is not customarily
or occasionally eaten in vehicles.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant where patrons are not
customarily served at tables or sit-down counters; where all or a portion
of the food is prepared and wrapped, boxed, bagged or prepackaged or is
prepared in a manner in anticipation of customers; and where the customer
places an order at a common counter by waiting in line or by being served
through a sequential number system and consumes the food at tables
provided in or adjacent to the building or in vehicles on-site or elsewhere.
Such uses as soft drink parlors, ice cream and/or hot dog stands and the like
shall be considered to be in this general classification.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR HIGHWAY LINE — The line, present or proposed, which
is the joint boundary line between a lot and the street or highway right-ofway.
SETBACK — The minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point
or line of reference, such as a street right-of-way or property line, to
the nearest vertical wall of a building or accessory structure as defined
herein and within § 190-36, Front setback.[Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L.
No. 1-2019]
A. Public libraries and museums.
B. Town (municipal) buildings and storage and repair facilities.
All front, side, and rear setback measurements shall be the minimum
horizontal distance measured from the principal structure or any
projections, whichever is greater, to the closest point of the front, side,
and rear property lines.
The depth of required front yards shall be the distance between the
front property line and the closest point of the front of a structure
or any projection thereof.
(1)
The depth of required rear yards shall be the distance between the
rear property line and the closest point of the rear of the principal
structure or any projection thereof.
(2)
In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after front yards have
been established shall be considered rear yards and side yards for
dimensional purposes.
(3)
A.
§ 190-5 GATES CODE § 190-5
179:340
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of at least three or more nonresidential
establishments, having a cumulative area of not less than 50,000 square
feet, which is planned, developed and managed as a unit, where there are
usually common walls between the various uses and with off-street parking
provided on the center's site.[Amended 2-2-1987]
SIGN — Any name, identification, description, display, illustration, symbol,
logo, statue or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from
any public place, designed to advertise, identify or convey information,
including any landscaping employing the aforesaid, and/or used for the
purpose of directing the public's attention to an object, product, service,
place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. Displays of
merchandise in storefront windows at regular mercantile establishments
shall not be considered signs; however, a false window or window box
affixed to the exterior of a structure is a sign.[Amended 3-1-1999 by L.L.
No. 1-1999]
SIGN BACKGROUND — The entire background area of a sign on which copy
can be placed and which may be referred to as just "sign area" or "area"
and which is exclusive of the facade of the structure.
SIGN COPY AREA — The actual area of the background occupied by the
sign. It is computed by drawing straight lines adjacent to the closest
extremities of the individual letters or words and is computed in the same
manner when there is no background area. Where there is no background,
the size of the copy area shall be equal to what would be permitted if the
background were provided.
SIGN DIRECTORY or DIRECTORY SIGN — A listing of two or more business
enterprises on one sign.[Added 3-1-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign not attached to or part of any building.
Included are pole signs, pylon signs, masonry wall-type signs and sandwich
signs.[Added 3-1-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues connected with any national, state or local election,
referendum or ballot proposition.[Added 3-1-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign, whether on its own trailer, wheels or otherwise,
designed to be movable and not structurally attached to the ground, a
building, a structure or another sign.[Added 3-1-1999 by L.L. No.
1-1999]
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign which projects more than 18 inches but not
more than six feet beyond the wall of the structure to which it is attached
and to which it is perpendicular. Projecting signs shall not exceed 60 feet in
area.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted.[Added 3-1-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
SIGN, WALL — Any sign integral with or attached to and parallel to the face
of the outside wall of a building. No part of said sign shall project more than
§ 190-5 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-5
179:341
18 inches from the building to which it is attached.[Amended 3-1-1999 by
L.L. No. 1-1999]
SITE PLAN — A plan, prepared to scale, showing, accurately and with
complete dimensioning, all of the uses proposed for a specific parcel of land.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of the
floor and the ceiling next above it, having a height of at least seven feet six
inches.
STREET — A public thoroughfare or right-of-way, other than an alley,
dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such, which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place,
way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare.
STRUCTURALLY ALTERED — In addition to its other ordinary applications,
any alteration whereby a building or other structure is adapted to another
or a different use and to any alteration or repair which would violate any
of the regulations applicable in the district wherein the same is located, if
said building or other structure were entirely constructed or so altered or
repaired at the time such alterations or repairs are made.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any
kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground
or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including,
but within limitation, swimming and wading pools, covered patios, towers,
smokestacks, poles, etc., except outdoor areas such as paved areas, walks,
tennis courts and similar recreation areas.
SUITABLE VEGETATION — Vegetation in sufficient quantity and of
sufficient maturity so as to prevent erosion, maintain the general character
of the area and provide effective screening when such purpose is
warranted.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Gates, New York.
TOWN ENGINEER — The Town Engineer of the Town of Gates, New York.
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling unit which is one of a series of
noncommunicating dwelling units, having a common party wall between
each adjacent unit, each with a private outside entrance.
TOWN ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS or BOARD OF APPEALS — The
Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Gates, New York.
TRUCK TERMINAL — A premises used principally for the loading and
unloading of trucks operating under regulation of the New York State
Public Service Commission and/or the Interstate Commerce Commission as
carriers of goods; the premises may include, as secondary uses, temporary
goods storage, offices, warehouse space, fuel pumps, minor repair facilities
and tractor and trailer storage.
YARD — Any open space on the same lot with a building or a dwelling group,
which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure except
for the projections as permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 190-5 GATES CODE § 190-5
179:342
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this chapter; but may
include steps, terraces and enclosed porches.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
building and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between a building and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this
chapter.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Gates, New
York.
§ 190-5 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-5
179:343

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 190-6. Application of regulations.
No site or structure shall be erected and no existing structure shall be
moved, altered or enlarged except in conformity with the regulations for the
district in which the site, structure or use is located. Where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules
or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 190-7. Classes of districts.
The districts established by this chapter, and subject to future amendments,
shall be as follows:
FW Floodway District
FPO Floodplain Overlay District
R-1 Single-Family Residence District
MR Multiple Residence District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
BN-R Business, Nonretail District
NB Neighborhood Business District
GB General Business District
LI Limited Industrial District
GI General Industrial District
AOD Airport Overlay District
TH Townhouse Residence District [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
§ 190-8. District locations.
The boundaries for each district listed as part of this chapter are the
boundaries indicated for the district by the map entitled "Official Zoning
Map of the Town of Gates," dated with the effective date of this chapter,
which map is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this
chapter, and hereinafter known as the "Zoning Map."22
§ 190-9. Official Zoning Map.
There shall exist only one Official Zoning Map, which shall be kept in the
office of the Town Clerk; and it shall bear the seal of the Town of Gates,
a certification that it is the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Gates and
its date of adoption. The original map shall be on file with the Town Clerk
22.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map and amendments thereto are on file in the office of the
Town Clerk.
§ 190-6 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-9
179:345
and open to review by the general public. Should the Zoning Map become
damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the changes
and additions, the Town Board may by resolution adopt a new Zoning Map
to supersede the former map. The new Zoning Map shall bear a statement
which explains that it supersedes the prior map and gives the dates of
adoption of both the prior map and the new Zoning Map. The records of the
ordinance amendments and map adoption and, if possible, the prior map
shall be preserved.
§ 190-10. Interpretation of boundaries.
In making a determination, where uncertainty exists, as to boundaries of
any of the aforesaid districts as shown on said Zoning Map, the following
rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center line or right-of-way lines of streets, alleys, highways, railroads or
streams, such lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot
lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. If a district
boundary divides a lot into two or more districts, the entire lot shall be
placed in the district in which the lot would be most compatible, based
on an evaluation of its characteristics and recommendation by the
Planning Board to the Town Board.
C. Where district boundaries are not indicated as approximately following
the items listed in Subsections A and B above, the boundary line shall
be determined by use of the scale designated on the Zoning Map.
D. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated in the manner
authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of the
former right-of-way and all of the area included in the vacancy shall
then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts. In the event that none of the above rules is applicable, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimension on
the map, shall be determined by the Town Board upon recommendation
of the Planning Board.
§ 190-9 GATES CODE § 190-10
179:346
ARTICLE IV
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 190-11. Requirements.
Except as required otherwise in this chapter, every hospital, institution,
business or industrial use hereafter established shall provide loading spaces
of not less than 14 feet wide, 60 feet long and 15 feet high. The appropriate
number of spaces, unless specified otherwise by this chapter, shall be
determined by the applicant and shall not be located so as to encroach on
streets or sidewalks or other areas as may be specified elsewhere in this
chapter. There shall be one auxiliary truck waiting space for each two dock
spaces. These requirements shall be exclusive of driveways, aisles and other
necessary circulation areas.
§ 190-12. Off-street loading.
Every hospital, institution, hotel or commercial or industrial building
hereafter erected or established having a gross floor area of 5,000 square
feet or more shall provide and maintain at least one off-street loading space,
plus one additional off-street loading space for each additional 10,000
square feet of gross floor area. Any use requiring 1/2 or more of a loading
space shall be deemed to require the full space. Each loading space shall
not be less than 14 feet in width, 60 feet in length and 15 feet in height.
These requirements apply to each separate occupancy and are exclusive of
driveways, aisles and other necessary circulation areas.
§ 190-13. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained as set forth in
this section for all uses in all zoning districts. Such off-street spaces shall be
provided at the time:
§ 190-14. Number of spaces required.
A. A new building is hereafter erected or enlarged.
B. A building existing on the effective date of this chapter is enlarged to
the extent that the cost of construction exceeds 50% of the market
value of the building, as shown on the Town of Gates Assessor's records,
or to the extent that the building's capacity is increased by more than
50% in terms of the units used in the "Required Parking Spaces" column
of § 190-14.
C. The use is changed to another use with greater parking requirements,
provided that if the enlargement of a building existing at the time
hereof is less than 50%, parking space shall be provided in proportion
to the increase only. Any use requiring 1/2 or more of a parking space
shall be deemed to require the full space.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
§ 190-11 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-14
179:347
Use Required Parking Spaces
Residential
One- or two-family dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Multifamily dwelling 1 1/2 per dwelling unit
Apartment-hotel, rooming or
boarding house
1 for each guest accommodation,
plus 1 additional space per 2
employees
Business-residential
Hotel and motel 1 per guest room, plus 1 per 2
employees
Club, lodge Spaces to meet the combined
requirements of the uses being
conducted, such as hotel,
restaurant, auditorium, etc.
Institutions
Nursing care home 1 per 3 beds for patients, residents
or inmates, plus 1 per each 2
employees and 1 per each staff
doctor
Hospital 3 per 2 beds
Medical and dental clinic 1 for every 200 square feet of floor
area
Places of public assembly
Church 1 per 4 seats or 8 feet of bench
length in the main auditorium
Swimming pool 1 per each 25 square feet of pool
area
Library, reading room
community center, club
1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Preschool nursery 2 per teacher
Private college, commercial
school for adults
1 per 3 seats in classrooms
Other auditorium, meeting room 1 per 4 seats or 8 feet of bench
length
Business amusements
Stadium, arena, theater 1 per 4 seats or 8 feet of bench
length
Bowling alley 6 per lane
Dance hall, skating rink 1 per 100 square feet of floor area
Business
§ 190-14 GATES CODE § 190-14
179:348
Use Required Parking Spaces
Business use, 1,500 square feet
gross floor area or less
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Automobile service station 1 for each 2 gas pumps and 2 for
each service bay
Supermarket, grocery store 1 per 100 square feet of floor area
but not less than 3 spaces
Service or repair shop; retail
store and outlet selling furniture,
automobiles or other bulky
merchandise, where the operator
can show that bulky merchandise
occupies the major area of the
building
1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Bank, office (except medical and
dental)
1 per 200 square feet of floor area,
plus 1 per 2 employees
Eating or drinking
establishment
1 per each 4 persons' capacity or 1
per table
Mortuary, funeral home At least 30 spaces for 2 parlors, 10
additional spaces for each parlor
over 2
Shopping center [Amended
12-4-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000]
5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable floor area
Industrial
Storage, manufacturing
establishment, air, rail or
trucking freight terminal
1 per 2 employees on the
maximum shift or 1 for each 400
feet of gross floor area, whichever
is greater
Wholesale establishment 1 per employee, plus 1 per 700
square feet of patron serving area
B. Other uses not specifically listed above shall furnish parking as
required by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall use the above
list as a guide for determining requirements for said other uses.
C. The off-street parking requirements of two or more uses, structures or
parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking or loading space,
used jointly, to the extent that it can be shown by the owners or
operators of the uses, structures or parcels that their operations and
parking needs do not overlap in point of time. If the uses, structures or
parcels are under separate ownership, the right to joint use of the
parking space must be evidenced by a deed, lease, contract or other
appropriate written document to establish the joint use.
§ 190-14 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-14
179:349
§ 190-15. Location of parking facilities.
Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same lot
with the dwelling. Other required parking spaces shall be located on the
same parcel or on another parcel, provided that the furthest parking space
is not farther than 200 feet from a residential unit or 300 feet from the
commercial building or use it is intended to serve, measured in a straight
line from the building. The burden of proving the existence of such offpremises
parking arrangements rests upon the person who has the
responsibility of providing parking.
§ 190-16. Use of parking facilities.
Required parking space shall be available for the parking of operable
passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees only
and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking
of trucks used in conducting the business or use.
§ 190-17. Parking in front yards. [Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
Parking in front yards. Parking spaces shall be allowed in the front yard for
all districts providing that there is sufficient screening to prevent headlight
glare, that the parking shall not be closer than 10 feet to all property
lines, and shall meet all other applicable provisions in this chapter. Loading
spaces shall not be located in any front yard.
§ 190-18. Storage of wood in front yards. [Added 7-7-1987]
§ 190-19. Development and maintenance standards.
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area,
including commercial parking lots, shall be developed as follows:
D. The design of all parking areas and/or lots shall be such as to
demonstrate a safe and efficient means of movement for both vehicles
and pedestrians.
A. Unless otherwise provided or permitted, the stacking or storage of solid
fuel (wood, lumber or other material) for use in wood-burning stoves in
any front yard is prohibited.
B. Any person in violation of Subsection A at the time of the adoption of
this section shall have a period of 45 days from the date of adoption to
be in compliance therewith.
A. Parking areas shall have a minimum aisle width of 15 feet for one-way
traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic. The minimum parking space shall
be nine feet in width and 18 feet in length for 90º, 60º and 45º parking
or 10 feet in width and 20 feet in length for parking parallel to the aisle.
§ 190-14 GATES CODE § 190-19
179:350
[Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999; 5-6-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
B. Any parking area which is intended to be used during nondaylight hours
shall be properly illuminated to avoid accidents. Any lights used to
illuminate a parking lot shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away
from all adjoining property.
C. Except for single-family dwellings, any parking area shall be designed
in such a manner that any vehicle leaving or entering the parking area
from or into a public or private street shall be traveling in a forward
motion. Access or driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall
be located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such lot
shall be clearly visible for a reasonable distance to any pedestrian or
motorist approaching the access or driveway from a public or private
street.
D. The required number of parking and loading spaces, as set forth in this
section, together with driveways, aisles and other circulation areas,
shall be improved with acceptable impervious material, to provide a
durable and dust-free surface or large aggregate stone or asphalt.
E. All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper drainage of
surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent
properties or walkways.
F. The owner and/or lessee of the property used for parking and/or loading
shall maintain such area in good condition without holes and free from
dust, trash and other debris. Trash receptacles shall be placed in
parking lots near entrances, exits and sidewalks for collection of paper
and other litter. These are not to be dumpsters.
G. The parking of a disabled vehicle within a residential or commercial
district for a period of more than one week shall be prohibited unless
such vehicle is stored in an enclosed garage or other accessory building
or otherwise screened, in accordance with this chapter, from public
view.
H. Unless otherwise permitted, no unlicensed motor vehicle of any type or
kind shall be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property
unless it is parked or stored in a completely enclosed building. No more
than one recreational trailer, motor home, boat or other personal
recreational vehicle belonging to an occupant of the premises may be
stored on a driveway or in a required side yard as long as such vehicle is
not used for habitation and does not impede the view of pedestrians or
vehicles from seeing one another for a reasonably safe distance. The
parking or storing of commercial vehicles or trailers in residentially
zoned areas is prohibited, except that one commercial vehicle not
exceeding three-fourths-ton rated capacity being used by an occupant
of the premises may be so parked or stored on the premises. [Amended
6-8-1978; 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
§ 190-19 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-19
179:351
I. In all parking areas of more than five vehicles, parking shall be so
distributed as to service the individual units or business. Parking lots
shall be kept small and in other ways broken into smaller units through
provision of islands and plantings.
§ 190-19 GATES CODE § 190-19
179:352
ARTICLE V
Signs
[Amended 4-19-1982; 3-16-1987; 3-1-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
§ 190-20. Conformance required.
No sign of any character shall be permitted in any zoning district of the
Town of Gates except in conformity with the regulations of this article.
§ 190-21. Purpose.
The purpose of the sign regulations, controls and provisions set forth in
this article is to promote an overall plan and program for the public safety,
preservation of property values and the general welfare of the Town of
Gates. It is intended to aid in traffic safety, preserve and protect property
values, lessen congestion of land and air space, establish standards for
commercial and other advertising through the use of signs compatible
with the nature and scale of the community and maintain and encourage
business activity and development. It is further intended here to reduce
sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute to
traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging
or projecting over public rights-of-way and to recognize that the general
welfare includes a plan that will preserve the scenic and natural beauty of
the community while recognizing the purpose and value of outdoor business
signage.
§ 190-22. Provisions applicable to all districts.
A. All signs shall comply with applicable regulations of the Building Code
regarding construction, erection and electrical needs. No sign shall be
erected or placed on a site until a sign permit has been issued by the
Building Inspector unless otherwise indicated herein.
B. The following signs shall be permitted in any district in which the use
identified is permitted without the issuance of a permit:
(1) Except as elsewhere provided for herein, signs not exceeding one
square foot in area and bearing property numbers, post box
numbers, names of occupants of premises or other identification of
premises.
(2) Signs regulating the use of a property, such as "no hunting," "no
fishing," etc., of no more than two square feet, in all zones.
(3) Signs directing and guiding traffic for service and parking on
private property, not to exceed three square feet in area and a
height of not more than 60 inches measured from ground level to
the top of the sign. Not more than two such signs shall be permitted
at a driveway entrance. [Amended 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 190-20 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-22
179:353
(4) A nonilluminated temporary sign, not exceeding 20 square feet in
area, announcing special public or institutional events, the erection
of a building, the architect, the builder or contractors may be
erected for a period of 60 days, plus the construction period.
(5) A nonilluminated sign, not exceeding 25 square feet in area and not
exceeding five feet in height, for each church, neighborhood
community center, educational institution or professional center.
[Amended 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
(6) Official signs, notices or direction devices erected or maintained by
federal, state, county or local government or agency thereof.
C. All illuminated signs shall employ only a light of constant intensity, and
no sign shall be illuminated by or contain a flashing, intermittent,
rotating or moving light or lights. In no event shall an illuminated sign
or lighting device, such as a ground spotlight, be placed or directed so
as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or
beamed upon a street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to
cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or create a
public nuisance.
(1) Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs are defined as standard signs
with static messages which are illuminated by internal or external
light. All illuminated signs shall employ only a light of constant
intensity, and no sign shall be illuminated by or contain a flashing,
intermittent, rotating or moving light or lights. In no event shall an
illuminated sign or lighting device, such as a ground spotlight, be
placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination
therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a street, highway,
sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection
that may constitute a traffic hazard or create a public nuisance.
[Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(2) Electronic message display signs. Electronic message display signs
shall be defined as signs which use LED or other similar
technologies to allow the message to be changeable in addition to
being illuminated. Electronic message display signs, where
permitted, shall employ static display only (or static display with
fade or dissolve transitions or similar subtle transitions and frame
effects that do not have the appearance of moving texts or images).
[Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
D. No sign shall be animated, rotating, flashing or extended above the
uppermost roof line of a building or project beyond property lines.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
E. No sign shall contain information regarding a business, product or
service not conducted at or available from the premises at which the
sign is located; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed as limiting an owner of a sign from displaying upon said sign
§ 190-22 GATES CODE § 190-22
179:354
any noncommercial message not related to any business or commercial
enterprise, whether or not said noncommercial message bears any
relationship to any business, product or service conducted or available
at the premises.
F. No permanent or temporary sign shall be erected or placed at or near
the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to cause a traffic
hazard at the intersection; or at any location where, by reason of the
position, shape, color or illumination of the sign, it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device which makes use of the words "stop," "look," "drive-in,"
"danger," "go slow," "caution," "warning," "right," "left" or any other
word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere
with, mislead or confuse vehicle operators.
G. Where signs are permitted to be illuminated, they shall be illuminated
only at such times as said uses are open for business or shall be turned
off by 11:00 p.m., except where the signs face business or industrial
zones and cannot be seen from adjacent residential areas.
H. All permitted freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from a lot line as shown on the Official Assessment Map or,
alternatively, from the future right-of-way line of a road, if such future
right-of-way line has been determined.
I. "Size of sign" shall refer to the background area of any face of a sign
that can be seen at any one time and shall include any spaces between
parts thereof.
J. All signs shall have no restrictions on colors. A color illustration of the
sign shall be presented to the appropriate Town authority for review to
determine its readability before approval. The sign and background
should contrast well with one another and not cause a significant or
detrimental glare to the traveling public or the adjacent properties.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013; 5-6-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
K. No sign or signs erected or maintained in the window of a building or
seen through such window, visible from any public or private street or
highway, shall occupy more than 30% of the window surface.
L. Any obsolete sign which no longer identifies a bona fide use shall be
removed within 90 days after notice by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The Town may remove said signs and supporting structure with costs
assessed to the Town tax bill on the property in the event that such sign
is not voluntarily removed.
M. No sign shall be installed, erected or attached in any form, shape or
manner to a fire escape or any door or window giving access to any fire
escape.
§ 190-22 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-22
179:355
N. The provisions of this section shall not apply to safety, directional,
historical markers or other types of signs erected and maintained by a
public agency.
O. In addition to other provisions of this section, the following regulations
shall apply to all projecting signs:
(1) No projecting sign shall be closer than two feet to the face of the
street curb or curbline or any other public right-of-way line under
the jurisdiction of the Town, county, state or federal government.
(2) No portion of any projecting sign shall be less than 10 feet above
grade level.
(3) There shall be no more than one projecting sign for any premises,
unless the use has frontage or has public entrances to two or more
public ways, in which case one projecting sign may be erected for
and toward each public way.
P. In addition to other provisions of this section, the following regulation
shall apply to all wall signs:
(1) No wall sign shall extend beyond the extremities of the wall to
which it is attached.
Q. Should any sign be or become unsafe, unsightly, damaged or
deteriorated or be in danger of falling, the owner thereof or the person
maintaining the same shall, upon receipt of written notice from the
authorized official, proceed at once to put such sign in safe and secure
condition or renovate or remove the sign; provided, however, that if
such a situation is not corrected within 90 days from receipt of written
notice, the Code Enforcement Officer shall correct the situation or have
it corrected, with the costs assessed to the Town tax bill on the property.
R. Political signs are permitted, not to exceed 16 square feet in area for
each face of the sign. Such signs may be erected up to 31 days prior to
election day and must be removed no later than 15 days after the
election.
S. Any advertising sign, business sign, identification sign or other sign
authorized in this article may contain a noncommercial message
constituting a form of expression in lieu of other copy.
T. No sign may be erected on any premises without the permission of the
owner of the premises. With respect to the highway rights-of-way of the
United States, State of New York, County of Monroe and the Town of
Gates, such permission must be in writing. The Town of Gates may
direct and/or cause the removal of any sign erected in violation of this
subsection. [Added 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
U. Temporary signs. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 190-22 GATES CODE § 190-22
179:356
§ 190-23. Signs in residential districts.
In addition to other provisions of this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all residential districts:
(1) Mobiles, pennants and flags. Such devices may be used as signs on
a temporary basis for the purpose of advertising and may be
allowed for a period of up to six months after receipt of a permit
allowing same and payment of fee set by the Town Board.
Bicentennial banners will be allowed in 2013 for six months upon
receipt of a permit with no permit fee and the Town Board may
allow other special event banners as determined by Town Board
resolution. State and national flags (specifically the American flag)
are exempt from this Subsection U.
(2) Sandwich board signs. "Sandwich boards" (meaning A-frame twosided
signs) shall be allowed on a daily basis during business hours
from business setup to closing and must be removed upon closing
of said business. Each side of a sandwich board sign shall be no
greater than nine square feet. Such signs must be on the business
property and set up as not to impede traffic, and only one will be
allowed per business location.
A. Nonilluminated signs not exceeding five square feet in sign area, which
advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which said signs
are located, shall be permitted. "Sold" signs shall be removed within 10
days after the premises advertised has been sold, rented or leased.
B. A nonilluminated sign not exceeding two square feet in area and placed
flat against the building shall be permitted for each occupation.
C. Illuminated signs and electronic message display signs are prohibited,
except for signs indicating doctors of medicine, churches, private
schools and signs necessary for public safety. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
D. Wall signs no larger than 12 square feet, denoting the name of an
apartment building, fraternity or sorority house, boarding- or rooming
house, tourist home, nonprofit club, community or municipal center or
any other similar enterprises, are allowed or may hereafter be allowed
in these districts.
E. A permanent nonilluminated sign not exceeding 32 square feet shall be
permitted for each subdivision site if less than five acres. Two such
signs are permitted on five-acre sites or larger sites in single ownership
fronting on two or more streets. Such signs may be installed after
approval by the Planning Board of the final subdivision plat or a valid
building permit has been issued, and shall contain only the name of the
subdivision.
F. Also permitted is a temporary nonilluminated sign no larger than 15
square feet in area, advertising the sale of edible farm products
§ 190-22 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-23
179:357
§ 190-24. Signs in business districts.
In addition to other provisions of this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all business districts:
produced on the premises and associated with a roadside stand or
advertising auctions and special events of charitable or public service
groups, excluding garage sales.
G. One sign denoting the contractor, placed on the premises where
construction, repair or renovation is in progress, which sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet in face area, shall be permitted. This sign must
be removed from the premises within seven days after such
construction, repair or renovation is completed.
H. Nonilluminated signs of a public or noncommercial nature displayed for
the direction, safety or convenience of the public or containing any
noncommercial or public interest message shall be permitted, provided
that the area of any one side of any such sign shall not exceed two
square feet.
I. Signs permitted pursuant to this section do not require any permit
except for those permitted under Subsections C and E hereof.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Property address numbers shall be not more than four square feet, with
not more than a one-foot height, and should be prominently placed on
the face of each structure in such a manner and made of such material
that would easily facilitate the recognition of addresses from structure
to structure from a moving vehicle.
B. One business wall sign shall be permitted, placed flat against the
building, not exceeding the sizes as listed on the table following this
Subsection B and with a height not greater than six feet. One such sign
shall be permitted for each street on which the business fronts. Such
sign may be illuminated. In the event that the front of the business does
not face a street, any building-mounted sign which is erected shall
comply with the regulations contained in Subsection C hereunder.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Size of Building-Mounted Signs in Nonresidential Districts
Front Setback of
Building
(feet)
Maximum Size of Sign
for Each Ten Feet of
Business Frontage
(square feet)
Not to Exceed
(square feet)
100 or less 10 50
101 to 200 15 125
201 to 300 20 200
301 to 400 25 275
§ 190-23 GATES CODE § 190-24
179:358
§ 190-25. Signs in industrial districts.
In addition to other provisions of this article, the following regulations shall
apply to all industrial districts:
Size of Building-Mounted Signs in Nonresidential Districts
Front Setback of
Building
(feet)
Maximum Size of Sign
for Each Ten Feet of
Business Frontage
(square feet)
Not to Exceed
(square feet)
More than 400 30 350
C. On those sides of a building not facing the street but where customer
entrances are provided, signs placed flat against the building shall be
limited in size to a maximum area of 15 feet. Such signs shall not be
illuminated when facing a residential area.
D. One freestanding sign identifying a shopping center shall be permitted.
Such freestanding sign may be or include a sign directory identifying
individual businesses within the shopping center. It may be illuminated
and shall be no larger than is provided in this article. The road to which
the uses have principal access or have address on shall be the road used
to determine the size in § 190-26.
E. Nonilluminated signs not exceeding 20 square feet are permitted in all
business districts, which signs advertise the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said signs are located. Such signs shall be
removed within 10 days after the premises advertised has been sold,
rented or leased.
F. One projecting sign not exceeding 60 square feet in background area
shall be permitted. Where this sign is provided along with a wall sign,
their total area shall not exceed 150 square feet, provided that neither
sign shall inhibit the view of the other. Only one such sign is permitted,
regardless of the number of streets the business fronts on.
G. One freestanding sign identifying a gasoline service station shall be
permitted in cases where there are three or more distinct uses
operating on the same premises. The dimensions of such service station
freestanding signs shall be as follows: [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(1) Maximum height of 18 feet.
(2) Maximum sign area no larger than 40 square feet.
A. Same as § 190-24A and B.
B. Signs, in addition to those included in Subsection A above, which
identify an area within the boundaries of the business premises, other
than the principal building on such premises, or are directional signs
§ 190-24 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-25
179:359
§ 190-26. Freestanding signs.
The site of each face of a freestanding sign and its height, as permitted in
this article, shall be limited to the dimensions as follows:
shall be permitted by a special use permit from the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(1) Such signs shall not exceed a cumulative total of 50 square feet in
area, and no one sign shall be greater than nine square feet in area
and have a height of more than five feet from ground level to the
top of the sign.
(2) A special use permit may be granted only where the applicant can
demonstrate that the sign or signs are necessary for the purposes
herein specified and that such purpose cannot be accomplished
under the provisions of § 190-22C.
C. Industrial parks.
(1) In the case of industrial areas which are planned and developed as
a park containing three or more companies or where an individual
use outside an industrial park contains between 150 and 200
contiguous acres and various buildings or facilities on site, one
freestanding sign shall be permitted and may be illuminated and
shall be no larger than is provided for in this article. Two such signs
are permitted on larger sites fronting on two or more streets; said
second sign shall be at least 2,500 feet from the other sign. Such
freestanding sign may be or include a sign directory identifying
individual businesses within the industrial park.
(2) Directional, warning or information signs within an industrial
complex as described in Subsection C(1) above which are not
visible from a public highway are permitted but shall not exceed 25
square feet in area and shall not exceed six feet in height for each
sign. [Amended 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
D. Nonilluminated signs not exceeding 20 square feet shall be permitted in
all industrial districts, which signs advertise the sale, rental or lease of
the premises upon which said signs are located. Such signs shall be
removed within 10 days after the premises advertised has been sold,
rented or leased.
A. In business and industrial districts. [Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
§ 190-25 GATES CODE § 190-26
179:360
§ 190-27. Permit procedures. [Amended 7-5-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000; 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Commerce or
Industry Site
Surrounded by
Site Surrounded by
Institutions,
Residence or Rural
Areas
Fronting
Road Number
of Lanes
Speed
(mph) Area
Height
(feet) Area
Height
(feet)
2 30 to 40 32 16 20 12
45 to 50 50 20 35 14
55 or
greater
100 24 70 16
4 30 to 40 40 18 30 14
45 to 50 90 22 65 16
55 or
greater
150 26 105 18
6 30 to 40 40 20 30 16
45 to 50 100 24 70 18
55 or
greater
190 28 135 20
B. Permit process for electronic message display signage. [Added
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) Electronic message displays may be permitted with the approval of
a use permit in commercial zoning districts subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Such displays shall contain static messages only and shall not
have movement or the appearance or optical illusion of
movement of any part of the sign structure designed or
pictorial segment of the sign, including the movement or
appearance of movement of any illumination of flashing,
scintillating or varying of light intensity.
(b) Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of
60 seconds.
(c) Message change sequence: a minimum of two seconds of time
with no message display shall be provided between each
message displayed on the sign.
A. Application. Application for a sign permit shall be made to the Building
Inspector and/or Fire Marshal upon prescribed forms and shall contain
the following information:
§ 190-26 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-27
179:361
§ 190-28. Appeals; fees; penalties for offenses; enforcement.
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The location of building, structure or land to which, or upon which,
the sign is to be erected.
(3) Scale drawings, including dimensions, showing lettering and/or
pictorial content of the sign; construction details; position of
lighting or other extraneous devices; a location plan showing the
position of the sign on any building and its position in relation to
nearby buildings, structures or existing signs, and to any private or
public street or highway.
(4) For multiple developments, a coordinated signage plan must be
submitted to the Planning Board, in addition to the application
procedure.
B. Review.
(1) Within 30 days after the application for a sign permit is submitted
the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal shall review said
application and either approve or deny said permit.
(2) In the event that the proposed sign complies with all of the relevant
provisions of this chapter, the Building Inspector and/or Fire
Marshal shall approve the application.
(3) In the event that the proposed sign does not comply with said
provisions, the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal shall deny
the application and direct the applicant to submit an application for
a variance to the Gates Zoning Board.
(4) For multiple developments, the Planning Board shall also review
coordinated signage plans and approve the locations, size and
number of signs permitted in such developments.
(5) In the event that the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal or the
Planning Board has not made a determination within 45 days after
the completed application is submitted, the application shall be
deemed denied and the applicant shall be entitled to appeal the
said denial to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. Issuance of permit.
(1) Upon application approval, the Building Inspector and/or Fire
Marshal shall issue a sign permit.
(2) For multiple developments, Planning Board approval of the
coordinated signage plan must be obtained prior to the issuance of
any permits.
§ 190-27 GATES CODE § 190-28
179:362
§ 190-29. When effective; effect on prior provisions.
This chapter will take effect pursuant to the applicable provisions of the
Town Law of the State of New York. However, to the extent that the
provisions of the former Town of Gates Sign Ordinance are the same as
those contained in the revised Town Sign Law, said provisions of the former
Sign Ordinance shall be, in effect, continued and be in full force and effect
as of the adopting of said former Sign Ordinance.
A. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board relative to the provisions of
this chapter may appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
[Amended 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
B. Fees. Sign permit fees shall be determined by the Town Board. All
annual renewal fees shall be collected by the Code Enforcement Officer,
the amount of such fees to be determined by the Town Board.
C. Penalties for offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter is guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $250
and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each
week's continued violation shall constitute a separate violation.
D. Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be empowered to
enforce this chapter.
§ 190-28 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-29
179:363

ARTICLE VI
Fences, Hedges, Berms and Screen Plantings
§ 190-30. General provisions.
Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings shall be permitted or,
alternatively, shall be required as provided in this article.
§ 190-31. Provisions applicable to all districts.
§ 190-32. Provisions applicable to residential districts.
A. In no case shall barbed wire, spikes, chipped glass, electricity or similar
materials or devices be used in conjunction with or as part of any fence.
The exceptions to this rule are certain types of fences listed in
§ 190-33C.
B. No fence shall be permitted which is expressly designed with the intent
to injure or malign anyone who attempts to climb such a fence. The
exceptions to this rule are certain types of fences listed in § 190-33C.
C. Fences shall not be placed within any municipal easement. [Added
5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
D. No fence shall be placed, erected, or constructed on a lot without a
permit issued therefor by the Building Inspector. [Added 5-6-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
E. For purposes of this chapter, a fence shall be deemed to be of closed
construction if its component materials comprise more than 50% of the
area of any and all portions of said fence. For purposes of this chapter, a
fence shall be deemed to be of open construction if its component
materials comprise 50% or less of the area of any and all portions of
said fence. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
F. Except as hereinafter provided, fences which are located in a front or
corner yard shall be of open construction and shall not exceed four feet
in height. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. Any fence in a residential district shall have its most pleasant or
decorative side facing the adjacent lot, with all posts being in the
applicant's yard, unless such posts or supports are an integral part of
the decorative design of the fence.
B. No fence, hedge or screen plantings shall be erected or maintained over
six feet in height measured from grade level to the uppermost point of
the fence, and they shall not extend beyond any required front setback
line. [Amended 6-15-1981; 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
C. No solid fence shall be constructed or maintained in a manner which
shall impede or otherwise obstruct access to the rear of the dwelling for
emergency equipment such as fire-fighting equipment, etc.
§ 190-30 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-32
179:365
§ 190-33. Provisions applicable to nonresidential districts.
D. Open decorative fences, hedges or screen plantings may be permitted
within any required front yard subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit by the Board of Appeals pursuant to Article XXXII. In
addition to any other requirements of a conditional use permit, no such
permit shall be issued where:
(1) The fence exceeds a height of three feet.
(2) The fence is nearer than three feet to any front or side lot line.
(3) The fence is not uniformly constructed.
(4) There is objection to the fence by more than 50% of adjoining
owners within a radius of 100 feet.
E. Fences, hedges or screen plantings lawfully existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming appurtenance
and shall be treated as are nonconforming uses under this chapter.
F. Fences shall be continually maintained and no fence, hedge or screen
plantings shall be permitted to become unsightly or in a state of
disrepair.
G. Open decorative fences, hedges and screened plantings not exceeding
three feet in height and not extending beyond the side foundation walls
of the house are permitted within 10 feet of the front foundation wall.
H. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting, in any
required front yard, decorative or landscape planting, such as bushes,
flowers, trees and the like, which are not designed or intended as a
fence.
A. Any fence facing a residential district shall have its most pleasant or
decorative side facing the residential district, with all posts and
supports being on the side of the fence opposite the residential area,
unless such posts or supports are an integral part of the decorative
design of the fence. This relationship shall prevail where any more
restrictive district abuts any less restrictive district, the less restrictive
district having the posts and/or supports on its side.
B. Closed and open fences are required within the buffer zones required
elsewhere in this chapter, and shall be a minimum of six feet high but
not to exceed eight feet in height. Such fences shall not exceed four feet
in height between the front setback and front lot lines.
C. Barbed wire or electric fences.
(1) A fence eight feet high with a barbed wire top or an electric shock
fence which would not be detrimental to health, safety or welfare of
any person coming into contact with it may be permitted in the
general commercial and industrial districts, upon issuance of a
§ 190-32 GATES CODE § 190-33
179:366
§ 190-34. Buffers, berms and screen plantings.
Buffers, berms and screen plantings shall be provided as required in
§ 161-33 of the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Gates.23
conditional use permit by the Town Board, where it can be
demonstrated that:
(a) The fence is needed to prevent entry to any area which could
be hazardous to the health, safety or welfare of a person or
persons.
(b) The fence is needed to secure an area where materials and/or
equipment is stored.
(c) The fence is needed to keep animals other than common
household pets, except in a kennel situation, from leaving the
site.
(d) Where, in the Board's opinion, other reasons are presented
which, in the general community interests of national safety,
justify the need for such a fence.
(2) Where such fences are permitted, the fact that they are either
barbed or electrified shall be clearly indicated on the fences at
intervals of not more than 75 feet.
A. A buffer area of at least 25 feet shall be provided along the boundary
line between any residential district and an NB or BN-R District. The
same buffer area shall be provided along all boundaries between any R
District and an MR District.
B. A buffer area of at least 100 feet shall be provided along the boundary
of any R, MR, NB or BN-R District and a GB, LI or GI District.
C. Such areas shall contain screen plantings of trees, hedges, shrubs, etc.,
to provide an immediate visual and sound buffer between the different
districts. [Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
D. The buffer areas shall be exclusive of any building setback
requirements that may be stated in this chapter.
E. Where one district is developed along its boundary and the other is not,
the provision of the buffer area will be the responsibility of the latter
property owner, lessee, etc., when the property is developed.
F. Where properties abutting each other in adjacent districts are both
undeveloped, the provision of the buffer shall be a mutual undertaking
by both owners. Each will provide 1/2 the required buffer when the
property is developed, or the more permissive zone will provide the
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 161, Subdivision of Land.
§ 190-33 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-34
179:367
entire buffer area, which will be completely developed no later than the
start of development on the adjacent property.
G. Where districts are separated by or are designated as bounding each
other within expressway property, no buffer area need be required.
Where district boundaries follow center lines of other roads and/or rail
lines, the distance from the zoning district boundary line to the subject
property line shall be subtracted from the buffer area requirement,
except where this would result in the elimination of a buffer
requirement, there shall be at least a ten-foot planting strip to act as a
screen, provided in accordance with the requirements for buffers.
§ 190-34 GATES CODE § 190-34
179:368
ARTICLE VII
Clear Vision Zone
§ 190-35. Visibility at intersections.
There shall be a clear vision zone at all corners of intersecting roads or road
junctions, consisting of a triangular area defined by the point of intersection
of the right-of-way lines and the two points extended along such lines for a
distance of 35 feet from any intersection.
§ 190-35 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-35
179:369

ARTICLE VIII
Reservation for Highway Purposes and Setbacks
§ 190-36. Front setback. [Amended 1-17-1977]
A. Where a reservation is required, the front lot line shall be considered to
be coincident with the future right-of-way line, with front setbacks and
any other necessary lot measurements being measured from the future
right-of-way line. Where there is no requirement for a reservation for
highway purposes, the front lot line shall be considered to be coincident
with the existing right-of-way line. The developer or owner shall contact
the Monroe County Department of Public Works, the New York State
Department of Transportation or Town records to determine if a future
right-of-way line has been established before a building permit will be
issued by the Building Inspector.
B. Except as hereinafter provided or elsewhere required in this chapter,
front setbacks shall be no less than 50 feet along state and county roads
and no less than 35 feet along all other roads, exclusive of parking
requirements.
C. Front setbacks for all uses in a GB, LI or GI District fronting on a state
or county road shall be not less than 100 feet. No parking shall be
permitted in the 50 feet nearest the state or county road.
D. The Planning Board of the Town of Gates or other appropriate board
may require the screening of parking areas by evergreen or other
suitable plantings.
§ 190-36 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-36
179:371

ARTICLE IX
Building Regulations
§ 190-37. Conformity with regulations.
No building shall be erected, altered or moved into or within this Town
except in conformity with all of the regulations pertaining to such structure
and pertaining to the district within which such structure is located or is to
be located. Nor shall any such building be erected, altered or moved into
or within this Town without having been issued previously a building permit
authorizing such erection, alteration or movement.
§ 190-38. Site plan approval; compliance with requirements.
No building permit shall be issued for structures other than one- or twofamily
dwellings, their customary accessory structures and common farmrelated
structures, such as barns, sheds, fences and silos, unless a site
plan showing compliance with all requirements of this chapter has been
reviewed by the Planning Board, in accordance with Article XXXIII of this
chapter, along with any additional requirements presented by the Planning
Board to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the Town of
Gates, or a finding by the Code Enforcement Officer that the alteration or
moving of a structure will permit compliance with all such ordinances and
regulations; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prevent the
issuance of a building permit for a variance duly granted by the Board of
Appeals.
§ 190-39. Building limitations.
§ 190-40. Lot area and width exceptions for existing small lots.
A. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to
exceed the height or bulk; to accommodate or house a greater number
of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; and to have
narrower or smaller rear yards, side yards or other open spaces than
herein required.
B. Except as provided otherwise elsewhere in this chapter, no land shall be
used for the storage, collection or accumulation of used lumber and
other used materials or for the dumping or disposal of scrap iron, junk,
garbage, rubbish or other refuse or ashes, slag or other industrial
wastes or by-products shall not be permitted in any district; nor shall
any use or building be in any other way contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
A. The lot width or area requirements of this chapter shall be
automatically waived to permit the erection of a single-family dwelling
or the restoration, enlargement (but not the creation of additional
dwelling units), moving, repair or alteration of an existing dwelling on
any lot of record which was owned separately and individually from all
other tracts of land on the effective date of this chapter or on the
§ 190-37 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-40
179:373
effective date of any subsequent amendment increasing area or width
requirements, provided that dwellings are a permitted use in the
district in which such lot is located.
B. Vacant land or subdivision lots in the same record ownership at the
effective date hereof or on the effective date of any amendment hereto,
increasing width requirements, having in the aggregate a continuous
frontage resulting in a total lot width of more than 150 feet and less
than 200 feet in an R-1-15 District, of more than 120 feet and less than
150 feet in an R-1-11 District or of more than 100 feet but less than 120
feet in an R-1-8 or less restrictive district, may be divided into two lots
of equal width so far as width requirements are concerned, and such
requirements shall be waived as in Subsection A above. (For
subdivisions filed in the Monroe County Clerk's office prior to the
effective date hereof, see § 265-a of the Town Law.)
C. The exceptions listed in Subsections A and B above shall apply only to
lots or land fronting on an improved public street or highway.
[Amended 1-17-1977]
§ 190-40 GATES CODE § 190-40
179:374
ARTICLE X
Easements
§ 190-41. Drainage easements.
Easements of sufficient width shall be provided along both sides of open
drainage courses. The width of the easement shall be based on
recommendation of the Town Engineer and shall be used for the
maintenance of the open drain, remain free of obstructions, be of natural
topography and contain no permanent or temporary buildings, plantings,
gardens or dumpings.
§ 190-41 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-41
179:375

ARTICLE XI
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 190-42. Nonconforming use.
Unless otherwise provided for elsewhere in this chapter, any use of land
or structure, which use was lawful at the time of the effective date of
this chapter, may be continued; provided, however, that such use shall
have continued in operation, does not constitute a nuisance and shall not
be enlarged, altered or changed in area, activity or content during its
continuance, except as provided otherwise by proper authority.
§ 190-43. Nonconforming structure.
§ 190-44. Nonconformance: lot size, open space, height or building
size regulations.
A. Any nonconforming use which has ceased its usual conduct of such
business for a period of six months or more shall be considered to have
terminated and may not thereafter commence operation.
B. Any use which was in violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Gates, New York, effective February 5, 1963, shall not be regarded as
nonconforming under this chapter.
A. The use or occupancy of a nonconforming structure which was a lawful
structure at the time of the effective date of this chapter may be
continued; provided, however, that no enlargement, change or
alteration shall be permitted upon such nonconforming structure,
except upon a finding by the Code Enforcement Officer that such
enlargement, change or alteration will produce greater compliance
with the requirements of this chapter; and further provided that no
enlargement, change or alteration of a nonconforming structure
housing a nonconforming use shall be permitted. [Amended 5-6-2019
by L.L. No. 1-2019]
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any structure, or part thereof, declared
to be unsafe by any official charged with providing for the public safety,
which strengthening or restoration is ordered by such official.
A. Any building, other structure or use of land which is made
nonconforming by any lot size, open space, height or building size
regulations of this chapter, or by any subsequent amendments thereto,
may be continued, except as hereinafter provided.
B. Such nonconforming building, other structure or use of land may be
enlarged or extended, provided that any such enlargement or extension
shall comply with the regulations of this chapter.
§ 190-42 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-45
179:377
§ 190-45. Destruction of structure.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration, rebuilding or repairing
of any nonconforming use, which structure has been damaged by fire, acts
of God or any act of a public enemy, subsequent to the effective date of
this chapter, provided that such restoration or construction is commenced
within six months after the destruction and is completed within one year
of the date of destruction. For any structure containing a nonconforming
use which is destroyed, by any cause, to an extent exceeding 75% of its fair
market value, as indicated on the latest assessment records of the Town of
Gates, the future structure or use on the site shall conform to this chapter.
§ 190-46. Maintenance.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the renovation or repair of
nonstructural members or the maintenance of a nonconforming structure
made necessary by ordinary wear and tear.
§ 190-47. Prior building permits.
Nothing in this chapter shall nullify any duly issued building permits issued
prior to the effective date of this chapter, provided that work is commenced
and diligently prosecuted within one year from the date of issuance of such
building permit.
§ 190-48. Accessibility to public right-of-way.
No zoning permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for any new land use
activity where there is no reasonable access from the lot or area upon which
such activity is located to an existing public street; provided, however, that
this provision shall not prohibit the continued use of any structure or lot as
such use existed at the effective date of this provision.
§ 190-45 GATES CODE § 190-48
179:378
ARTICLE XII
Dimensional Criteria
§ 190-49. Height limitations.
The limitations affecting the height of structures shall not apply to the
appurtenant appendages and structures, such as parapet walls, not
exceeding three feet in height, chimneys, smokestacks, church spires,
flagpoles, television antennas and penthouses for mechanical equipment, or
to barns, pole barns, silos and other common farm-related structures, and
water tanks; provided, however, that such appendages and structures shall
comply with all other provisions of this or any other applicable ordinance.
If the provisions or requirements of the Airport Overlay District apply, the
exceptions granted in this section no longer apply.
§ 190-50. Yard measurements.
All front, side and rear yards shall be the minimum perpendicular distance
measured from the principal structure, excluding all projections not
exceeding three feet in length or width from the structure wall, to the
closest point of the front, side and rear lot lines.
§ 190-51. Lot grades.
All structures shall be constructed or located with a ground elevation so
as to provide a sloping grade to cause the surface drainage to flow away
from the walls of such structures and any adjacent structures on adjacent
properties. The ground grade of any lot upon which new construction or
earth movement is to be conducted shall be related to existing grades and
drainage system so as to provide adequate drainage and not jeopardize such
existing drainage systems, and shall be approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer or such other authorities having jurisdiction over such system.
A. In the case of corner lots, a front yard of the required depth shall be
provided along each road frontage; however, if there are dwellings on
both abutting lots with front yards of less than that required, the front
yard for the lot need not exceed the average front yard of the abutting
dwellings. If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front yard of
less than the required depth for the district, the front yard need not
exceed a depth halfway between the depth of the abutting lot and the
required front yard depth.
B. Depth of required front yards shall be the distance between the front lot
line or, alternatively, the future right-of-way line, if determined, and the
closest point of the front of the proposed principal structure.
C. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of
front yards required. In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after
front yards have been established shall be considered side yards for
dimensional purposes.
§ 190-49 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-51
179:379

ARTICLE XIII
Effect of Provisions
§ 190-52. Essential services.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the provision of essential services,
provided that the installation of such service does not violate any other
applicable provision of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to permit the erection, construction or enlargement of any
aboveground structure except utility poles and wires, except as otherwise
permitted in this chapter.
§ 190-53. Temporary use.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the use of a travel trailer, a mobile
home or other similar structure in any district as a temporary construction
field office for a period not to exceed the period of construction, or in other
situations not to exceed a period of one year; provided, however, that such
structure is not used for overnight sleeping accommodations and adequate
arrangements for sanitary facilities are made; and provided, further, that
the temporary field office has been certified as such and as conforming to
this chapter by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 190-52 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-53
179:381

ARTICLE XIV
Accessory Structures
§ 190-54. Accessory structures in residential zones.
All accessory structures in any residential zone shall be subject to the same
locational requirements affecting the principal structure on a lot; except,
however, that such accessory structure may be placed not less than five
feet from any rear lot line or the rear yard portion of any side lot line;
provided, however, that no such structure shall be built closer to any other
lot line than the minimum front yard or side yard setback required on
the lot upon which the structure is proposed or upon the contiguous lot
closest to the location of such accessory structure, nor shall any structure
be placed closer than the established setback from any street right-of-way,
except as otherwise specifically provided herein. Nothing in this section or
this chapter shall permit the occupancy of a basement without a complete
residential structure thereon.
§ 190-55. Accessory structures in nonresidential districts.
All accessory structures in nonresidential districts shall be subject to the
same locational requirements as are required for all principal structures
within such districts.
§ 190-54 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-55
179:383

ARTICLE XV
Access
§ 190-56. Access control in nonresidential districts.
In order to prevent adverse effects from strip road front development,
to produce more harmonious appearance and to promote public safety
by reducing, to a reasonable number, access points to and from public
highways, all development must take place in areas which have a minimum
frontage on state and county roads of 400 feet and a minimum size of
four acres. Ownership need not be by one owner but adjacent owners may
apply jointly if their aggregate holdings meet these requirements and agree
to a coordinated development plan. Individual lots may be used within
a development area. Adjacent property owners within these districts will
be required to give mutual easements for vehicular traffic across their
properties to permit vehicles to get to limited points of access to and from
public highways. No access point serving these areas shall be closer than
100 feet to an intersection. Deceleration and/or acceleration lanes may be
required as deemed necessary by appropriate county or state officials to
permit proper traffic flow into and out of the access point. Proof that these
regulations are being or will be met shall be provided before building or
occupancy permits can be issued.
§ 190-56 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-56
179:385

ARTICLE XVI
Excavations and Topsoil Removal
§ 190-57. Conformance required.
All excavations and appurtenant activities commenced henceforth shall
be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and shall be located
only within areas specifically permitted according to the provisions of this
article. Excavations in operation at the time when this article becomes
effective may continue and will be issued a temporary excavation permit for
180 days. The owner, lessee or operator shall then apply for a permit within
180 days of the effective date of this article, as adopted.
§ 190-58. Application procedures.
Before any excavation or appurtenant activities are commenced, the owner,
agent or lessee of the premises shall file with the Town Board an application
for permit and a filing fee required by the Town in a resolution establishing
such fees. In all cases, five copies of the application for each permit shall
be signed by the owner of the premises if other than the applicant. It shall
include but not be limited to the following information:
A. Name and address of the applicant and of each owner of the premises.
B. A statement of each mortgage or other lien upon the premises together
with the name and address of the holder of each mortgage or other lien
upon the premises.
C. A certification of the County Finance Officer showing payment of all
taxes and assessments to date for the property as described in the
application.
D. Vertical aerial photographs, five copies, at a negative scale no smaller
than one inch equals 1,000 feet and certified as flown not earlier than
one year prior to the date of application. The area covered by vertical
aerial shall include:
(1) All land being requested for excavation permit and all contiguous
land which is being or has been used by the owner or lessee for
excavation or appurtenant activities.
(2) All public roads bounding the proposed excavation site and all
structures adjoining property within 100 feet of the property line.
(3) A location map in the form of an overlay of the vertical aerial
photography, covering the land within at least 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of the entire land proposed for permit, showing existing
classification of public and private land use.
E. An identification plat of which five copies shall be prepared by a
licensed engineer or surveyor at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet.
This plat shall be submitted to the Town Engineer and shall be subject
§ 190-57 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-58
179:387
§ 190-59. Review of permit application.
to his approval as to the sufficiency of data shown thereon. The plat
shall show:
(1) The boundaries of the entire tract proposed for permit, by bearing
and distance, existing topography at five-foot contour intervals and
the location of all water sources within 500 feet of the tract
proposed for permit.
(2) Average thickness of overburden within the boundaries of the tract
proposed for permit.
(3) Means of vehicular access and type of surface to the tract proposed
for permit.
(4) Areas of trees and woodlots.
F. An operations map showing the plan for the operation of excavation and
appurtenant activities, which map shall be presented as an overlay to
the identification plat. All of the following operations, including the
acreage to be devoted to them, shall be shown:
(1) Area of active excavation and area requested for excavation; area
of active appurtenant activities and area requested for appurtenant
activities.
(2) Area where topsoil and overburden will be temporarily stored for
the future use of restoring excavated areas.
(3) Existing and/or proposed fences or berms, by height and type.
G. A plan for restoration and revegetation shall be presented as a map, five
copies, at the same scale as the identification plat. The restoration plan
shall be referred to the Monroe County Soil and Water Conservation
District for their recommendations. All of the following items shall be
included in the restoration plan:
(1) A topographical map showing final grades and drainage facilities.
(2) Calculations of necessary fill from other sources, if such is needed.
(3) Methods and materials proposed for topsoil and planting
restoration.
A. Prior to a public hearing held by the Town Board, all maps, aerial
photographs and data filed with the application shall be submitted to
the Planning Board, the Monroe County Department of Planning, the
Monroe County Environmental Management Council, the Monroe
County Soil and Water Conservation District and the Town
Conservation Commission for review and recommendations. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for receiving and processing
all applications for permits for excavation and appurtenant activities
§ 190-58 GATES CODE § 190-59
179:388
§ 190-60. Letter of credit.
After the approval of the application and before the issuance of any permit,
the applicant and each owner of record of the premises other than the
applicant shall jointly make, execute and file with the Town Clerk a letter
of credit in an amount approved by the Town Engineer for each acre of
land within the area to be used for excavation and appurtenant activities.
The above party or parties guarantee that either upon termination of the
permit or the operation, whichever may come first, the ground surface of
the land so used shall be restored in conformity with both the approved
specific requirements and the standards set forth in this chapter. In the
event of default of compliance with the conditions of this chapter and any
other applicable laws, such credit shall be forfeited to the Town. The Town
shall return to the applicant any amount that is not needed to cover the
costs of restoration, administration and any other expenses incurred by the
Town as a result of the applicant's default. Such credit shall continue in full
force and effect until a certificate of compliance shall have been issued by
the Town Engineer after consulting with the Monroe County Soil and Water
Conservation District and any other agency(s) necessary to ensure that all
provisions of this chapter and of the permit have been met.
§ 190-61. Fee.
The owner or lessee of land under excavation shall pay a removal fee, per
ton of removed material, as set forth in the Town's fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the Town Board. The fee shall be paid one year from approval
and coordinating the annual site inspection. Approval or denial of the
application shall be rendered within 60 days after a complete
application is filed by the applicant, unless both the Town Board and
the applicant mutually consent on a time extension. The running of
this sixty-day period will be suspended any time during which the
application is returned to the applicant for the furnishing of additional
information. The application shall be presumed approved if the Town
Board has not made a decision at the end of the sixty-day period.
B. Renewal. If all operations undertaken pursuant to any permit issued
hereunder have been conducted in full compliance with the terms of
such permit and all provisions of this chapter, the time limit of such
permit may be renewed by the Code Enforcement Officer upon
recommendation of the Planning Board and the Town Engineer for a
period no greater than that for which the permit was originally issued.
At least 10 days before taking any such renewal action, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall cause to be posted on the land affected a
notice of the proposed renewal and a statement indicating clearly both
the property affected and the nature of the operation. All ordinances
and regulations in effect at the time a renewal is granted will apply to
the renewal permit in the same manner as when a new or original
permit is issued.
§ 190-59 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-61
179:389
date of the permit and each year thereafter, but prior to annual site approval
inspection.
§ 190-62. Dimensional and safeguard requirements.
A. Permits for excavation within the geographical area outlined in the
permit application shall be issued for a three-year period, subject to
annual site inspection and approval by the Town Engineer and any
other agency(s) that the Town designates.
B. The active excavation area shall not exceed a total of five acres at any
one time.
C. No excavation shall be conducted closer than 100 feet to a public rightof-
way or adjoining property line, except that grading may be
conducted within such limits in order to provide adequate access to the
premises. The setback area shall not be used for any use in conjunction
with the excavations and appurtenant activities, except for one public
notice sign for identifying use, buffer effect and those conditions stated
in § 190-62H of this chapter pertaining to topsoil and subsoil
preservation.
D. All equipment, structures and other operation facilities, including
sedimentation ponds, shall not be closer than 200 feet from the right-ofway
of the public highway or from an adjoining property line, except
when the applicant demonstrates that the topography necessitates the
location of a sedimentation pond elsewhere and also demonstrates that
sufficient safeguards will be constructed or provided for the protection
of neighboring residents. Screening from public view will be provided
as required in this chapter and as may be additionally required by the
Town.
E. Each tract of land to be granted a conditional use permit for excavation
must use only direct access to major highways and have proof of legal
rights to that access.
F. All access roads shall be constructed to include a curve so as to screen
the operation from public view; provided, however, that the junction of
the access and the public road must be at an angle of not more than tendegrees
deviation from a right angle (90º).
G. Fencing shall be required on all sides of an excavation area that is
within 500 feet of a residential area, unless the depth of excavation
(vertical face) is less than 10 feet. Fencing shall be erected no closer
than 40 feet from a public right-of-way or an adjoining property line.
The fencing shall be at least five feet in height and of a type listed in this
chapter and shall be approved by the Town Board.
H. Topsoil and subsoil shall be stripped from the active excavation area
and stockpiled and seeded for use in accordance with the restoration
plan. Such stockpiles shall be treated to minimize the effects of erosion
§ 190-61 GATES CODE § 190-62
179:390
by wind or water upon public roads, streams or adjacent property. This
provision applies to all operations except that of topsoil removal.
I. Landscape. Existing hills, trees and ground cover fronting along public
roads or adjacent property shall be preserved, maintained and
supplemented by selective cutting, transplanting and addition of new
trees, shrubs and other ground cover for the purpose of screening and
noise reduction. If, however, the existing topography and natural
vegetation does not lend itself to any economically feasible supplement
plan, the operation can, if properly landscaped with grass, trees and
shrubs, grade back overburden around the perimeter of the excavation
site to create a berm for the purpose of screening and noise reduction.
No berm shall be constructed within 25 feet of property boundaries.
The type and design of screening shall be approved by the Town Board
after referring the proposal to the Monroe County Soil and Water
Conservation District or the Town Conservation Board. Adequate
maintenance approval of the landscape by the Town Engineer shall be
required for all permit renewals.
J. Lateral support. All operations shall be conducted in a safe manner with
respect to the likelihood of hazard to persons, physical damage to
adjacent land or improvement or damage to any street by reason of
slides, sinking or collapse.
K. Hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be only between 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m., local time. No operations will be allowed on
Sundays. Loaded trucks shall not leave prescribed premises before 7:00
a.m., except in the case of a public emergency or whenever any
necessary repairs to equipment are required to be made.
L. Dust and dirt control. All access routes leading to public highways shall
be dust and mud free. All precautions, such as oiling or watering, daily
or more frequently if and when necessary, shall be taken to prevent dust
and dirt from being blown from the premises. Also, the first 200 feet of
access from public roads shall be paved.
M. Noise. Operations shall not be detrimental to adjacent property nor
unduly interfere with the quiet enjoyment of adjacent property.
N. Drainage system. An adequate and comprehensive drainage system
shall be provided to convey the stormwater runoff originating on and
crossing the premises in accordance with the natural direction of runoff
for the total watershed area. No excavation shall be allowed closer than
50 feet from a natural stream. Sediment control measures musts be
installed to keep all sediment damage on the applicant's property. The
Town Engineer shall determine whether or not the system and control
measures are adequate before approval of an original or renewal
permit.
O. Flood and erosion control. The applicant shall include a plan for control
of soil erosion and excessive groundwater seepage to public roads,
streams or adjacent property. The Town Engineer shall determine
§ 190-62 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-62
179:391
§ 190-63. Restoration and revegetation requirements.
whether or not the controls are adequate before approval of an original
or renewal permit.
A. Slope. No slope shall be left with a grade steeper than one foot on three
feet; provided, however, that for quarry operations, the Town Engineer
shall certify the face of the quarry wall as safe and acceptable and may
require any means necessary to reinforce unsafe faces.
B. All debris, stumps, boulders, etc., shall be removed from the site and
disposed of or, in case of inorganic material, buried and covered with a
minimum of two feet of soil.
C. Timing. Restoration shall be a continuous operation subject to field
review and approval at each annual inspection and at the end of the
permit period, by the Town Engineer and anyone else designated by the
Town Board. Grading of topsoil or cover material and planting of the
area designated for restoration during the permit period shall have
been completed before a permit renewal can be granted. Plans for
reuse of a quarry which do not call for restoration shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board and the Town Engineer.
D. Topsoil and fertilizing. Subsoil and topsoil shall be respread over the
excavation area to a minimum depth of one foot (six inches of topsoil
and six inches of subsoil). This soil shall be treated with lime and
fertilizer and seeded with a grass or legume mixture prescribed by the
Town Engineer after conferring with the Monroe County Soil and Water
Conservation District. Trees or shrubs shall be planted in order to
provide screening, natural beauty and to reduce erosion. The planted
area shall be protected from erosion during the establishment period
using approved conservation practices.
E. During and upon completion of the excavation operation (within six
months after completion of the excavation operation) the land shall be
left so that natural drainage leaves the property at the original drainage
points. Also, the volume of drainage to any one point shall not be
increased.
F. Within six months after termination of the excavation operation, all
equipment, building, structures, etc., shall be removed from the
premises and all restoration will have been completed.
§ 190-62 GATES CODE § 190-63
179:392
ARTICLE XVII
FW Floodway District
§ 190-64. Purpose.
It is hereby found and declared that the unmanaged use or alteration of
topography, excessive filling, channel encroachment or other acts affecting
the natural discharge of water through floodplains constitutes a threat to
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Gates and to
the economic vitality of the community. The purpose of this district is to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the Town's residents from hazards
due to periodic flooding. This shall include the protection of persons and
property, the preservation of water quality and the minimizing of
expenditures for relief insurance and flood control.
§ 190-65. Delineation of Floodway District.
There is hereby established a Floodway District, FW, to accomplish the
purposes of this article. This district contains lands immediately adjacent to
the existing watercourse of Little Black Creek and is the lands that would
probably be covered by moving water in the event of a one-hundred-year
flood. This district includes the water channel and the lands immediately
adjacent to and on both sides of the creek which will carry the increased
discharge due to periodic flooding. This district does not imply that areas
outside the designated district boundaries will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
§ 190-66. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the FW District:
A. General farming, including but not limited to the growing and raising of
trees, shrubs, vines, berries, vegetables, nursery stock, hay, grains and
similar food and fiber crops, pasturing and grazing.
B. Animal husbandry, including the breeding and raising of cattle, sheep,
horses, goats, pigs and rabbits.
C. Temporary and/or seasonal stands for the sale of agricultural products
grown, raised or produced on the premises.
D. Open recreation uses for which no occupied structures are necessary,
such as parks, playgrounds, riding trails, playing fields, golf courses
and golf driving ranges and tennis courts.
E. Wildlife, game and forest preserves.
F. Off-street parking areas, provided that that no overnight parking is
permitted.
G. Lawns, gardens and play areas.
H. Historic, scientific and scenic area preservation.
§ 190-64 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-66
179:393
§ 190-67. Dimensional regulations.
There are no minimum dimensional regulations required for the uses
permitted in this district other than that the area is that, in the opinion
of the Town official designated to implement the purpose of this article,
necessary to uphold the purpose of this district and to meet the
requirements specified in § 190-69 of this article.
§ 190-68. Site plan approval.
Each use listed as being permitted in this district shall be subjected to
the site plan approval process pursuant to Article XXXIII of this chapter.
The site plan shall include, if not specifically listed in Article XXXIII, the
following:
§ 190-69. Additional requirements applying to uses.
I. Uses of a similar character but not specifically listed above may apply to
the Town Board for approval to locate in this area. Approval shall be
granted upon a finding by the Board that said use is indeed of the same
general character as the above permitted uses.
A. The location and design of the off-street parking and/or loading
requirements called for in this chapter.
B. Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings; and their location, design,
type, density, etc., so that a determination can be made as to whether or
not they will impede flood flows or in any other way be detrimental to or
contrary to the provisions of this district.
A. All permits for development of any use shall be reviewed by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers or the Town Engineer for approval.
B. All uses and utilities shall meet the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program for which the Town of Gates has been approved.
C. It shall be demonstrated for each use that any filling permitted will not
unduly increase flood levels on adjacent lands.
D. It shall be demonstrated that the amount and rate of runoff from the
site would not increase flood hazards downstream from the site.
Additionally, site runoff combined with projected upstream drainage
should not result in any problems to the site. Any requirements
necessary to comply with this condition shall be met by the applicant.
E. No temporary or permanent structure, fill for any purpose, deposit,
obstruction, storage of materials or equipment or other uses shall be
permitted which, acting alone or in combination with existing or future
uses, will unduly affect the efficiency or the capacity of the floodway or
unduly increase flood heights, cause increased velocities or obstruct or
otherwise catch or collect debris which will flow under flood conditions
in the floodway.
§ 190-66 GATES CODE § 190-70
179:394
§ 190-70. Determination of location.
Each applicant who requests permission to conduct uses other than those
listed above and whose site is located in the Floodplain Overlay District FPO
shall submit sufficient information to the Town Engineer to prove that the
site in question is not in the floodway of Little Black Creek.
§ 190-70 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-70
179:395

ARTICLE XVIII
(Reserved)24
§ 190-71. through § 190-90. (Reserved)
24.Editor’s Note: Former Art. XVIII, Flood Damage Prevention, was repealed 5-6-2019 by L.L.
No. 1-2019.
§ 190-71 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-71
179:397

ARTICLE XIX
R-1 Residence District
§ 190-91. Purpose.
The purpose of the residential districts is to maintain and promote suitable
living environments and to protect and stabilize the residential character
of the district. The districts are to provide for single-family homes at urban
standards.
§ 190-92. Permitted uses.
The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted in the R-1-15,
R-1-11 and R-1-8 Districts:
§ 190-93. Conditional uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted upon
issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Article XXXII:
A. Single-family dwelling.
B. Customary home occupation.
C. 25 The occasional sale of personal property, commonly known as
"garage sales," "lawn sales" or other similar designation, subject to the
following conditions and limitations: [Added 4-5-1982]
(1) Not more than three sales shall be conducted from any residential
dwelling unit during any one calendar year.
(2) No sale shall be for a period of more than three consecutive days
and shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.
(3) The term "residential dwelling unit" shall include a multiple
dwelling unit.
D. Public recreation and parks owned and maintained by the Town of
Gates.
E. Public buildings and grounds, excluding maintenance, storage or repair
facilities.
F. Farming, excluding animal husbandry and breeding and the storage of
manure.
A. 26Churches and similar institutions.
25.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which listed public schools accredited by the New
York State Department of Education as a permitted use in the R-1-15, R-1-11 and R-1-8
Districts, was repealed 9-5-1979.
26.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, which listed two-family dwelling unit structures as a
conditional use in the R-1 District, was repealed 5-4-1981.
§ 190-91 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-93
179:399
§ 190-94. Dimensional requirements.
B. Nursing care homes approved by the Genesee Region Health Planning
Council and the New York State Health Department.
C. Golf courses, excluding driving ranges, miniature golf facilities,
amusement parks, racetracks or other similar uses.
D. Public utilities substations and uses, excluding power plants or repair
yards, and warehouses or uses of a similar nature.
E. Sale of agriculture products, limited to those products grown on the site
in question and only during the local harvest season.
F. Public, parochial or private schools accredited by the New York State
Department of Education. [Added 9-5-1979]
A. Lot areas. Minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet in the R-1-15
District, 11,000 square feet in the R-1-11 District and 8,000 square feet
in the R-1-8 District. Lot areas shall be increased by 5,000 feet for each
additional dwelling unit.
B. Lot widths and depths.
(1) Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet in the R-1-15 District, 80 feet
in the R-1-11 District and 70 feet in the R-1-8 District. An additional
20 feet of frontage shall be required where there is an additional
dwelling unit.
(2) The lot width may be increased by 10% of the lot depth and the lot
depth reduced accordingly, as long as minimum lot areas are
maintained. This provision may be applied to all lots as long as the
minimum front setback required in these areas is adhered to. The
depth to width ratio shall not exceed 2 1/2 to 1.
C. Setbacks.
(1) Front setbacks shall be as required in § 190-36.
(2) Side and rear yard setbacks. Rear yard setbacks shall be not less
than 30 feet. Unless required elsewhere, there shall be two side
yards for each dwelling unit structure; each side yard shall have a
width of not less than 10% of the required lot width at the front
setback line, but need not exceed 10 feet. No side yard shall be less
than six feet. [Amended 1-17-1977]
(3) Corner lots shall have two front yards. The depth of each yard shall
depend on the type of street that portion of the lot fronts on.
D. Floor areas. Minimum floor areas shall be as follows:
(1) R-1-15 single-family dwellings of one floor level: 1,400 square feet;
all other types of single-family dwellings: 1,750 square feet.
§ 190-93 GATES CODE § 190-94
179:400
§ 190-95. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as listed in Article IV.
§ 190-96. Signs.
Signs are permitted as listed in Article V.
§ 190-97. Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings.
Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings are permitted or, alternatively,
shall be required as listed in Article VI.
§ 190-98. Site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall be secured as required in Article XXXIII.
(2) R-1-11 single-family dwellings of one floor level: 1,100 square feet;
all other types of single-family dwellings: 1,375 square feet.
(3) R-1-8 single-family dwellings with one floor level: 1,000 square
feet; all other types of single-family dwellings: 1,250 square feet.
(4) Seventy-five percent of the above floor areas shall be required for
each additional unit on the site in the appropriate district.
E. Building height. Building shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet.
Accessory structures shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
F. The maximum building lot coverage shall be 25% in the Residential
Zone. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 190-94 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-98
179:401

ARTICLE XX
MR Multiple Residence District
§ 190-99. Purpose.
It is the intent to permit, where appropriate, the construction and
development of multiple-family residences in the Town. At the same time,
the Town does not desire the large-scale development of these units to the
extent that large areas of the Town become so devoted to such use that
single-family residences would appear out of place. Accordingly, areas shall
be zoned as an MR District only upon application for a specific proposal in
accordance with the normal rezoning procedures. In reaching its decision,
the Town Board shall consider the general criteria set forth in this chapter,
the most current Comprehensive Plan for the Town and this statement of
purpose.
§ 190-100. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the MR District:
§ 190-101. Conditional uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted upon
issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Article XXXII:
A. Apartment houses, multiple dwellings and dwelling groups and
condominiums and cooperatives, which are simply apartment units
under certain specific rules of ownership.
B. Two-family-unit structures and other two-unit structures.
C. Normal accessory uses designed as an integral part of the development
and scaled for the exclusive use of the development.
D. Public recreation and parks owned and maintained by the Town of
Gates.
E. Public buildings and grounds, excluding maintenance, storage or repair
facilities.
F. Public schools accredited by the New York State Department of
Education.
A. Customary home occupations.
B. Public utilities substations and uses, excluding power plants or repair
yards and warehouses or uses similar in nature.
C. Nonprofit private schools and nursery or day-care schools, but not
including business, dancing, trade or any other commercially oriented
school.
D. Churches and similar uses.
§ 190-99 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-102
179:403
§ 190-102. Dimensional requirements.
§ 190-103. Off-street parking and loading space requirements.
Off-street parking shall be provided as listed in Article IV.
§ 190-104. Signs.
Signs are permitted as listed in Article V.
A. Lot area. Minimum lot area shall not be less than five acres for multipleresidence
complexes. All other uses shall have lot sizes of not less than
15,000 square feet.
B. Density. Density shall not exceed six dwelling units per acre.
C. Setbacks.
(1) Front setbacks shall be as required in § 190-36.
(2) Side and rear yard setbacks shall not be less than 40 feet between
structures on the site and a property line, plus any required buffer
listed in § 190-34A.
D. Floor areas. Minimum floor areas, exclusive of common areas such as
halls, foyers and basement utility areas, shall be as follows:
(1) Efficiency unit: 450 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom apartment: 600 square feet.
(3) Two-bedroom apartment: 800 square feet.
(4) Three-bedroom apartment: 950 square feet.
(5) Duplex dwelling unit floor areas: same as required in the R-1-15
District.27
E. Building heights.
(1) Principal structures shall not exceed 35 feet.
(2) Accessory structures shall not exceed 15 feet.
F. Open space. There shall be at least 400 square feet of common open
space for recreation, active and/or passive, for each multiple residence.
G. No multiple-residence structure shall contain more than eight dwelling
units. No dwelling unit's floor area shall be below grade level.
H. The maximum building lot coverage shall be 30% in the Multiple
Residential Zone. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
27.Editor's Note: See Article XIX, R-1 Residence District.
§ 190-102 GATES CODE § 190-105
179:404
§ 190-105. Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings.
Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings are permitted or, alternatively,
shall be required as listed in Article VI.
§ 190-106. Site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall be secured as required in Article XXXIII.
§ 190-105 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-106
179:405

ARTICLE XXI
TH Townhouse Residence District
[Added 12-6-1982]
§ 190-107. Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to permit, where appropriate,
the construction and development of townhouses (as herein defined) so
as to provide a variety of housing types, encourage innovation in design
and development, conserve open space ancillary to said dwellings and
protect areas which have or may be partially developed by townhouses from
incompatible uses. At the same time the Town does not desire such a largescale
development of such units to the extent that large areas of the Town
become so devoted to such use that single-family residences would appear
out of place. Accordingly, areas shall be zoned as a TH District only upon
application for a specific proposal.
§ 190-108. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOWNHOUSE DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit which is part of a
townhouse cluster designed and occupied as a residence for one family only.
TOWNHOUSE OR ROWHOUSE CLUSTER — A group of not less than three
nor more than six dwelling units attached to each other by at least one party
wall. The terms "townhouse cluster" and "rowhouse cluster" shall have the
same meaning and may be used interchangeably when used in the language
of this article.
TOWNHOUSE OR ROWHOUSE DEVELOPMENT — Two or more townhouse
clusters with streets, parking areas, sidewalks, common areas and open
spaces, which may include recreational and social facilities intended
principally for the use of the residents of the development, whether
managed as a single and common operating unit or in cooperative form or,
if the dwelling units are sold and conveyed in fee, managed by or through
a homeowners' association, trust or other appropriate arrangement for the
maintenance and conservation of the streets, parking areas, sidewalks,
common areas, open space and facilities.
§ 190-109. Location.
Townhouse clusters and developments shall be limited to and permitted in
those areas which are now or may hereafter be zoned by the Town Board
of the Town of Gates as a Townhouse Residence District in accordance with
the normal rezoning procedures. The Town Board shall consider the general
criteria set forth in this article the most current Comprehensive Plan for the
Town, and the statement of purpose set forth in this article.
§ 190-107 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-110
179:407
§ 190-110. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in a TH District:
§ 190-111. Dimensional requirements.
A. Townhouse clusters and developments.
B. Single-family dwellings which conform to R-1-11 standards as set forth
in Article XIX.
C. Private garages attached or detached for the use of the occupants of the
dwelling units.
D. Maintenance buildings for the development.
E. Parks, playgrounds, play areas and other recreational areas, including
structural facilities incidental to such areas, such as rest rooms,
bathhouses and clubhouses, which facilities are intended principally for
the use of the residents of the development and their guests.
A. Tract area. The minimum tract area for townhouse development shall
be not less than 10 acres.
B. Density. Overall density shall not exceed five dwelling units per gross
acre, and not more than 10 dwelling units shall be allowed on any one
acre of land.
C. Setbacks.
(1) Front setbacks shall be as required in § 190-36.
(2) Side yard setbacks shall be not less than 40 feet between each
cluster.
(3) Rear yard setbacks shall be not less than 20 feet for main building
and five feet for accessory structure.
(4) Setbacks from property lines shall be 40 feet plus the same buffer
area as required for a residential district from other districts as
specified in § 190-34A and B.
D. Individual lot size.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 2,000 square feet.
(2) The minimum lot width at the main building line shall be 20 feet.
(3) The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.
E. Minimum habitable floor area per dwelling unit shall be 1,100 square
feet. No part of the habitable floor area shall be below grade level.
F. Building heights shall be the same as § 190-102E.
§ 190-110 GATES CODE § 190-111
179:408
§ 190-112. Variation of requirements.
Where a proposed townhouse development plan substantially meets the
purpose and objectives of the TH District, the Planning Board is hereby
authorized to vary the following dimensional requirements: § 190-111C(3),
D(1), D(2) and D(3) and G(1).
§ 190-113. Community facilities and open space.
All open spaces and/or community facilities which are a part of a townhouse
development shall be attractively and regularly maintained. In order to
effectively ensure such maintenance, the applicant for the approval of a
townhouse development shall submit to the Planning Board for its review
and approval a proposed written plan which, when finalized, shall be
recorded in the Monroe County Clerk's office. Such plan shall detail
provisions as to the ownership of such areas and facilities, rights and
responsibilities of the residents thereto, method of assessing dues, if any,
and means of enforcement.
§ 190-114. Sewers required; approval.
§ 190-115. Exceptions to certain requirements.
The project commonly known as "Hidden Valley," located on the west side of
Pixley Road, having heretofore received either final or preliminary approval
for its overall development shall not be subject to the dimensional
requirements specified in § 190-111 of this article and may continue to be
developed in accordance with prior approvals.
G. Parking requirements.
(1) A minimum of three paved parking spaces shall be provided for
each dwelling unit, one of which shall be completely enclosed and
covered.
(2) Parking spaces shall not be located in any front setback area.
(3) Appropriate screening shall be provided so as to prevent glare from
headlights.
H. The maximum building lot coverage shall be of 30% in the Townhouse
Residential Zone. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. Townhouse developments shall be permitted only in areas that are
serviced by public water and sanitary sewers.
B. No permit for the construction of townhouses shall be issued unless the
applicant shall first receive approval for a proposed townhouse
development from the Planning Board pursuant to the Subdivision
Ordinance of the Town of Gates, being Chapter 161 of the Code of the
Town of Gates.
§ 190-111 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-115
179:409

ARTICLE XXII
PUD Planned Unit Development District
§ 190-116. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this PUD District to provide flexible land use and
design regulations through the use of performance criteria so that smallto
large-scale neighborhoods or portions thereof can be developed within
the Town that incorporate a variety of residential types and nonresidential
uses, and which may contain both individual building sites and common
property which are planned and developed as a unit. Where PUD is deemed
appropriate through the rezoning of land to a PUD District by the Town
Board, the set of use and dimensional specifications elsewhere in this
chapter are herein replaced by an approval process in which an approved
plan becomes the basis for continuing land use controls. The PUD District
shall be applicable to the area of the Town designated for such use in the
Town's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 190-117. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the PUD District:
§ 190-118. Dimensional requirements.
A. All residential types and their customary uses. The use of a variety of
housing types shall be deemed most in keeping with this district.
B. Business and business, nonretail uses and their customary accessory
uses. These are to be scaled primarily to serve the residents of the PUD.
A. Lot area. The minimum lot area per project shall be 50 acres. Where the
applicant can demonstrate that his holdings will meet the objectives of
this district, the Planning Board may consider sites with less acreage.
B. Lot width and depth. There shall be no lot width and depth
requirements; however, generally, the depth to width ratio, where such
is determinable, should not be greater than 3 to 1.
C. Setbacks.
(1) Front setback for any structure shall meet the minimum
requirements listed in § 190-36.
(2) Side and rear setbacks. Side and rear setbacks shall only apply to
dwellings nearest the exterior project boundaries, unless otherwise
required by the Planning or Town Board, and shall meet the
requirements for such yards stated elsewhere in this chapter for
the respective type of dwelling unit or structure.
D. Building heights.
(1) Principal buildings shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
§ 190-116 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-118
179:411
§ 190-119. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as listed in Article IV.
§ 190-120. Signs.
Signs are permitted as listed in Article V.
§ 190-121. Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings.
Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings are permitted or, alternatively,
shall be required as listed in Article VI.
§ 190-122. Special provisions.
(2) Accessory structures shall not exceed 15 feet.
E. The Planning Board shall set the maximum building lot coverage in the
PUD Residential Zone. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. In order to carry out the purpose of this district, a PUD shall achieve the
following objectives:
(1) A maximum choice in the types of environment, occupancy, tenure,
types of housing, lot sizes and community facilities available to
existing and potential Town residents at all economic levels.
(2) Usable open space and recreation areas.
(3) More convenience in location of accessory commercial and service
areas.
(4) The preservation of trees, outstanding natural topography and
geologic features and the prevention of soil erosion.
(5) A creative use of land and related physical development which
allows an orderly transition of land from rural to urban uses.
(6) An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and
streets and thereby lower housing costs.
(7) A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan.
(8) A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other provisions of this chapter.
B. The tract of land for a project may be owned, leased or controlled either
by a single person or corporation or by a group of individuals or
corporations. An application must be filed by the owner or jointly by
owners of all property included in a project. In the case of multiple
ownership, the approved plan shall be binding on all owners.
§ 190-118 GATES CODE § 190-122
179:412
§ 190-123. Financial responsibility.
No building permit shall be issued for construction within a PUD District
until improvements are installed or a letter of credit is posted in accordance
with the same procedures as provided for in § 277 of the Town Law, relating
C. The rezoning of any property to PUD shall be done in accordance with
the rezoning procedures established in Article XXX.
D. The Town Board shall determine, in each case, the appropriate land use
intensity and dwelling unit density for individual projects and shall
consider any recommendation on the same from the Planning Board.
The determination of land use intensity ratings or dwelling unit
densities shall be completely documented, including all facts, opinions
and judgments justifying the selection of the rating or density.
E. When common property exists, the ownership of such property may be
either public or private. When common property exists in private
ownership, satisfactory arrangements must be made for the
improvement, operation and maintenance of such common property
and facilities, including private streets, drives, service and parking
areas and recreational and open space areas.
F. Site plan review under the provisions of Article XXXIII shall suffice for
Planning Board review of subdivisions under the Town Subdivision
Ordinance,28 subject to the following conditions:
(1) The developer shall prepare sets of subdivision plats suitable for
filing with the Monroe County Clerk in addition to those drawings
required above.
(2) The developer shall plat the entire development as a subdivision;
however, PUD's being developed in stages my be platted and filed
in the same stages.
(3) Final site plan approval under Article XXXIII shall constitute final
plat approval under the Town Subdivision Ordinance, and
provisions of § 276 of the Town Law regarding the filing of a plat
with the Monroe County Clerk shall apply.
G. For the purposes of regulating development and use of property after
initial construction and occupancy, any changes other than use changes
shall be processed as a conditional use request to the Board of Appeals.
Use changes shall also be in the form of a request for conditional use,
except that Town Board approval shall be required. Properties lying in a
PUD District are unique and shall be considered by the Planning Board
or Town Board when evaluating these requests; and maintenance of the
intent and function of the planned unit shall be of primary importance.
H. The development shall be served by public sanitary sewers.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 161, Subdivision of Land.
§ 190-122 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-123
179:413
to subdivisions, and as elsewhere required in this or other ordinances of the
Town of Gates. Other such requirements may also be established from time
to time by the Town Board.
§ 190-123 GATES CODE § 190-123
179:414
ARTICLE XXIII
BN-R Business, Nonretail District
§ 190-124. Purpose.
The purpose of establishing this district is to provide suitable areas for
various nonretail, service-oriented uses that are easily accessible to
neighborhoods or the general public via pedestrian paths and/or bikeways.
Such districts are also intended, where possible, to act as a compatible
transition area between residential areas and business and industrial areas
because of the generally low volumes of traffic associated with such uses,
and their hours of operation and noise characteristics, which make them
compatible as transition uses.
§ 190-125. Permitted uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted in the
BN-R District.
§ 190-126. Conditional uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted upon
issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Article XXXII:
A. Insurance offices of independent or general agents, excluding regional
or district offices of individual companies.
B. Medical and dental offices and clinics, excluding overnight occupancy.
C. Branch banks.
D. Branch offices for uses such as telephone companies.
E. Attorneys' offices.
F. Offices for other licensed professions, such as architects, designers,
engineers, etc., excluding, however, any warehouse or storage areas.
G. Other types of executive or professional offices in accordance with the
purposes of this district.
H. Public buildings and grounds, excluding maintenance, storage or repair
facilities.
A. Drive-in bank auto tellers.
B. Pharmacies, when included with a medical building only.
C. Mortuaries or funeral homes.
D. Nonprofit institutions for charitable, religious, cultural or community
social purposes.
E. Barber- and beauty shops.
§ 190-124 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-126
179:415
§ 190-127. Dimensional requirements.
§ 190-128. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as listed in Article IV.
§ 190-129. Signs.
Signs are permitted as listed in Article V.
§ 190-130. Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings.
Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings are permitted or, alternatively,
shall be required as listed in Article VI.
§ 190-131. Site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall be secured as required in Article XXXIII.
F. Public utilities substations and uses, excluding power plants,
maintenance or storage facilities and uses of a similar nature.
G. Nursery or day-care centers, and nonprofit schools, excluding
commercially oriented schools such as dancing, art and business
schools.
H. Nursing care home.
A. Lot area.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be that necessary to accommodate the
necessary structures and all other loading, parking access and
buffer area regulations required elsewhere in this chapter.
(2) Where uses in this district abut one another, the side and/or rear
yard setback shall not be less than 15 feet exclusive of any parking
or loading area requirements. The lot depth to width ratio should
not exceed 3 to 1.
B. Building height.
(1) Principal structures shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(2) Accessory structures shall not exceed 20 feet.
C. The maximum building lot coverage shall be 15% in the BN-R Business
Zone. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 190-126 GATES CODE § 190-131
179:416
ARTICLE XXIV
NB Neighborhood Business Districts
§ 190-132. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide areas or centers for convenient
shopping to serve residential neighborhoods. These districts shall be
located so as to be generally distributed throughout the Town in proportion
to the population and shall be limited both in size and in proximity to one
another. Additionally, such districts are intended to be designed to attract
pedestrian customers from the surrounding residential development.
§ 190-133. Permitted uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted in the
NB Districts:
§ 190-134. Conditional uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted upon
issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Article XXXII:
A. Grocery stores.
B. Laundromat or dry-cleaning pickup establishments.
C. Bakery stores.
D. Pharmacies.
E. Hardware stores, garden supply stores and paint and wallpaper stores,
excluding outside storage.
F. Barber- and beauty shops.
G. Specialty shops oriented toward serving a neighborhood.
H. Public buildings and grounds, excluding maintenance, storage or repair
facilities.
I. Flower shops.
J. Any use permitted outright or conditionally in a BN-R Business,
Nonretail District. [Added 8-1-1977]
A. Public utilities substations and uses, excluding power plants,
maintenance, storage or repair facilities and uses of a similar nature.
B. Sit-down restaurant.
C. Fast-food restaurant. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
D. Gasoline service station.
§ 190-132 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-135
179:417
§ 190-135. Dimensional requirements.
§ 190-136. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be provided as listed in
Article IV.
§ 190-137. Signs.
Signs are permitted as listed in Article V.
§ 190-138. Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings.
Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings are permitted or, alternatively,
shall be required as listed in Article VI.
§ 190-139. Site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall be secured as required in Article XXXIII.
A. Lot area.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be that necessary to accommodate the
necessary structures and all other loading, parking, access and
buffer area regulations required elsewhere in this chapter.
(2) Where uses in this district abut one another, the side and/or rear
yard setbacks shall not be less than 15 feet, exclusive of any
parking and loading area requirements.
(3) The lot depth to width ratio should not exceed 3 to 1.
B. Building height.
(1) Principal structures shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(2) Accessory structures shall not exceed 20 feet.
C. The maximum building lot coverage shall be 15% in the Neighborhood
Business Zone. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 190-135 GATES CODE § 190-139
179:418
ARTICLE XXV
GB General Business District
§ 190-140. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide the broader range of general and
comparison commercial goods and services necessary to serve a number of
neighborhoods and do so in an orderly fashion that maintains viability of
residential areas and neighborhood commercial centers.
§ 190-141. Permitted uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted in the
GB District:
§ 190-142. Electronic games. [Added 7-19-1982]
A. Any use permitted outright or conditionally in the Neighborhood
Business District, except gasoline service stations and fast-food
restaurants. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
B. Commercial schools, such as barber, beauty, art and dancing studios
and similar uses.
C. Auto accessories and parts, excluding repairs, and home appliances,
furniture and department stores.
D. Liquor stores.
E. Public buildings and grounds, excluding maintenance, storage or repair
facilities.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ELECTRONIC GAME — Any type of machine which operates by electric
power, battery power or any other form of activation and which is
principally intended for use by the general public for the amusement of
the user of such machine upon the payment of a stipulated amount by
inserting one or more coins into such machine or by any other method
and shall include but shall not be limited to pinball machines and video
games. The definition does not include jukeboxes, amusement rides or
bowling alleys.
ELECTRONIC GAME CENTER — Premises which are used to house
electronic games as a principal use.
B. Location. Electronic game centers shall be permitted in a General
Business (GB) District upon the issuance of a conditional use permit by
the Town Board pursuant to Article XXXII.
C. Restrictions.
§ 190-140 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-142
179:419
(1) No electronic game center shall be permitted within a one-fourthmile
radius of any public or private school.
(2) No electronic game center shall have more than 30 machines.
(3) For each machine in an electronic game center and for each
machine where permitted as an accessory use, there shall be not
less than 50 square feet of floor space of which not less than 25
square feet shall be unoccupied, open space. The purpose and
intent of this requirement is to provide minimal space to
accommodate those not playing machines.
(4) All game machines shall at all times be so located and kept in plain
view of any person who may frequent or be in the premises.
(5) No game machine shall be so placed as to block or obstruct any
passageway, fire door, means of ingress or egress or in any manner
which may be or become a fire hazard. Location of game machines
shall be approved by the Town of Gates Fire Marshal.
(6) No electronic game machine shall be used on any premises unless
there is on the premises at least one person 18 years of age or older
all or part of whose responsibility shall be ensuring compliance
with these regulations.
D. Accessory use.
(1) Electronic games shall be permitted as an accessory use to the
following principal uses and none other, subject to the limitations
contained herein as follows:
(a) Bowling alley: one game for each four lanes, not to exceed 12
game machines.
(b) Indoor skating rink (ice or roller): one game for each 800
square feet of floor space, not to exceed 12.
(c) Restaurant: one game for each 30 seats, not to exceed four.
(d) Bar or tavern: one game for each 200 square feet of floor area,
not to exceed four.
(e) Theater, motel or hotel: one machine for each 200 square feet
of lobby area, not to exceed four.
(f) For all other principal uses in a General Business District or a
Neighborhood Business District: one machine for each 500
square feet of floor area, not to exceed three.
(2) Where premises contain more than one use, such as a bar and
restaurant, the principal use to which the premises are devoted
shall determine the maximum number of electronic games
permitted as an accessory use.
§ 190-142 GATES CODE § 190-142
179:420
(3) The requirements specified under § 190-142C(3) through (6) shall
apply to accessory use of electronic games.
E. Licensing.
(1) No person, owner, lessee or occupant of premises shall install or
permit the installation of electronic games where permitted under
this section without first having obtained a license from the Town
Clerk of the Town of Gates. License application forms shall be
provided by the Town of Gates.
(2) As part of the application for a license, the applicant shall provide a
sketch layout of the premises demonstrating thereon compliance
with applicable requirements of this section. The sketch layout
submitted shall have plainly marked thereon the approval of the
Town of Gates Fire Marshal.
(3) The license shall be prominently displayed on the premises.
(4) The license shall be for a period of one year. All licenses shall expire
on the 31st day of December following the date of issue.
(5) Renewal applications shall be filed with the Town Clerk at least 30
days prior to the expiration date of the license.
(6) On each renewal, the applicant shall certify that location of
electronic games has not changed or, if changed, that the change
has been approved by the Fire Marshal.
F. Fees. Fees for electronic game center licenses and all others shall be as
set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board. [Amended
9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
G. Responsibility of licensee. The holder of a license issued hereunder
shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this
section any other applicable state or local laws and shall not permit:
(1) Fighting or rowdy behavior on or about the premises.
(2) Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, except where
duly licensed for on-premises consumption.
(3) The use of marijuana or any controlled substance the use or
possession of which is prohibited by New York Penal Law in or
about the premises.
(4) The offering or giving of any cash awards in any contest involving
an electronic game on the premises.
(5) The use of an electronic game as a gambling device.
H. Unauthorized use of premises. Any use of premises not in accordance
with the requirements of this section shall cease and terminate by
§ 190-142 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-142
179:421
§ 190-143. Conditional uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted upon
issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Article XXXII:
§ 190-144. Dimensional requirements.
December 31, 1982, unless a license has been obtained for the year
1983 by said date.
A. Gasoline service stations.
B. Bowling alleys.
C. Hospitals.
D. Rentals of trucks, trailers, etc., associated with gasoline service
stations or other uses.
E. Theaters.
F. Public utilities substations and uses, excluding power plants,
maintenance, storage or repair facilities, and uses of a similar nature.
G. Bus passenger stations.
H. Motel or hotel.
I. Fast-food service restaurant.
J. Cocktail lounge/tavern. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
K. Pet shops. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
L. Other uses similar in nature but not specifically listed here, subject to
approval of the Town Board.
A. Lot area.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be that necessary to accommodate the
necessary structures and all loading, parking, access and buffer
area regulations required elsewhere in this chapter. When adjacent
to R, MR, BN-R and/or NB Districts, there shall be a minimum
setback distance equal to the height of the tallest structure closest
to that district boundary on the general business site plus the
buffer area required in § 190-34B.
(2) Side and/or rear yard setback shall be equal to the height of the
tallest structure on either lot or 25 feet, whichever is greater,
exclusive of parking and loading requirements.
(3) The depth to width ratio shall not exceed 3 to 1.
B. Building height.
§ 190-142 GATES CODE § 190-144
179:422
§ 190-145. Off-street parking and loading requirement.
Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as listed in Article IV.
§ 190-146. Signs.
Signs are permitted as listed in Article V.
§ 190-147. Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings.
Fences, hedges berms and screen plantings are permitted or, alternatively,
are required as listed in Article VI.
§ 190-148. Site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall be secured as required in Article XXXIII.
(1) Principal structures shall not exceed 40 feet.
(2) Accessory structures shall not exceed 20 feet.
C. The maximum building lot coverage shall be 15% in the General
Business Zone. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 190-144 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-148
179:423

ARTICLE XXVI
LI Limited Industrial District
§ 190-149. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for research- and developmentoriented
industries and regional or district corporate offices and other
compatible light manufacturing operations in industrial park-like or
campus-like environments.
§ 190-150. Permitted uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted in the
LI District:
§ 190-151. Conditional uses.
A. Scientific research or experimental development of materials, methods
or products, including engineering and laboratory research.
B. Administrative, educational and other related activities and facilities in
conjunction with a permitted use.
C. Manufacture of electric, electronic or optical instruments or devices.
D. Light manufacturing, assembling, fabricating or packaging of products
from previously prepared materials, such as cloth, plastic, paper,
leather, precious or semiprecious metals or stone.
E. Manufacture of food products, pharmaceuticals and the like, but not
including the production of fish, meat or dairy products or fermented
foods, such as sauerkraut, vinegar or the like or the rendering of fats
and oils.
F. Regional or district offices of various types of companies, such as
insurance companies.
G. Public buildings and grounds, excluding maintenance, repair or outdoor
storage facilities.
H. Public utility substations and uses, excluding power plants,
maintenance, storage or repair facilities or uses of a similar nature.
I. Electrical contractors and plumbing contractors. [Added 9-7-1999 by
L.L. No. 2-1999]
J. Kitchen and bath design display facilities. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L.
No. 2-1999]
A. Any use of a similar nature but not specifically listed in § 190-150 may
apply for a conditional use permit, subject to approval of the Town
Board.
§ 190-149 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-151
179:425
§ 190-152. Dimensional requirements.
§ 190-153. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be provided as listed in
Article IV.
§ 190-154. Signs.
Signs are permitted as listed in Article V.
§ 190-155. Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings.
Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings are permitted or, alternatively,
are required as listed in Article VI.
B. Warehouses and storage facilities. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
A. Lot area.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be that necessary to accommodate the
necessary structures and all loading, parking, access and buffer
area regulations required elsewhere in this chapter. When adjacent
to R, MR, BN-R and/or NB Districts, there shall be a minimum
setback distance equal to the height of the tallest structure closest
to that district boundary on the limited industrial site plus the
required buffer area in § 190-34B.
(2) Side and/or rear setback shall be equal to the height of the tallest
structure on either lot or 30 feet, whichever is greater, exclusive of
parking and/or loading requirements.
(3) The depth to width ratio shall not exceed 3 to 1.
(4) On an interior project road where the same uses abut one another,
the minimum side yard setback shall be 10% of the lot width at the
required front setback line. No side yard shall be less than 10 feet.
A side yard in excess of 15 feet shall not be required. [Added
1-17-1977]
(5) Where the uses abut one another, as provided in Subsection A(4)
above, the required side yard may be used for parking and/or
loading. Where so used, it shall be screened from the road upon
which the use fronts by evergreen or other appropriate screen
planting. [Added 1-17-1977]
B. Building height. Structures shall not exceed 50 feet.
C. The maximum building lot coverage shall be 45% in the Limited
Industrial Zone. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 190-151 GATES CODE § 190-156
179:426
§ 190-156. Site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall be secured as required in Article XXXIII.
§ 190-157. Additional requirements for permitted and conditional
uses.
A. All assembly, research, engineering, administration, storage and other
related activities shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings.
B. At no time shall any use result in or cause dissemination of dust, smoke,
smog, observable gas, fumes, odors, radiation or other atmospheric
pollution, objectionable noise, glare or vibrations, or hazard of fire or
explosion, or any other physical hazard to any adjacent buildings, to any
plant growth or to any land adjacent to the site. In terms of noise, uses
in this district shall be subject to the same decibel requirement for the
same areas as specified in § 190-201B(2)(b) of this chapter.
C. The architectural treatment and general appearance of all buildings
and grounds shall be in keeping with the purpose of this district and
shall be of such quality and design as to be a visual asset to the area in
which they are located as well as to adjacent development.
§ 190-156 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-157
179:427

ARTICLE XXVII
GI General Industrial District
§ 190-158. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for the establishment of the socalled
"heavy" industries, essential to the development of a well-balanced
industrial environment, in a manner which will not be detrimental to the
adjacent development or general community health, safety or welfare.
§ 190-159. Permitted uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted in the
GI District:
§ 190-160. Conditional uses.
The following uses and their customary accessory uses are permitted upon
the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Article XXXII:
A. Uses permitted and conditionally permitted in the LI District, with the
exception of adult uses. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
B. Automobile rental agencies and valet parking services. [Amended
9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
C. Lumberyards.
D. Trucks, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles
and minibike sales and service, new car sales and services and, in
conjunction therewith, used car sales and service. [Amended
6-8-1978]
E. Machine and sheet metal shops; press operations; upholstering,
welding and monument works.
F. Building materials yards, excluding concrete plants.
G. Printing, publishing and bookbinding.
H. Construction equipment storage and repair.
I. Public buildings and grounds, including storage and repair.
J. Public utilities substations and uses, including storage and repair,
power plants and other similar uses.
K. Automotive engine repair facilities excluding collision shops and body
shops. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
L. Bottling plants, dairies, carpet cleaning and other cleaning and dyeing
plants, laundries, photocopying and blueprinting.
A. Junkyards, autowrecking or dismantling yards and similar uses.
§ 190-158 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-160
179:429
§ 190-161. Dimensional requirements.
§ 190-162. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as listed in Article IV.
B. Cement plants.
C. Truck and freight terminals.
D. Excavation (quarrying).
E. Any other use of a similar character upon issuance of a conditional use
permit, subject to approval of the Town Board.
F. Small animal hospitals and/or kennels by application for conditional use
permit to the Planning Board of the Town of Gates. [Added 6-8-1978]
A. Lot area.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be that necessary to accommodate the
necessary structures and all loading, parking, access and buffer
area regulations required elsewhere in this chapter. When adjacent
to R, MR and/or NB Districts, there shall be a minimum setback
distance equal to the height of the tallest structure closest to that
district boundary on the general industrial site plus the required
buffer area in § 190-34B.
(2) Side and/or rear yard setback shall be equal to the height of the
tallest structure on either lot or 40 feet, whichever is greater, and
shall be exclusive of loading and/or parking requirements.
(3) The depth to width ratio shall not exceed 4 to 1.
(4) On an interior project road where the same uses abut one another,
the minimum side yard setback shall be 10% of the lot width at the
required front setback line. No side yard shall be less than 10 feet.
A side yard in excess of 15 feet shall not be required. [Added
1-17-1977]
(5) Where the uses abut one another, as provided in Subsection A(4)
above, the required side yard may be used for parking and/or
loading. Where so used, it shall be screened from the road upon
which the use fronts by evergreen or other appropriate screen
plantings. [Added 1-17-1977]
B. Building height. Structures shall not exceed 50 feet.
C. The maximum building lot coverage shall be 45% in the General
Industrial Zone. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 190-160 GATES CODE § 190-163
179:430
§ 190-163. Signs.
Signs are permitted as listed in Article V.
§ 190-164. Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings.
Fences, hedges, berms and screen plantings are permitted or, alternatively,
are required as listed in Article VI.
§ 190-165. Site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall be secured as listed in Article XXXIII.
§ 190-166. Additional requirements for permitted and conditional
uses.
A. All areas of outdoor storage or equipment parking, or both, shall be
screened in such a manner that the stored material or parked
equipment cannot be seen from the public road on which the use fronts
and/or abuts.
B. At no time shall any use result in or cause dissemination of dust, smoke,
smog, observable gas, fumes, odors, radiation or other atmospheric
pollution; objectionable noise, glare or vibrations; or hazard to any
adjacent buildings, to any plant growth or to any land adjacent to the
site.
C. The architectural treatment and general appearance of all buildings
and grounds shall be in keeping with the purpose of this district and
shall be of such quality and design as to be a visual asset to the area in
which they are located as well as to adjacent development.
§ 190-163 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-166
179:431

ARTICLE XXVIII
AOD Airport Overlay District
§ 190-167. Purpose.
The purposes of these regulations are to promote safe and efficient flight
operations connected with the Rochester-Monroe County Airport by limiting
the heights of structures and objects of natural growth in areas necessary
for airport operations, in accordance with Federal Aviation Agency
standards for planes using the airport, and to protect the lives and property
of the occupants of land in the vicinity of the airport by regulating the use
of property within specified areas adjacent to and extending outward from
the boundary of the airport, in the Town of Gates.
§ 190-168. Delineation of districts.
§ 190-169. Regulations.
A. There are hereby established Airport Overlay Districts a(AOD-a),
b(AOD-b) and c(AOD-c) to accomplish the purposes described above.
These districts are delineated more specifically on the Zoning Map
which is a part of this chapter.29 These districts provide for
unobstructed air spaces for general use, instrument approach areas
and noninstrument approach areas, as well as additional regulations
that apply to areas already covered elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Where these districts overlay any primary zoning district delineated on
the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Gates, the requirements of these
districts shall be met in addition to those requirements specified for
development in the respective primary district; provided, however, that
where the requirements specified in any or all of these districts are
more restrictive or require review before development can take place,
then the requirements specified in this article shall supersede those
requirements and administrative review procedures required for
development in the primary zoning district.
A. Airport Overlay District a(AOD-a). No permit for any land use shall be
issued and no map subdividing such lands into lots for residential,
business or industrial purposes in such areas shall be accepted for filing
by the Monroe County Clerk unless it shall have been approved by the
Monroe County Director of Planning and shall have such approval
endorsed thereon. The Building Inspector shall refer all building
permits, occupancy permits and all other types of permits for land use
and/or land subdivision to the Planning Director for his review. The
following requirements shall be met before any building permit can be
issued by the Building Inspector.
29.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map and amendments thereto are on file in the office of the
Town Clerk.
§ 190-167 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-169
179:433
§ 190-170. Review procedures.
B. Airport Overlay District b(AOD-b). The Building Inspector shall refer
every application for a building, structure, wire, tower, smokestack,
pole, overhead transmission line, fence, derrick or any other object
constructed or installed by man, regardless of height, to the Director of
Public Works of Monroe County. Additionally, any tree or any other
object of natural growth in this district should be reviewed by the
Director of Public Works.
C. Airport Overlay District c(AOD-c). The Building Inspector shall refer
every application for items listed in Subsection B above, including those
of natural growth, which exceed 40 feet in height above ground level of
the particular site, to the Director of Public Works.
D. The Building Inspector shall refer every application for items listed in
Subsection B above, including those of natural growth, to the Director
of Public Works where the specific object is outside any of the overlay
districts listed above and exceeds 75 feet in height above ground level
where it is to be located.
E. Potential hazards.
(1) The Building Inspector shall refer to the Director of Public Works
every application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy
for a structure or use of land which has the potential of creating
any condition listed below: [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
(a) Interference with radio communications or signaling between
the airport and aircraft.
(b) Impairment of visibility in the vicinity of the airport.
(c) Placement of lights in a location or manner that may make it
difficult for fliers to distinguish such lights and airport lights.
(d) Production of glare in the eyes of fliers using the airport.
(e) Any other interference that might tend to endanger the
landing, taking-off or maneuvering of aircraft.
(2) Such referral shall pertain to any use or structure in the Town
which could or would create the conditions listed above. The
Building Inspector should contact the Director of Public Works of
Monroe County if he is unsure as to whether to submit a particular
permit request.
A. Procedures for § 190-169A. The Director of Planning shall review and
approve, modify or disapprove plans submitted for subdivision
development or land use relating to the efficient and safe operation of
the Rochester-Monroe County Airport. No permit shall be issued, no
subdivision granted and no structure constructed until the Town has
§ 190-169 GATES CODE § 190-170
179:434
received the written report of the Planning Director stating his approval
or modification. When the plan is approved or modified by the Planning
Director, the Building Inspector may then issue the appropriate permits
in conformance with the requirements of the primary zoning district in
which the permit is for, in addition to the conditions that may have been
stipulated by the Director of Planning. No permit may be issued when
the request has been disapproved by the Planning Director.
B. Procedures for § 190-169B, C, D and E.
(1) The Director of Public Works of Monroe County, or his authorized
designee, shall review the location and height of the proposed
structure above ground level or, alternatively, examine the
proposed use to determine if it would, in either case, result in one
or more hazards to aircraft operations. In the event that in neither
case would there be a hazard to aircraft operations, the Director or
his designee shall notify the Building Inspector that the permit
need only meet requirements of the local code or ordinance. In the
event that it is found that either the height of the structure or the
use would present a hazard to aircraft operations, the Director
shall determine to what extent the hazards exist and what
modifications should be made to eliminate or satisfactorily reduce
the hazard. The results of the investigation, which may take into
account existing structural heights and uses in the immediate
vicinity of the permit in question, shall be transmitted to the
Building Inspector. Such notification shall state that the application
for building permit, for use or for certificate of occupancy is to be
denied if the request is for a structure or use within one mile of the
boundary of the airport, or the notification shall recommend that
the permit application be denied if it is beyond the one-mile
distance.
(2) The Director or his designee shall have 30 days from the date of
receipt of the request to render his decision; however, where it is
not necessary to conduct a detailed investigation, the Director or
his designee shall attempt to render a decision within 10 days.
However, if no action is taken by the Director of Public Works or his
designee within 30 days, then the application shall be deemed to
have been approved.
(3) Building permits and certificates of occupancy shall expire 18
months after issuance, unless provided otherwise in this chapter.
(4) A nonconforming structure, natural object or use of land or
structure existing as of March 12, 1965, may continue in existence
without change; provided, however, that the owner of the
structure, natural object or use may be required to install or may be
required to permit the installation of markers and lights necessary
to indicate the location of the hazard to aircraft operators in the
vicinity of the airport.
§ 190-170 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-170
179:435
§ 190-171. Appeals procedure.
(a) No structure, use of land or natural object existing as of March
12, 1965, which is nonconforming to the provisions of this
district shall be altered or permitted to grow so as to increase
its height. No existing structure or object of natural growth
which is not nonconforming shall be permitted to be altered or
to grow to a height which would render it nonconforming.
(b) Unless provided for otherwise elsewhere in this chapter,
whenever a structure or use of structure or land which is
nonconforming to the provisions of § 190-169B, C, D and E is
destroyed or torn down to the extent of 80% or more of its
effective utility, any permit for reconstruction, occupancy or
reuse of the site shall be subject to review as stipulated in the
above-mentioned sections.
(5) Unless provided for otherwise elsewhere in this chapter, any
structure or use of land which is nonconforming to the provisions of
§ 190-169B, C, D and E shall be considered to be abandoned when
use has been voluntarily discontinued for a period of 24 months.
When such is the case, as determined by the Building Inspector,
any permit for reuse or occupancy or any building permit shall be
subject to review as stipulated in the above-mentioned sections.
A. For applications listed in § 190-169A:
(1) An appeal from a decision of the Director of Planning shall be made
to the Monroe County Planning Board. The Board may affirm,
modify or overrule such decisions.
(2) The County Planning Board shall establish and make rules,
regulations and the criteria for acting upon appeals.
B. For applications listed in § 190-169B, C, D and E:
(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Public Works
of Monroe County or his designee may appeal to the County of
Monroe.
(2) Variances may be granted where the literal enforcement of these
regulations contained in this provision would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship to the applicant, provided that it
is found that relief from these provisions would not be contrary to
the public interest and public safety and would conform to the
spirit of this district. When determining whether a variance should
be granted, prior existing structures and uses of land or structures
which are nonconforming to the provisions of this district may be
taken into consideration, when in the immediate vicinity of the site
or use in question, in order to determine if the granting of the
variance would result in a material increase of the airport hazard.
§ 190-170 GATES CODE § 190-171
179:436
§ 190-172. Additional requirements.
Where an application has been approved by the Director of Planning or has
been approved upon appeal to the County Planning Board, the request shall
thereafter be reviewed by the Director of Public Works of Monroe County
or his designee to determine compliance with § 190-169B, C, D and E and
the subsequent provisions that relate to implementation of these respective
sections.
When granting a variance the applicant may be required to meet
any conditions necessary to protect the public health and safety.
(3) Penalties for violations of § 190-169B, C, D and E and the
subsequent sections of this district that implement these sections
shall be the same as those required for the remainder of this
chapter; provided, however, that a penalty of $500 shall be
recovered by Monroe County in a civil action at the request of the
Director of Public Works, whether in an action for a penalty or in
action in equity for injunctive relief.
§ 190-171 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-172
179:437

ARTICLE XXIX
Administrative Provisions
§ 190-173. Administration.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power and duty to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. The officer shall be appointed and may be
removed by the Town Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Town
Board of Gates. An appeal from a ruling by him regarding a requirement of
this chapter may be made only to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 190-174. Form of petitions, applications and appeals.
All petitions, applications and appeals provided for in this chapter shall be
made on forms prescribed by the Town Board. Forms shall be accompanied
by plans and specifications as required by this chapter.
§ 190-175. Filing fees.
Fees shall be paid to the Town Clerk upon the filing of an application.
Such fees shall be as established by Town Board resolution and are not
refundable.
§ 190-176. Notice of public hearings. [Amended 5-6-2019 by L.L.
No. 1-2019]
When the Town Board, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals is
required to hold a public hearing, as provided for in this chapter or
elsewhere by law, notice of the hearing shall be given in the following
manner:
A. Each notice of a public hearing for Town Board, Planning Board, and
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town, posted on the Town website, and Town bulletin
board at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. Additionally:
(1) The applicant shall be responsible for notifying all property owners
of record within 300 feet of the outside perimeter or boundary line
of property involved in the application with the letter included in
the application package at least five days prior to the scheduled
public hearing. Sufficient notice shall be deemed to have been
given if mailed and/or hand-delivered to the property owner at the
tax billing address listed on the property records of the Town
Assessor's Office.
(2) At the Town Board, Planning Board, and/or Zoning Board of
Appeals meeting the applicant will provide to the Board the
affidavit of mailings (included in the application package) certifying
that sufficient notice was completed prior to the public hearing.
§ 190-173 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-176
179:439
§ 190-177. Limitation of new applications.
In a case where a conditional use permit or a variance is denied by the
authorized board, as the case may be, unless specifically stated to be
without prejudice, said permit or variance shall not be eligible for
resubmittal for the period of one year from the date of said denial, unless,
in the opinion of the authorized board, new evidence is submitted or
conditions have changed to an extent that further consideration is
warranted or as provided by § 267 of the Town Law.
§ 190-178. Certificate of occupancy; change in use of land or
structure.
B. Each notice of a hearing regarding an amendment to this chapter shall
be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Town at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
C. Each notice of a hearing on an appeal authorized by this chapter shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town not less
than five days prior to the date of the hearing.
D. Posting of property.
(1) The board reviewing the application will request that Town staff
post the property under consideration with the following
information prominently displayed on each road frontage:
(a) What is being requested.
(b) The date, time and location of public hearing.
(2) Such sign shall be provided by the Town, and such sign shall be
posted at least 15 days prior to the hearing date and shall be
removed by the Town within five days after the hearing.
A. Upon the completion of a structure legally erected or altered, as
required by this chapter, a permit for the occupancy of the structure
and the use designated in the building permit shall be issued within 10
days of a written request for inspection. No structure shall be occupied
or the premises used until such permit is issued, and such certificate
shall automatically become invalid upon any change in use of said
premises.
B. It shall be unlawful to change the occupancy or the use of any land or
structure unless: [Added 10-29-1979]
(1) Prior to such change in the use of land or structure from the use
stated on the certificate of occupancy issued for said land or
structure, or, if no certificate of occupancy was issued, from the use
of land or structure in existence at the time of the adoption of this
amendment, the owner of the premises or his duly authorized agent
§ 190-176 GATES CODE § 190-178
179:440
§ 190-179. Planning Board.
Pursuant to § 271 of the Town Law, the Planning Board of the Town of
Gates shall consist of seven members appointed by the Town Board, in such
manner and for such terms as provided in the Town Law. For the purpose
of initiating a Planning Board under this chapter, the normal continuance
of the existing Planning Board is established. The Planning Board shall
have power to pursue all those duties established for it by statute and
this chapter. Such Board shall establish such rules and regulations as are
necessary for the transaction of its business and may amend, modify and
repeal the same.
§ 190-180. Zoning Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 267 of the Town Law, a Board of Appeals is
hereby created. Said Board shall consist of seven members to be appointed
by the Town Board, which shall also designate the Chairman thereof, for
such terms as provided by the Town Law and any amendments thereto; and
the Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and perform all the duties
prescribed by statute and by this chapter. For the purpose of initiating a
Board of Appeals under this chapter, the normal continuance of the existing
Board of Appeals is established. Said Board shall establish and from time to
time amend or repeal rules and regulations for the effectuation of its powers
and duties.
shall make an application in writing, on forms provided by the Town
of Gates, for a certificate of occupancy for the proposed use.
(2) The application shall be filed with the Building Inspector of the
Town of Gates, who shall review the application for the proposed
use and determine if said use complies with and conforms to the
various requirements of this chapter applicable to the proposed
use.
(3) Within 10 days from the date of the filing of the application, the
Building Inspector shall either issue a certificate of occupancy for
the proposed use or deny the same in writing, stating the reasons
for such denial.
(4) The same fee as that charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be
charged to the applicant for a change of use certificate, and the
same penalties as provided in Article XXXIV of this chapter shall be
applicable.
§ 190-178 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-180
179:441

ARTICLE XXX
Amendments
§ 190-181. Purpose.
This chapter may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts
(rezoning of land) or by changing any text provision herein, whenever the
public necessity and convenience and the general welfare require such
amendment, by following the procedures of this article.
§ 190-182. Authorization to initiate.
An amendment to the text or the Zoning Map may be initiated by:
§ 190-183. Application.
A property owner(s) or his agent(s) may initiate a request for an amendment
to this chapter by filing an application with the Town Clerk, using forms
provided by the Town for such requests. Such application shall be
accompanied by a legal description of the property or properties affected
and a map showing the property or properties affected and all properties
within a radius of 500 feet of the exterior boundaries thereof. Such
application shall be referred to the Town Board for its consideration and
further action.
§ 190-184. Referral to Planning Board.
The Town Board may refer an application for zoning amendment to the
Planning Board, when such was not initiated by such Board, for review and
recommendation. The Town Board may also specify the time limit on the
review by the Planning Board.
§ 190-185. Public hearing.
A public hearing shall be held by the Town Board before an amendment is
permitted. Notice of said hearing shall be provided as required in § 190-176.
§ 190-186. Hearing before Town Board.
When applicable, in no case shall any amendment or change be finally
considered by the Town Board until all provisions of this chapter have
been met. If the Town Board proposes to adopt an amendment that is
substantially altered from the recommendation of the Planning Board, the
Town Board may refer said proposed amendment back to the Planning
Board for report and recommendation before adoption.
A. Resolution of intention of the Town Board.
B. Resolution of intention of the Planning Board.
C. Application by one or more property owners or their agents.
§ 190-181 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-187
179:443
§ 190-187. Notification of decision.
The Town Board shall notify the applicant for amendment in writing of the
Town Board's decision within five business days after the decision has been
rendered.
§ 190-188. Records.
The Town Clerk shall maintain separate files and records of each
amendment to the map or this chapter, which shall be open to public
inspection upon request.
§ 190-187 GATES CODE § 190-188
179:444
ARTICLE XXXI
Variances
§ 190-189. Purpose.
Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent
with the general purposes of this chapter may result from the strict
application of certain provisions thereof, variances may be granted as
provided in this section.
§ 190-190. Authorization to grant or deny.
Any permitted variance to this chapter shall be authorized by the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with the standards and procedures set
forth in this section and/or the laws of the State of New York. In granting
a variance, the Board of Appeals may impose conditions similar to those
provided for conditional uses to protect the best interests of the
surrounding property, the neighborhood or the Town as a whole.
§ 190-191. Application.
A property owner(s) or his agent(s) may initiate a request for a variance
by filing an application with the authorized official, using forms provided
by the Town for such requests. Such application shall be accompanied by
either a legal description or tape location map of the property and, as
deemed necessary by the Board of Appeals, plans and elevations necessary
to show the proposed variance, other drawings or information necessary to
an understanding of the proposed use and its relationship to surrounding
properties and a filing fee as required in the Town's fee schedule,
established by Town Board resolution.
§ 190-192. Circumstances for granting. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L.
No. 2-1999]
The Board of Appeals may grant area and use variances from the terms of
this chapter only in the event that all of the circumstances as provided in
Town Law § 267-b, Subdivisions 2 and 3, exist.
§ 190-193. Public hearing. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
Before the Board of Appeals may act on a request for a variance, it shall
hold a public hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be given as provided
in § 190-176, and a decision shall be rendered within 62 days of the final
hearing date.
§ 190-194. Notification of decision.
The Board of Appeals shall, in writing, notify the applicant for a variance of
the Board's decision, within five days after the decision has been rendered.
A building permit must be obtained within six months of the decision date;
substantial construction must start within one year.
§ 190-189 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-194
179:445

ARTICLE XXXII
Conditional Use Permit Review Procedures
§ 190-195. Purpose.
The purpose of conditional use approval is to allow the proper integration
of uses into the community and zoning districts, plans and elevations
necessary to show the proposed development, any requirements listed in
§ 190-196, as determined necessary by the review board, and other
drawings or information necessary for an understanding of the proposed
use and its relationship to surrounding properties and a filing fee as
required in the Town's fee schedule, established by Town Board resolution,
no part of which is returnable.
§ 190-196. Authorization to grant or deny.
The conditional uses listed in this chapter may be permitted upon
authorization of the appropriate board authorized to do so by Town Board
resolution or, alternatively, the Town Board, in accordance with the
standards and procedures set forth in this article. In permitting a
conditional use or the modification of a conditional use, the appropriate
board may impose, in addition to those standards and requirements
expressly specified by this chapter, any additional conditions which the
Board considers necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding
property, the neighborhood or the Town as a whole. These conditions may
include but are not limited to increasing the required lot size or yard
dimensions; limiting the height of buildings; controlling the location and
number of vehicle access points; increasing the street width; increasing
the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required; limiting the
number, size and location of signs; and requiring diking, fencing, screening,
landscaping or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property. In the
case of a use existing prior to the effective date of this chapter and classified
in this chapter as a conditional use, any change in use or in lot area or
an alteration of structure shall conform with the requirements dealing with
conditional uses.
§ 190-197. Application.
A property owner(s) or his agent(s) may initiate a request for a conditional
use by filing an application with the authorized official, using forms
provided by the Town for such requests. Such application shall be
accompanied by a legal description of the property, a map showing the
property and all properties within a radius of 500 feet of the exterior
boundaries thereof, plans and elevations necessary to show the proposed
development, any requirements listed in § 190-196, as determined
necessary by the review board, and other drawings or information
necessary for an understanding of the proposed use and its relationship
to surrounding properties and a filing fee as required in the Town's fee
schedule, established by Town Board resolution, no part of which is
returnable.
§ 190-195 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-198
179:447
§ 190-198. Governing standards.
A conditional use shall comply with the standards of the zone in which it
is located, except as these standards have been modified in authorizing the
conditional use or as otherwise modified when consideration is given the
following:
§ 190-199. Public hearing.
Before a conditional use is permitted, the proposed conditional use shall
be considered by the appropriate board at a public hearing. Notice of said
hearing shall be given as provided in § 190-176.
§ 190-200. Notification of action.
The appropriate board shall, in writing, notify the applicant for a conditional
use of the Board's action, within five days after the decision has been
rendered.
A. In order to grant any conditional use, the appropriate board shall find
that the request is:
(1) In harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and
of other respective zoning districts in which it is proposed.
(2) Would not be detrimental in any way to any uses permitted in the
respective zone or adjacent zones, taking into account the location
and size of use, the nature and intensity of the operations involved
in connection with it and the size of the site in respect to streets
giving access thereto.
B. In order to grant any conditional use, the appropriate board shall find
that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use applied for
will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental
to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood of such proposed use or be detrimental or injurious
to the property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the
general welfare of the Town.
C. A conditional use permit shall become void one year after approval
unless, by conditions of the use permit, greater or lesser time is
specified as a condition of approval or unless, prior to the expiration of
one year, a building permit is issued and substantial construction is
started within two years. The reviewing board may extend the permit
for a period of one year subject to the requirements of this article.
D. The appropriate board, on its own motion, may revoke any conditional
use permit for noncompliance with conditions set forth in the granting
of said permit after first notifying the applicant of the violations and of
the time period for compliance.
§ 190-198 GATES CODE § 190-201
179:448
§ 190-201. Uses subject to issuance of conditional permit.
The following uses shall be subject to issuance of a conditional use permit
by the Town Board. The Board may, in addition to administering the
requirements listed for other conditional use permits and all requirements
contained elsewhere in this chapter, consider and be guided by the
following factors for each respective use:
A. Gasoline service stations.
(1) There should be no more than one such station for each 1,000
residents in the Town.
(2) The gasoline service station and all customary uses and operations
associated with the facility should not be located closer than 200
feet to a residential district or be separated from such district by
another nonresidential use, or meet both requirements, as the case
may be.
(3) They shall be located at either major origin and/or destination
points within the community, such as shopping areas or areas near
major employment centers or in neighborhood service centers
located at the intersection of two major roads, that is roads
identified as either arterial or collector, in the Town Comprehensive
Plan. Each service station shall comply with access requirements
as listed elsewhere in this chapter.
(4) They shall be designed in keeping with the prevailing architectural
characteristics of the adjacent area and development.
(5) Outdoor merchandise shall be limited to those items that are stored
inside at the time the station closes.
(6) Lubrication and repair facilities shall be located within wholly
enclosed structures; provided, further, that repairs shall be limited
to those which do not require the retention of a vehicle any longer
than two full working days. Such vehicles shall be kept inside the
station.
(7) There shall be no outdoor storage of any disabled or dismantled
vehicle. There shall be no outdoor storage of more than five
vehicles, each vehicle having a valid license plate and/or New York
State inspection sticker, and no more than two of which vehicles
may be commercial vehicles. Where such use is allowed, the area
shall be kept neat and shall be screened from adjacent uses by an
opaque-type fence consistent with the character of adjacent uses
and buffered with screen plantings if seen from a residential
district.
(8) Outdoor storage of used oil or other material of a reusable nature
shall be screened from the view of the general public by an opaque
§ 190-201 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-201
179:449
fence. Any dumpster or other facility for outdoor storage of waste
material shall be similarly screened.
(9) No gasoline pump should be closer than 25 feet from a property
line or future highway right-of-way, if one has been determined.
(10) Grease and other filters and/or traps shall be provided as
recommended or required by the Monroe County Health
Department for the purpose of protection of the public sewer
system and public bodies of water.
(11) The use shall be located so as not to interfere with pedestrian
circulation patterns in the immediate vicinity and shall not increase
traffic hazards and congestion through turning movements or other
means.
(12) Outdoor lighting shall not cause glare or nuisance to adjoining
uses.
B. Vehicle washes.
(1) Coin-operated vehicle washes. These washes are intended to be
those where the vehicle operator washes the vehicle by using a
hose which is geared to a coin-operated, timed mechanism.
(a) The vehicle washing facility or customary uses or operations
associated with the facility shall be located no closer than 300
feet from any residential district and should be separated from
a residential district by another nonresidential use, or meet
both requirements, as the case may be.
(b) All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed
building which shall be designed in keeping with the facades of
adjacent land uses.
(c) Vacuuming facilities may be outside the building but shall not
be in the front yard and shall meet the respective setback
requirements as listed in Article XXV for the General Business
District. Such area may be buffered or screened as deemed
necessary.
(d) Off-street parking shall be provided on the property in the ratio
of not less than four parking spaces at the exit from each stall
and one space per employee. Each space shall meet the
minimum requirements for a parking space as required in
Article IV.
(e) All off-street parking areas shall be paved.
(f) Any lights used to illuminate the area shall be directed away
from adjacent properties.
§ 190-201 GATES CODE § 190-201
179:450
(g) The use shall close operations at a reasonable hour, as
determined by the Town Board.
(h) The same as in Subsection A(11) and (12) for gasoline service
stations.
(2) Automatic vehicle washers. These washers are intended to be those
where the vehicle is either slowly driven through or pulled through
by an automatic-chain mechanism, a vehicle wash in which the
vehicle operator does not perform any of the washing functions
other than to drive the vehicle where necessary.
(a) The vehicle washing facility and customary uses or operations
associated with the facility shall not be located closer than 500
feet from a residential district and should be separated from a
residential district by at least two other nonresidential uses, or
meet both requirements, as the case may be.
(b) Noise.
[1] All vehicle wash operations shall be so soundproofed, the
entire development shall be so arranged and the
operations shall be so conducted that the noise emanating
therefrom, as measured from any point on adjacent
property, shall be no more audible than the noise
emanating from the ordinary street traffic and from other
commercial or industrial uses measured at the same point
on said adjacent property; except that in no event shall it
be necessary to reduce the noise from such operations as
measured from any point on the adjacent lot in a
residential and/or business nonretail district to below 65
decibels, or to below 70 decibels, as measured from any
point from adjacent property in a neighborhood and/or
light and general industrial districts.
[2] The comparison between noise emanating from the vehicle
wash and from the street and commercial or industrial
uses shall be made at the same time of the day. The decibel
readings shall be the power averages from several
readings.
[3] All sound-level meter performance, including the
definitions and units, shall be in accordance with the
American Standards Association standards.
[4] The Town Board may permit temporary deviations from
these requirements in those cases and for such periods of
time as it finds that no one will be adversely affected. The
reasons for allowing such deviations shall be fully
documented as part of the Board's report on the project.
§ 190-201 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-201
179:451
(c) There shall be provided not less than 10 parking spaces for the
entrance to each washing area if there are two bays and seven
if there are three or more bays, and five parking spaces at the
exit of each washing area. Each space shall meet the minimum
requirements for a parking space as required in Article IV. One
parking space shall also be provided for each employee on
maximum shift.
(d) Vacuuming facilities may be provided outside but shall meet
the setback requirements as listed in Article XXV for the
General Business District.
(e) The only operations conducted on the property shall be the
washing of vehicles and vacuuming of interiors of vehicles.
(f) The same as in Subsection A(10) for gasoline service stations.
(g) Any lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
(h) All off-street parking areas shall be paved.
(i) All washing operations shall be conducted within enclosed
structures which shall be exteriorly designed to be in keeping
with the exterior facades of adjacent land uses.
(j) The same as Subsection A(11) and (12) for gasoline service
stations.
(k) All requirements listed above shall apply to automatic vehicle
washes that are operated in conjunction with and/or are
accessory to gasoline service stations, except that the parking
spaces required at the entrance to and exit from such washing
bay may be reduced to three and two spaces, respectively.
C. Funeral homes.
(1) The same as in Subsection A(11) and (12) for gasoline service
stations.
(2) All parts of the operation, exclusive of parking, shall take place
within an entirely enclosed building.
(3) There shall be either screen plantings or an opaque-type fence
consistent with the character of the surrounding area, or both, to
act as a visual buffer along the boundaries between this and other
uses.
(4) The site shall contain enough area to permit the loading and
formation of funeral processions on-site.
(5) The site shall have access to either a collector or arterial road, as
listed in the Town Comprehensive Plan, and, further, shall not use
any minor residential neighborhood street or subdivision street as
any part of a funeral procession route unless it can be
§ 190-201 GATES CODE § 190-201
179:452
demonstrated that such is absolutely necessary in order to reach a
cemetery or similar facility.
(6) Any other condition imposed by the Town Board pursuant to
§ 190-196.
D. Truck terminals.
(1) the site shall be either a ten-acre minimum or have a land-area-toroofed-
area ratio of at least 10 to 1 (10 square feet to one square
foot), whichever is greater, and shall contain enough area to meet
all of the following conditions which contain dimensional
requirements.
(2) No part of the proposed operation or future operation area shall be
closer than 300 feet to the boundary of any R, MR, PUD, BN-R or
NB District.
(3) Use shall not derive access to and from principal arterials, other
principal arterials, minor arterials or major collector streets, as
illustrated on the Thoroughfare Plan, Town of Gates, through what
are considered by the Town Board to be principally residential
streets by nature or residential neighborhoods.
(4) All areas used for the operation, maneuvering and storage of
tractors, trailers and employee vehicles, plus interior project roads,
shall be paved to specifications of the Town of Gates.
(5) The apron area and the area used for maneuvering of trucks for
purposes of loading and unloading between the dock area and the
nearest obstruction shall be at least 2 1/2 times the length of the
longest tractor-trailer combination that will use or may use the site.
(6) Truck parking area shall provide at least three spaces per dock in
loading-unloading areas, plus at least one additional space, each,
per such area where piggyback or double bottom hauling methods
are used. All trucks and trailers shall be stored neatly. Spaces
should be at least 14 feet wide by 60 feet long.
(7) All storage of oil, tires, etc., shall be in an enclosed building.
Dumpsters shall be screened from view by an opaque fence.
(8) A buffer area as required in § 190-34B shall be required. This shall
be within the required 100 feet. (The remaining portion of the
setback area shall be graded and seeded with suitable material to
prevent erosion.) In addition to natural plantings, an opaque fence
consistent with § 190-33B shall be included in the buffer area
closest to the terminal. Any additional screening for tractor and/or
trailer storage or parking areas and employee parking areas may
be required by the Town Board, where it is deemed necessary.
(9) Any outdoor lighting should not cause glare or a nuisance to
adjoining uses.
§ 190-201 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-201
179:453
(10) No portion of any vehicle shall extend beyond the property line.
(11) Any truck maintenance or minor repairs shall take place entirely in
an enclosed building.
E. Nursing care homes.
(1) Nursing care homes must be approved by the Genesee Region
Health Planning Council and the New York State Health
Department, or other successors. Approval shall pertain to the
actual need for the facility in the general area in which it is
proposed as well as approval regarding design, floor area per
person, services, etc. Where such items are hereafter listed the
appropriate regional or state agency's rules shall apply.
(2) Exterior construction shall be in harmony with the prevailing style
of architecture in the immediate area.
(3) Any exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent
properties so as not to cause glare or general nuisance.
(4) The site should be designed to offer privacy to the residents thereof
and convenience to shopping and other facilities.
(5) There shall be at least 120 square feet of private room area per
person and 100 square feet of private room area per person for
rooms designed for two persons.
(6) Any building converted to a nursing home or a new building
constructed for such purposes shall be a completely detached
structure, no part of which is used for a purpose not directly
associated with the main use.
(7) Fire Department approval shall be obtained as necessary regarding
fire walls, fire escapes and/or exits, etc.
(8) A buffer area shall be required as specified in § 190-34A.
(9) The use shall meet all other dimensional requirements specified for
uses in the zone where this use is either permitted or conditionally
permitted, except that the structure shall not exceed one story in
height or 20 feet.
F. Junkyards.
(1) No proposed or future area or process of the operation shall be
closer than 500 feet to any other district boundary. Within the GI
District, no part of the proposed or future operation shall be closer
than 100 feet to a neighboring use.
(2) Where adjacent to another district, there shall be a one-hundredfoot
buffer area which, in addition to natural plantings, shall
contain an eight-foot-high opaque fence. Such fence shall be
located in that portion of the buffer area closest to the junkyard
§ 190-201 GATES CODE § 190-201
179:454
§ 190-202. Renewal of existing conditional use permit. [Added
1-21-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991]
operation. The buffer area as a whole shall be located in the last
100 feet of the five-hundred-foot setback area mentioned in
Subsection F(1) above. The remainder of the setback area shall
be graded and seeded with suitable material to prevent erosion.
Additional bufferage of employee parking areas may be requested
by the Town Board, where it is deemed necessary.
(3) When adjacent to other special permit uses in the GI District, a
regular cyclone-type fence may be substituted for the opaque
fence. Otherwise such fence shall be opaque and eight feet high.
(4) No material shall be burned unless it is done so in a completely
enclosed incinerator and approved by the Fire and Building
Departments. Incineration shall meet applicable air pollution
standards established for the general metropolitan area and
enforced by the appropriate health agency. The incinerator shall
not be closer than 200 feet to an adjacent use in the GI District.
(5) Surface where material is stored shall be dust resistant.
(6) Material shall be stored in an orderly manner.
(7) No part of the storage area should be seen by passing motorists on
roads to which the use has direct access or which are bordering the
site.
(8) The same as Subsection D(3) for truck terminals.
(9) The same as Subsection D(9) and (10) for truck terminals.
A. In situations where an existing conditional use permit is the subject of
an application for renewal, the Town Board may, in its discretion,
determine that the best interests of the Town are served by waiver of a
formal public hearing on the renewal and may submit such applications
to the Director of Public Works for his report and recommendation on
the application.
B. All applications for renewal of existing conditional use permits
originally granted by the Town Board may be submitted by the Town
Board to the Director of Public Works for his review, report and
recommendation.
C. The Director of Public Works shall review such application and make a
report, including his comments on any proposed changes in the renewal
application as compared with the conditions and any other relevant
items regarding the operation in general. The report shall also contain
the Director's recommendation on whether a formal public hearing
should be held and whether or not the Town Board should grant the
renewal.
§ 190-201 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-202
179:455
D. The Town Board, upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the
Director of Public Works, may waive the public hearing requirement
and issue a conditional use permit for a renewal if the Board finds that
there is no material change in the application or operation and that the
applicant has been in compliance with existing conditions since the
granting of the original conditional use permit.
§ 190-202 GATES CODE § 190-202
179:456
ARTICLE XXXIII
Site Plan Review
§ 190-203. Time of submittal.
§ 190-204. Preapplication sketch.
A. A site plan shall be submitted to the Town Board or other board or
officer authorized to approve site plans by resolution of the Town Board
only when the land on which the proposal is situated is in the proper
zoning district to allow the intended use(s). The appropriate board shall
determine which of the following stages and/or data requirements are
necessary and completely document its reason for its actions on these
matters as part of the record on the application. In the event that the
reviewing board is not the Planning Board, the reviewing board or
officer shall refer the plans to the Planning Board for its review and
recommendation, before final action is taken by the referring board.
B. Prior to issuing a building permit for the construction of a building on a
parcel of land for any permitted use in any district, except one- or twofamily
dwellings and their customary accessory structures and farmrelated
structures, the owner, developer or agency or Building
Inspector shall refer the site plans for such parcel of land to the Clerk of
the Planning Board for its review and approval.
A. The preapplication sketch shall include:
(1) Title of drawing.
(2) Location of site with respect to existing and proposed rights-of-way
and intersections.
(3) Internal street pattern, if any, of the proposed development.
(4) Location of all existing structures on the site and future use of the
same.
(5) Existing zoning classification(s) of the property and all adjacent
properties, and any restrictions on land use of the site.
(6) Existing natural features on the site and future use of the same.
(7) Contour intervals at 10 feet, including 100 feet of adjacent
property. [Amended 1-17-1977]
(8) Names of the owner and of adjacent property owners.
B. The Planning Board may, at this stage, suggest changes in the
preapplication sketch involving street layout, traffic patterns, lot size or
shape, preservation of natural features or other matters which, in its
opinion, will improve the layout in keeping with the best interests of the
Town.
§ 190-203 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-204
179:457
§ 190-205. Application for preliminary site plan approval.
Any preliminary application for site plan approval shall be made in writing
and shall be accompanied by any or all of the following information, as
required by the Planning Board, prepared by a licensed engineer, architect,
landscape architect or surveyor and certified by the seal and signature of
such engineer, architect or surveyor:
C. The Planning Board shall be permitted a reasonable time to review the
plan, but in no instance longer than 62 days, unless provided for
elsewhere in this chapter. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
D. The Planning Board shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision.
A copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the decision was made
shall suffice.
A. An area map showing that portion of the applicant's property under
consideration, the applicant's entire adjacent holdings and all
properties, subdivisions, streets and easements within 500 feet of the
applicant's property.
B. A tracing overlay showing existing contour intervals of not more than
one foot of elevation, or as may be required by the Planning Board,
including 100 feet of adjacent property.
C. A tracing overlay showing proposed finished contour intervals of not
more than one foot of elevation, or as may be required by the Planning
Board, and direction of drainage with arrows. Data required here may
be placed on the same tracing as required in Subsection B above,
provided that the proposed finished contours are illustrated by solid
lines. [Amended 1-17-1977]
D. A preliminary site plan including the following information:
(1) Title of drawing, including the name and address of the applicant.
(2) North point, scale and date.
(3) Boundaries of the property plotted to scale.
(4) Existing watercourses.
(5) A plan showing location of all buildings; location and size of all offstreet
loading facilities, with ingress and egress drives thereto;
location and size of outdoor storage, if any, and the method of
screening the storage area from public view; location of all existing
or proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts,
retaining walls and fences; description of the method of sewage
disposal and location of such facilities and any proposed changes in
existing stream channels; location and size of all signs; location and
proposed development of buffer areas; location and design of
lighting facilities; any existing and proposed easements; the
location, if any, of waste storage and the method of screening from
§ 190-204 GATES CODE § 190-205
179:458
§ 190-206. Factors for consideration.
public view air-conditioning units and other facilities located on
rooftops of buildings; and the location of exhaust fans for use in
relationship to adjacent residential areas.
(6) A tracing overlay showing all soil areas and their classifications,
and those areas, if any, with moderate to high susceptibility to
flooding and moderate to high susceptibility to erosion. For areas
with potential erosion problems, the overlay shall also include an
outline and description of existing vegetation.
A. The Planning Board's review of a preliminary site plan shall include but
is not limited to the following considerations:
(1) Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation, including separation of pedestrian from vehicular
traffic, walkway structures, control of intersections with vehicular
traffic, and pedestrian convenience. Consideration shall be given to
facilities to assist handicapped persons using the facility.
(2) Location, arrangement, size and design of buildings, lighting and
signs. As much as is possible, consideration should be given to
noise sources, privacy, prevailing wind directions and seasonal sun
movements when locating structures, patios and open spaces on
parcels, exhaust fans and outdoor waste disposal locations.
(3) Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping constituting a visual and/or noise-deterring buffer
between these and adjoining lands. The preliminary site plan
should also show existing stands of trees on the site.
(4) In the case of an apartment house or multiple dwelling, the
adequacy of usable open space for playgrounds and informal
recreation.
(5) Adequacy of stormwater and sanitary waste disposal facilities.
(6) Adequacy of structures, roadways and landscaping in areas with
moderate to high susceptibility to flooding and ponding and/or
erosion.
(7) Protection of adjacent properties and the general public against
noise, glare and unsightliness or other objectionable features.
B. In its review the Planning Board is encouraged to consult with the Town
Engineer and other Town and county officials and boards, as well as
with representatives of federal and state agencies, including the Soil
and Water Conservation District, the United States Army Corps of
Engineers or the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation. The Planning Board may require that exterior design of
§ 190-205 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-206
179:459
§ 190-207. Modification.
The Planning Board may require such additional provisions and conditions
that appear necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 190-208. Action on preliminary application.
§ 190-209. Application for final detailed site plan approval.
all structures be made by or under the direction of a registered
architect, whose seal shall be affixed to the plans.
A. Within 62 days of the receipt of the application for preliminary site plan
approval, the Planning Board shall act on it. If no decision is made
within said sixty-two-day period, the preliminary site plan shall be
considered approved. The Planning Board's action shall be in the form
of a written statement to the applicant stating whether or not the
preliminary site plan is conditionally approved. A copy of the
appropriate minutes of the Planning Board shall be a sufficient report.
The Planning Board's statement may include recommendations as to
desirable revision to be incorporated in the final site plan, of which
conformance with shall be considered a condition of approval. If the
preliminary site plan is disapproved, the Planning Board's statement
will contain the reasons for such findings. In such a case, the Planning
Board may recommend further study of the site plan and resubmission
of the preliminary site plan to the Planning Board after it has been
revised or redesigned. [Amended 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
B. No modifications of existing stream channels, filling of lands with
moderate to high susceptibility to flooding, grading or removal of
vegetation in areas with a moderate to high susceptibility to erosion, or
excavation for and construction of site improvements shall begin until
the developer has received preliminary site plan approval. Failure to
comply shall be construed as a violation of this chapter, and, where
necessary, final site plan approval may require the modification or
removal of unapproved site improvements.
A. After receiving conditional approval from the Planning Board on a
preliminary site plan and approval for all necessary permits and curb
cuts from state and county officials, the applicant may prepare his final
detailed site plan and submit it to the Planning Board for approval;
except that if more than six months has elapsed between the time of the
Planning Board's report on the preliminary site plan and if the Planning
Board finds that conditions have changed significantly in the interim,
the Planning Board may require a resubmission of the preliminary site
plan for further review and possible revision prior to accepting the
proposed final site plan for review.
B. The final detailed site plan shall conform substantially to the
preliminary site plan that has received preliminary site plan approval. It
shall incorporate any revisions or other features that may have been
§ 190-206 GATES CODE § 190-209
179:460
§ 190-210. Action on final site plan.
§ 190-211. Notice to county planning agency; compliance with
SEQRA. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
The Planning Board shall mail notices to the county planning agency as
required by Town Law § 274-a, Subdivision 9, and shall comply with the
provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act under Article 8 of
the Environmental Conservation Law and its implementing regulations, as
required by Town Law § 274-b, Subdivision 8.
§ 190-212. Map standards.
recommended by the Planning Board at the preliminary review. In
addition to that provided elsewhere in this chapter, the Planning Board
may require a letter of credit, bond or maintenance bond for any facility
or improvement that is indicated as part of the plan, such as parking
areas and buffer and screen devices. All such compliances shall be
clearly indicated by the applicant on the appropriate submission.
A. Within 62 days of the receipt of the complete application for final site
plan review, the Planning Board shall, when appropriate and required
to do so by Town Board resolution, render a decision to the appropriate
referring board, agency or official. If no decision is made within 62
days, the final site plan shall be considered approved. [Amended
9-7-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
B. Upon approving an application, the Planning Board shall endorse its
approval on two copies of the final site plan and shall forward one copy,
when necessary, to the referring board, agency or official authorized by
the Town Board to render final decisions on such matters, who may then
issue, when appropriate, one or more building permits to the applicant
if the project conforms to all other applicable requirements, once
application is made by the applicant. The second copy shall be filed with
the Planning Board, when appropriate, and it shall be considered the
approved plan with which all development on the respective site must
conform.
C. The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed in the office of the
Town Clerk within five business days after the decision is rendered, and
a copy thereof mailed to the applicant. [Added 9-7-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
D. Substantial construction, excluding the clearing and mass grading of
the land, must begin within one year after the date of the final
resolution of approval, or approval by the authorized official, provided
final site plan approval has been filed with the Town Clerk; otherwise,
an extension or reapproval must be obtained. The Town Board, under
advisement from the Planning Board, may grant an extension or
reapproval for up to three years. [Added 5-6-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
§ 190-209 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-212
179:461
A. All required maps and tracings, except the preapplication sketch, shall:
(1) Be on the same United States of America standard size sheets:
(a) Size A, 8 1/2 by 11 inches;
(b) Size B, 11 by 17 inches;
(c) Size C, 17 by 22 inches;
(d) Size D, 22 by 34 inches; or
(e) Size E, 34 by 44 inches.
(2) Consist of all United States of America standards for drafting on
the various sheets.
B. Any additional requirements requested by the Town of Gates Engineer
shall be made known to the applicant at the time of the approval of the
preapplication sketch, provided that all requirements shall be complied
with before the Planning Board renders a final decision.
§ 190-212 GATES CODE § 190-212
179:462
ARTICLE XXXIIIA
Cluster Developments
[Added 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 190-212.1. Powers and authority granted for review of cluster
developments.
The Town Board of the Town of Gates, pursuant to its authority under
§ 278 of the New York Town Law, intends to grant to the Gates Planning
Board certain powers and authority with regard to the review of alternate
subdivision configuration proposals commonly known as "cluster
development."
§ 190-212.2. Determination of appropriateness.
The Town Board shall review proposals for cluster development pursuant
to New York Town Law § 278 and shall determine whether or not such
development is appropriate.
§ 190-212.3. Subdivision and site plan approval. [Amended
5-6-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A subdivider, or the Planning Board or Town Board as the case may be,
may request the use of Town Law § 278, in which case the subdivider
shall present, along with the proposal in accordance with the provisions of
Town Law § 278, a conventional sketch plat which is consistent with all the
criteria established by this chapter.
§ 190-212.4. District limitations.
The Planning Board may review cluster development proposals for
developments in the R1-11 and R1-15 Zoning Districts only.
§ 190-212.5. Ownership, use and maintenance of open space.
The Planning Board may impose conditions on the ownership, use and
maintenance of any open lands shown on the plans submitted in connection
with any cluster development application such as are necessary to preserve
any such open lands. In the event that such conditions are imposed upon
the plan, the Gates Town Board shall review the conditions and may accept
or reject same.
§ 190-212.6. Variation from dimensional or building criteria.
The Gates Planning Board may allow variation from Town Code
requirements for the dimensional or building criteria discussed in New
York Town Law § 278. These shall include setback requirements. The Gates
Planning Board may not, however, allow any variation with respect to the
permissible use of the land as provided in the Gates Zoning Ordinance.
§ 190-212.1 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-212.6
179:463

ARTICLE XXXIV
Penalties for Offenses
§ 190-213. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, company or corporation owning, controlling or managing
any building or structure or premises therein or where there shall be placed
on or there exists anything in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter; and any person, firm, company or corporation who shall assist in
the commission of any violation of this chapter or any conditions imposed
by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals; or who shall build,
contrary to the plans or specifications submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and by him certified as complying with this chapter; and any person,
firm, company or corporation who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act
required by this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine
of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a period of not more than 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and in addition may be ordered
to pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Every such person, firm,
company or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each week such violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal shall
continue.
§ 190-214. Alternative penalty.
In case of any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or conditions
imposed by the Planning Board or Board of Appeals, in addition to other
remedies herein provided, the Town Board may institute any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, structural
alteration, reconstruction, moving and/or use; to restrain, correct or abate
such violations; to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or
land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises.
§ 190-213 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-214
179:465

ARTICLE XXXV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 190-215. Interpretation.
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions
of this chapter, resolution or regulation, the provisions which are more
restrictive shall govern.
§ 190-216. Repealer.
The Zoning Ordinance known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Gates," adopted January 25, 1963, and the "Multiple Residence Ordinance
of the Town of Gates," adopted April 23, 1968, and all amendments thereto
are hereby repealed, with the provision that violations of these ordinances
and all amendments thereto shall remain violations to the extent that the
matters in violation do not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 190-217. Saving clause.
The adoption of this chapter shall not affect or impair any act done, offense
committed or right incurred or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred prior to the time this chapter takes effect under the
ordinance relative to use districts in said Town.
§ 190-218. Unpermitted use of property and erection of structures
prohibited. [Added 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Any use of property or the erection of any structure which is not permitted
outright or conditionally, pursuant to this Chapter 190, is expressly
prohibited.
§ 190-215 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § 190-218
179:467
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2000
4-3-2000 Historic preservation Ch. 107
L.L. No.
2-2000
7-5-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
L.L. No.
3-2000
12-4-2000 Fire sprinkler systems
amendment; historic
preservation amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 97; 107 190
L.L. No.
1-2001
2-5-2001 Taxation: senior citizens
exemption amendment;
exemption for persons with
disabilities and limited
incomes amendment; partial
exemption for living quarters
for parent or grandparent
Ch. 166, Arts. I, III
and IV
L.L. No.
1-2002
3-4-2002 Adult uses amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 137, Art. I;
Ch. 190
L.L. No.
2-2002
5-6-2002 Fire systems safety Ch. 98
Res. No.
259-02
10-7-2002 Tax exemptions for senior
citizens and persons with
disabilities and limited
incomes amendments
Ch. 166, Arts. I
and III
L.L. No.
1-2003
4-21-2003 Adults uses amendment Ch. 137, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-2003
8-4-2003 Elevators Ch. 88
Res. No.
280-03
11-5-2003 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2004
8-2-2004 Fire sprinkler systems Ch. 97
Res. No.
212-05
10-3-2005 Alternative veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 166, Art. II
§ 190-218 GATES CODE § DL-1
179:468
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
70-07
2-5-2007 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment; tax exemption for
persons with disabilities and
limited incomes amendment
Ch. 166, Arts. I
and III
Res. No.
297-07
12-3-2007 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Ch. 166, Art. V,
reference only
L.L. No.
1-2008
1-7-2008 Stormwater management:
construction site stormwater
pollution prevention and
sediment control
Ch. 157, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-2008
1-7-2008 Stormwater management:
postconstruction stormwater
pollution prevention
Ch. 157, Art. II
L.L. No.
3-2008
1-7-2008 Storm sewers Ch. 156, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2008
5-5-2008 Flood damage prevention Ch. 100
L.L. No.
1-2010
4-5-2010 Recreation and parks
amendment
Ch. 134
L.L. No.
2-2010
5-3-2010 Speed limits amendment Ch. 176, Art. I
L.L. No.
3-2010
5-3-2010 Criminal history records
searches
Ch. 11
L.L. No.
4-2010
12-6-2010 Second-hand dealers Ch. 151
L.L. No.
5-2010
12-6-2010 Dogs and cats amendment Ch. 62, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2013
1-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
L.L. No.
2-2013
7-1-2013 Tents and awnings
amendment
Ch. 172
L.L. No.
1-2014
2-3-2014 Taxation: home improvement
exemption
Ch. 166, Art. VI
L.L. No.
2-2014
3-3-2014 Taxation: Tax Grievance Day Repealed by L.L.
No. 3-2017
L.L. No.
1-2015
1-5-2015 Taxation: alternative veterans
exemption amendment
Ch. 166, Art. II
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED § DL-1
179:469
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2016
1-4-2016 Peddling, soliciting and food
vending amendment;
stormwater management:
construction site stormwater
pollution prevention and
sediment control amendment
Ch. 140; Ch. 157
L.L. No.
2-2016
5-2-2016 Registration of defaulted
mortgage property
Ch. 147
L.L. No.
1-2017
4-3-2017 Property maintenance Ch. 133
L.L. No.
2-2017
5-1-2017 Best value award methodology Ch. 63
L.L. No.
3-2017
11-8-2017 Taxation: Tax Grievance Day Ch. 166, Art. VII
L.L. No.
1-2018
4-4-2018 Parking amendment Ch. 131
L.L. No.
1-2019
5-6-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 GATES CODE § DL-1
179:470