Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-11-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the City of Geneva,
as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 350, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as
the "Code of the City of Geneva," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever
reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
contained in the "Code of the City of Geneva" to any other local law,
ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be
changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or
section number where such legislation appears in the Code, as if such local
law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the City Council of the City of Geneva, and it is the intention
of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code is
hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former
local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed
repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of inconsistent enactments.
All local laws or ordinances or parts of local laws or ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this local law are
hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the
extent of such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the City of Geneva
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Geneva prior to the effective date of
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Geneva or
any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Geneva.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the City of Geneva.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Geneva providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the City of Geneva or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Geneva appropriating money
or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of
Geneva or other instruments or evidence of the city's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for city employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the city.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to 4-10-2001.
§ 1-4 GENEVA CODE § 1-5
1:4
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Geneva and shall remain there for use and examination
by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local
law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City Clerk of the
City of Geneva by impressing thereon the Seal of the City of Geneva, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while the said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local
law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the City of Geneva" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
City Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the City Council deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code of the City of Geneva required to be filed in
the office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code
and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate the
intention of said City Council to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes,
local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the City Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by resolution of the City Council. The Clerk may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
City of Geneva or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Geneva to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for
publication as the Code of the City of Geneva, no changes in the meaning
or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have been made.
Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1
of the Code of the City of Geneva, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-9 GENEVA CODE § 1-13
1:6
ARTICLE II
Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as §§ 1.2, 1.3 and 1.9 to 1.11 of the 1968 Code]
§ 1-14. Definitions.
A. When used in this Code, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ASSESSOR — The Assessor of the City of Geneva, New York.
BOARD OF APPEALS — See "Zoning Board of Appeals."
BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW — The Board of Assessment Review
of the City of Geneva, New York created by Sec. 69 of the Geneva City
Charter.
CHARTER — The Geneva City Charter.
CITY — The City of Geneva, New York.
CITY ATTORNEY — The City Attorney of the City of Geneva, New York.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Geneva, New York.
CITY COMPTROLLER — The City Comptroller of the City of Geneva,
New York.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Geneva,
New York.
CITY COURT — The City Court of the City of Geneva, New York.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Geneva, New York,
but if none is appointed or serving, then the Director of Public Works of
the City of Geneva, New York.
CITY JUDGE — The City Judge of the City of Geneva, New York.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Geneva, New York.
COUNTY — The County of Ontario in the State of New York.
COUNTY CLERK — The County Clerk of the County of Ontario in the
State of New York.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY — The Director of Public Safety of the
City of Geneva, New York.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works of the
City of Geneva, New York.
DIRECTOR OF RECREATION AND YOUTH BUREAU — The Director of
Recreation and Youth Bureau of the City of Geneva, New York.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or employee designated by
appropriate authority to be in charge of and responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance or ordinances for which
he is so designated.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
EXAMINING BOARD OF PLUMBERS — The Examining Board of
Plumbers of the City of Geneva, New York.
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief of the City of Geneva, New York.
FIRE COMMISSION — The Fire Commission of the City of Geneva, New
York.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — Fire Department of the City of Geneva, New
York as established by Sec. 122 of the Geneva City Charter.
FIRE MARSHALL — The enforcement officer of the Fire Prevention
Code in and for the City of Geneva, New York.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of Geneva, New
York.
MUNICIPAL CODE or CODE — The City of Geneva Municipal Code.
OWNER — A person who has the legal title, alone or with others, or
exercises dominion or control over property, both real and personal.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural person,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies,
societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
PERSONNEL ADVISORY BOARD — The Personnel Advisory Board of
the City of Geneva, New York established by Sec. 138 of the Geneva
City Charter.
PERSONNEL OFFICER — The Personnel Officer of the City of Geneva,
New York.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Geneva, New
York.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The Plumbing Inspector of the City of
Geneva, New York.
POLICE CHIEF or CHIEF OF POLICE — The Police Chief of the City of
Geneva, New York.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the City of Geneva,
New York.
PUBLIC HEALTH ADVISORY BOARD — The Public Health Advisory
Board of the City of Geneva, New York established by Sec. 128 of the
Geneva City Charter.
RECREATION AND YOUTH BUREAU ADVISORY BOARD — The board
of the City of Geneva, New York established by Sec. 133 of the Geneva
City Charter.
SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES — The Sealer of Weights and
Measures of the City of Geneva, New York.
STATE — The State of New York.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Superintendent of
Public Works of the City of Geneva, New York.
§ 1-14 GENEVA CODE § 1-14
1:8
§ 1-15. Rules of construction.
§ 1-16. Conflict with other provisions.
Wherever the requirements of any ordinance or portion thereof are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule,
regulation, ordinance or other enactment, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern unless a contrary intent is
expressly stated.
§ 1-17. Penalty when not otherwise prescribed. [Amended by Ord.
No. 72-11, eff. 7-5-1972]
When no specific penalty is prescribed in any ordinance contained in this
Code or in any other provision of law for any act which is prohibited or the
failure to do any act which is required is made or declared to be unlawful,
the violation of any provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both said fine and
imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 1-18. Interpretation.
The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate
the purposes for which this Code and the ordinances contained herein are
enacted.
YOUTH BUREAU — The Youth Bureau of the City of Geneva, New York
established by Sec. 131 of the Geneva City Charter.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS or BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning
Board of Appeals of the City of Geneva, New York.
B. All other words used in this Code and not otherwise specifically defined
shall be construed in the manner that they are normally used unless the
context or subject matter requires otherwise; but words that have
acquired a technical meaning in law and are so used shall be construed
and understood in accordance with such meaning.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular number includes the plural.
C. A word importing the masculine gender only shall also be construed to
include females, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock
companies, societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
Chapter 5
AGENCIES, MUNICIPAL
§ 1-18 GENEVA CODE § 1-18
5:10
ARTICLE I
Power Agency
[Adopted 3-2-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983]
§ 5-1. Findings and purpose.
The City of Geneva does hereby find and determine that when certain
contracts between the Power Authority of the State of New York and others
expire respectively in 1985 and 1990 there may become available at those
times relatively inexpensive hydropower from the Power Authority's St.
Lawrence and Niagara River Hydroelectric Power Plants, and that there is
a need for the City of Geneva to authorize the purchase of such hydropower
from the Power Authority of the State of New York on behalf of and for
the benefit of the residents of this city: such hydropower to be in turn
transmitted and then distributed to the residential electric consumers of
the city utilizing the services, including the transmission and distribution
systems, of the respective public utility companies now serving the
residents of the City of Geneva, and by such process passing on to such
residential electric consumers such cost savings for electric use as may be
derived therefrom.
§ 5-2. Purchasing authorized.
The City of Geneva is hereby authorized to purchase hydroelectric power
and electricity from the Power Authority of the State of New York.
§ 5-3. Power agency established.
There is hereby established in the City of Geneva a Power Agency for the
purpose of purchasing hydroelectric power and electricity from the Power
Authority of the State of New York and passing on to the residents and
consumers of the City of Geneva such hydroelectric power and electricity
and any cost savings as may be derived therefrom, either directly or
indirectly through contracts with third parties. The composition,
organization and operation of said agency shall be governed by the
resolution or resolutions of the City Council of the City of Geneva.
§ 5-4. Approval by electors.1
This article shall not take effect unless and until approved by the majority
of electors at the next general election.
1. Editor's Note: Local Law No. 4-1983 was approved by the electorate 11-8-1983.
§ 5-1 AGENCIES, MUNICIPAL § 5-4
5:11
Chapter 8
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 8-1. Definition; form and contents of ticket.
An appearance ticket is a written notice issued and subscribed by a police
officer or other public servant authorized by state law or local law enacted
pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law to issue the
same, directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal
court at a designated future time in connection with his alleged commission
of a designated offense. A notice conforming to such definition constitutes
an appearance ticket regardless of whether it is referred to in some other
provision of law as a summons or by any other name or title.
§ 8-2. Issuance by other than a police officer.
A public servant other than a police officer may in such cases issue and
serve upon a person an appearance ticket when he has reasonable cause to
believe that such person has committed a misdemeanor, or has committed a
petty offense in his presence.
§ 8-3. Enforcement officers designated. [Amended 7-1-2015 by L.L.
No. 2-2015]
A police officer, peace officer, Zoning Coordinator, and Code Enforcement
Officer of the city are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the
laws and ordinances of the City of Geneva and are further authorized to
issue an appearance ticket relating to parking, licensing of occupations or
businesses, fire prevention, safety, health and sanitation, building, zoning,
planning or any other ordinance, rule, or regulation affecting the public
health, safety, and welfare.
Chapter 10
ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 318.
§ 10-1. Dates for assessment procedures.
The following dates shall be retained and used for assessment procedures
in the City of Geneva:
A. Valuation date: January 1.
B. Taxable status date: May 1.
§ 5-4 GENEVA CODE § 10-1
10:12
Chapter 14
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
§ 14-1. Intent.
The New York State Defense Emergency Act, in Section 29-a thereof,
authorizes political subdivisions of the state to provide for the continuity
of their governments in the event of an actual or imminent attack upon
the United States by an enemy or foreign nation. The General Municipal
Law, in § 60 thereof, authorized political subdivisions to provide for the
continuity of their governments in the event of other public disasters,
catastrophes or emergencies. Based on the authority contained in such
laws, this chapter is adopted so that on such occasions the government
of the City of Geneva, New York may continue to function properly and
efficiently under emergency circumstances.
§ 14-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTACK — Any attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks by an enemy
or foreign nation upon the United States causing, or which may cause,
substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the United
States in any manner by sabotage or by the use of bombs, shell fire or
nuclear, radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological means or other
weapons or processes.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY — A person authorized to perform all the
powers and duties of a public office in the event the office is vacant or at
such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability
of the incumbent officer, where such authorization is provided pursuant to
the provisions of any general, special or local law other than this chapter.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated pursuant to
this chapter for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but
not the office, of a city officer in the event that neither such officer nor any
duly authorized deputy is able, due to death, absence from the city, or other
physical, mental or legal reasons, to perform the powers and duties of the
office.
PUBLIC DISASTER — A disaster, catastrophe or emergency, actual or
imminent, of such unusual proportions or extent that a substantial number
of the residents of the city of Geneva either sustain injury, become ill, are
infected with disease, have their lives imperiled, are killed or die as the
C. Filing of tentative roll: June 1.
D. Grievance date: third Tuesday in June.
E. Filing of final roll: August 1.
§ 10-1 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 14-2
14:13
result of injury, disease or exposure, or the property of a substantial number
of such residents is imperiled, damaged or destroyed, and it is necessary
and essential in the interest of public safety, health and welfare that the
continuity of the government of the City of Geneva be assured in order that
it be enabled to function properly and efficiently and to exercise its essential
powers in meeting emergency conditions. Such disasters, catastrophes and
emergencies may include, but shall not be limited to, conflagrations,
explosions, earthquakes or other convulsions of nature, floods, tidal waves,
pestilence, riots, insurrections, storms, prolonged failure of electric power
or essential transportation services, or any incident or occurrence which
causes or threatens to cause danger to life, health or property from
exposure to noxious materials or radiation.
§ 14-3. Designation, status, qualifications and terms of emergency
interim successors.
A. Mayor and City Manager. Within 30 days following the effective date of
this chapter, and thereafter within 30 days after first entering upon the
duties of his office, the Mayor and City Manager shall, in addition to any
duly authorized deputy, designate such number of emergency interim
successors to the powers and duties of his office and specify their rank
in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy so that there
will be not less than three duly authorized deputies or emergency
interim successors, or combination thereof, to perform the powers and
duties of the office.
B. Review of designations. The Mayor and City Manager shall from time to
time review and, as necessary, promptly revise the designations of
emergency interim successors to ensure that at all times there are at
least three duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors,
or combination thereof, for their respective offices.
C. Qualifications. Any person may be designated to serve as an emergency
interim successor, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, so long as the person designated possesses the qualifications
prescribed by § 3 of the Public Officers Law and is a resident of the city.
D. Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an
emergency interim successor shall hold that designation at the pleasure
of the designator, and such a designation shall remain effective until
replaced by another by the authorized designator.
E. Compensation. An emergency interim successor shall serve without
salary, unless otherwise provided by local law. He shall, however, be
entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses necessarily incurred in
the performance of his powers and duties.
§ 14-2 GENEVA CODE § 14-4
14:14
§ 14-4. Assumption of powers and duties by emergency interim
successor.
If, in the event of an attack or a public disaster, the Mayor and City
Manager, or duly authorized deputy of each office, if any, are unable, due
to death, absence from the city or other physical, mental or legal reasons,
to perform the powers and duties of the office, the emergency interim
successor of such officer highest in rank in order of succession who is able
to perform the powers and duties of the office shall, except for the power
and duty to discharge or replace duly authorized deputies and emergency
interim successors of such officer, perform the powers and duties of such
officer. An emergency interim successor shall perform such powers and
duties only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or his duly
authorized deputy, if any, resumes the office or undertakes the performance
of the powers and duties of the office, as the case may be, or until, where an
actual vacancy exists, a successor is duly elected or appointed to fill such
vacancy and qualifies as provided by law.
§ 14-5. Recording and publication of designations.
The name and address and rank in order of succession of each duly
authorized deputy and emergency interim successor shall be filed with
the City Clerk, and each designation, replacement or change in order of
succession of any emergency interim successor shall become effective when
the designator files with such Clerk the successor's name, address and rank
in order of succession. Such Clerk shall keep an up-to-date file of all such
data regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors
and the same shall be open to public inspection. The Clerk shall notify in
writing each designated person of the filing of his name as an emergency
interim successor and his rank in order of succession and also shall notify
in writing any person previously designated who is replaced or whose place
in order of succession is changed.
§ 14-6. Qualification for taking office.
At the time of their designation, or as soon thereafter as possible,
emergency interim successors shall take such oath and do such other
things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to perform the powers and
duties of the office to which they may succeed.
§ 14-7. Quorum and voter requirements.
In the event of an attack or a public disaster, the presiding officer of
the Common Council, or his duly authorized deputy or emergency interim
successor performing his powers and duties, may suspend quorum
requirement for the Council. If quorum requirements are suspended, any
local law, ordinance, resolution or other action requiring enactment,
adoption or approval by an affirmative vote of a specified proportion of
members may be enacted, adopted or approved by the affirmative vote of
the specified proportion of those voting thereon.
§ 14-4 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 14-7
14:15
Chapter 19
ELECTIONS
§ 19-1. Permanent personal registration.
The City of Geneva does hereby elect to adopt, and hereby does adopt for
the purpose of the registration of voters for elections within the City of
Geneva, the system of permanent personal registration set forth in Article
15 of the Election Law.
Chapter 22
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 105.
Operating permits — See Ch. 170.
Firesafety and property maintenance
compliance — See Ch. 171.
Housing Code — See Ch. 202.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 14-7 GENEVA CODE § 19-1
19:16
ARTICLE I
Superintendent of Building and Zoning
§ 22-1. Position established.
The position of "Superintendent of Building and Zoning" is hereby
established to enforce the ordinances or portions thereof as hereinafter set
forth.
§ 22-2. Designation of superintendent of building and zoning.
The Zoning and Building Coordinator is hereby designated as the
Superintendent of Building and Zoning and shall have all of the duties and
shall have all of the authority as hereinafter provided.
§ 22-3. Powers and duties.
A. Enforcement officer. The Superintendent of Building and Zoning shall
be the enforcement officer of the following ordinances or provisions
thereof:
(1) Chapter 105 of this Code, entitled "Building Construction";
(2) Chapter 111 of this Code, entitled "Buildings, Unsafe";
(3) Chapter 177 of this Code, entitled "Flood Damage Prevention";
(4) Chapter 199 of this Code, entitled "Hospitals and Similar
Facilities";
(5) Chapter 202 of this Code, entitled "Housing Code";
(6) Chapter 264 of this Code, entitled "Property Maintenance Code";
(7) Chapter 273 of this Code, entitled "Sanitary Code";
(8) Chapter 288 of this Code, entitled "Signs and Fire Escapes";
(9) Chapter 310 of this Code, entitled "Subdivision Regulations";
(10) Chapter 332 of this Code, entitled "Vehicles, Abandoned"; and
(11) Chapter 350 of this Code, entitled "Zoning."
B. Additional responsibilities. The Superintendent of Building and Zoning
shall have the authority to assist and/or act in the absence of the
designated enforcement officer for the following ordinances or
provisions thereof:
(1) Chapter 170 of this Code, entitled "Operating Permits"; and
(2) Chapter 171 of this Code, entitled "Firesafety and Property
Maintenance Compliance."
§ 22-1 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS § 22-3
22:17

ARTICLE II
Department of Public Works
§ 22-4. Enforcement duties of department.
A. Abandoned excavation and construction, and smoke abatement. The
Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the removal and
demolition of buildings and structures and their appurtenances located
in the City and for enforcement of Chapter 151 of this Code, entitled
"Abandoned Excavation and Construction" and Chapter 294 of this
Code, entitled "Smoke Abatement."
B. Abatement of nuisances by the City of Geneva. The Department of
Public Works shall be responsible for the enforcement of Chapter 100 of
this Code, entitled "Brush, Grass and Weeds."
§ 22-4 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS § 22-4
22:19

ARTICLE III
Fire Marshal
§ 22-5. Designation of Fire Marshal.
The Fire Chief of the City of Geneva is hereby designated as the Fire
Marshal for the purpose of enforcing the City of Geneva's Municipal Code.
A. Notification of fire and/or explosion. The Fire Marshal for the City of
Geneva shall promptly notify the Superintendent of Building and
Zoning for the City of Geneva of any fire or explosion involving any
structural damage, fuel-burning appliance, chimney or gas vent.
B. Enforcement officer. The Fire Marshall shall be the enforcement officer
of the following ordinances or provisions thereof:
(1) Chapter 169 of this Code, entitled "Firesafety";
(2) Chapter 170 of this Code, entitled "Operating Permits";
(3) Chapter 171 of this Code, entitled "Firesafety and Property
maintenance Compliance";
(4) Chapter 264 of this Code, entitled "Property Maintenance Code";
(5) Chapter 273 of this Code, entitled "Sanitary Code"; and
(6) Chapter 288 of this Code, entitled "Signs and Fire Escapes."
§ 22-5 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS § 22-5
22:21
Chapter 26
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 38.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 43.
Purchasing and public works contracts — See
Ch. 50.
§ 26-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Code of Ethics of the City of Geneva."
§ 26-2. Declaration of policy.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the City
Council of the City of Geneva recognizes that there are rules of ethical
conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high
degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and a public confidence is to be
maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter
to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees
of the City of Geneva. These rules shall serve as a guide for the official
conduct of the officers and employees of the City of Geneva. The rules of
ethical conduct of this chapter as adopted shall not conflict with, but shall
be in addition to, any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law
or any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest
in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
§ 26-3. Enactment and authorization.
By separate resolution, the City Council of the City of Geneva shall enact
a Code of Ethics of the City of Geneva pursuant to the authority and
provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law. This chapter shall provide
additional provisions as to implementation and adherence to the Code of
Ethics, and shall provide the necessary force of law for the Code of Ethics
resolution. All prior local laws, ordinances or resolutions or parts of local
laws, ordinances or resolutions of the City of Geneva inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed; provided, however, that
such repeal shall be only to the extent of such inconsistency, and in all
respects this chapter shall be in addition to other legislation regulating and
governing the subject matter covered by this chapter.
§ 26-4. Disclosure of interest.
Upon election, each City Councilor, including the Mayor, must file a
statement of economic interest, in a format approved by City Council. These
statements will remain on file in the City Clerk's Office, and shall be updated
annually prior to April 15 of each year of office.
§ 22-5 GENEVA CODE § 26-5
22:22
§ 26-5. Board of Ethical Review Membership. [Amended 9-5-2018 by
Ord. No. 2-2018]
City Council shall appoint a five-member Board of Ethical Review to
participate in the complaint procedures outlined in § 26-6.
§ 26-6. Complaint procedures.
A. Qualifications. In order to serve on the Board of Ethical Review,
candidates must live in the City of Geneva, and demonstrate knowledge
and/or experience in ethical or legal concepts, mediation, or related
experience.
B. Term. Board of Ethical Review members shall serve for a period of four
years, except that an initial appointee shall serve a term of two years.
Following the initial appointment, all Board Members shall serve a fouryear
term.
C. Meetings. Meetings shall be called at the direction of City Council, in
accordance with the complaint procedure outlined in § 26-6.
A. A. Any officer or employee of the City of Geneva who would like to file a
complaint must file copies of said complaint with the City Attorney and
Board of Ethical Review. In the case of a complaint against the City
Attorney, the complaint may be filed with a member of the City Council
or Board of Ethical Review. A member of the public wishing to make a
complaint may file said complaint with the City Clerk, a City Council
member, or member of the Board of Ethical Review. [Amended
8-5-2015 by Ord. No. 9-2015]
B. Complaints against an employee of the City, other than the City
Manager, City Clerk, or City Attorney shall be forwarded by the receiver
to the City Manager. The City Manager, in conjunction with the
Personnel Officer will review the complaint and conduct any
investigation necessary to determine a basis in fact for the complaint. If
the complaint is substantiated, the City Manager shall execute any
disciplinary action that he feels is necessary and appropriate; and that
is permitted by applicable state, federal, and local laws, rules, and
regulations. All substantiated complaints shall be reported to City
Council at the first regular City Council meeting following
substantiation.
C. In cases where complaints are made against a sitting Councilor or any
Council appointee, the Council, by open vote, may call a meeting of the
Board of Ethical Review. Once called, the complaint will be carried by
the Council liaison to the Board. The Board will conduct any
investigation necessary to determine a basis in fact for the complaint.
Once the investigation is complete, the Board will make a report to the
Council. All substantiated complaints shall be reported at the first
regular City Council meeting following substantiation. Following the
report, a majority of Council may execute disciplinary action as they
§ 26-5 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS § 26-6
22:23
§ 26-7. Council review.
This chapter shall be reviewed by each subsequent Council for the purpose
of ensuring familiarity with its terms and for amendment as deemed
appropriate.
Chapter 33
HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION ON
§ 33-1. Commission created; terms of membership.2
The City Council of the City of Geneva shall and hereby does create a
Commission on Human Rights, and it is hereby further determined:
Chapter 38
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Enforcement officers — See Ch. 22.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 26.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 43.
feel is necessary and appropriate; and that is permitted by applicable
state, federal, and local laws, rules, and regulations. [Amended
8-5-2015 by Ord. No. 9-2015]
A. That the Commission shall be known as the "Geneva Commission on
Human Rights."
B. That said Commission shall be composed of 12 members, to be
appointed by the City Council.
C. That the terms of office of all members shall expire on December 31,
1964, and thereafter members shall be appointed for a term of one year.
D. That the members of the Commission shall appoint their own Chairman.
E. That all members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
2. Editor's Note: Commission was originally called Commission on Human Relations, but is
now called Commission on Human Rights in accordance with General Municipal Law
§ 239-o, which was amended by L.1964, c. 413, effective 4-10-1964.
§ 26-6 GENEVA CODE § 33-1
33:24
ARTICLE I
Term of Office of City Supervisors
[Adopted 9-4-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
§ 38-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to extend the term of the City of Geneva
Supervisors from two years to four years.
§ 38-2. Term of office of Supervisors extended.
The term of office of each Supervisor hereafter elected in the City of
Geneva, notwithstanding the provisions of the City Charter, shall be four
years. It is the intent of this section of law, which is subject to mandatory
referendum, to extend the term of the City Supervisors elected at the
November 1997 general election from two years to four years and that such
Supervisors shall only be elected in the City of Geneva each fourth year
thereafter, except to fill vacancies.
§ 38-3. Validity.
The City Charter provision in conflict herewith, specifically Article 2,
Section 2.1, pertaining to term of office of City Supervisors, is hereby
amended.
§ 38-4. Effective date.
This article shall become operative only if approved at the November 5,
1996, general election by the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified
electors of the City of Geneva voting upon the proposition in the above
matter, and as prescribed by law.3
3. Editor's Note: Local Law No. 1-1996 was approved by the electorate 11-5-1996.
§ 38-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 38-4
38:25

ARTICLE II
Office Hours of City Comptroller
[Adopted 3-15-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
§ 38-5. Hours established.
The office of the City Comptroller shall be kept open for the transaction
of business on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays from 9:00
a.m. until 3:30 p.m. and on Fridays from 9:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. The office
of the City Comptroller shall be closed for the transaction of business on
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, including civic holidays.
§ 38-5 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 38-5
38:27

ARTICLE III
Office Hours of City Clerk
[Adopted 3-15-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
§ 38-6. Hours established.
The office of the City Clerk shall be kept open for the transaction of business
on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays from 9:00 a.m. until
3:30 p.m. and on Fridays from 9:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. The office of the City
Clerk shall be closed for the transaction of business on Saturdays, Sundays
and legal holidays, including civic holidays.
§ 38-6 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 38-6
38:29
Chapter 43
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 26.
§ 38-6 GENEVA CODE § 38-6
43:30
ARTICLE I
Grievance Procedures
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 5 of the 1968 Code]
§ 43-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
DAYS — All days other than Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in computing the
number of days within which action must be taken or notice given within
the terms of this article.
DEPARTMENT — Any office, department, board, commission or other
agency of the government of the city.
EMPLOYEE — Any person directly employed and compensated by the city
except persons employed in the legislative or judicial branch thereof.
GRIEVANCE — Any claimed violation, misinterpretation or inequitable
application of the existing laws, rules, procedures, regulations,
administrative orders or work rules of the city or a department thereof,
which relate to or involve employee health or safety, physical facilities,
materials or equipment furnished to employees, or supervision of
employees; provided, however, that such term shall not include any matter
involving an employee's rate of compensation, retirement benefits,
disciplinary proceeding or any other matter which is otherwise reviewable
pursuant to law or any rule or regulation having the force and effect of law.
IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR — The employee or officer on the next higher
level of authority above the employee in the department wherein the
grievance exists and who normally assigns and supervises the employee's
work and approves his time record or evaluates his work performance.
§ 43-2. Declaration of basic principle.
Every employee of this city shall have the right to present his grievance
in accordance with the procedures provided herein, free from interference,
coercion, restraint, discrimination or reprisal, and shall have the right to be
represented by a person of his own choosing at all stages of the grievance
procedure.
§ 43-3. Initial presentation.
A. An employee who claims to have a grievance shall present his grievance
to his immediate supervisor, orally, within two days after the grievance
occurs.
B. The immediate supervisor shall discuss the grievance with the
employee, shall make such investigation as he deems appropriate and
shall consult with his superiors to such extent as he deems appropriate,
all on an informal basis.
§ 43-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 43-3
43:31
§ 43-4. Second stage.
§ 43-5. Amendments.
This article may be amended at any time in accordance with the general
procedures and requirements in effect at such time for the amendment of
an ordinance.
C. Within three days after presentation of the grievance to him, the
immediate supervisor shall make his decision and communicate the
same to the employee presenting the grievance, and to the employee's
representative, if any.
A. If an employee presenting a grievance be not satisfied with the decision
made by his immediate supervisor, he may, within five days thereafter,
request a review and determination of his grievance by the department
head. Such request shall be in writing and shall contain a statement to
the specific nature of the grievance and the facts relating to it. Such
request shall be served upon both the department head and the
immediate supervisor to whom the grievance was originally presented.
Thereupon, and within two days after receiving such request, the
immediate supervisor shall submit to the department head a written
statement of his information concerning the specific nature of the
grievance and the facts relating to it.
B. The department head, or his nominee, may, and at the request of the
employee shall, hold a hearing within five days after receiving the
written request and statement from the employee. The employee, and
his representative, if any, may appear at the hearing and present oral
statements or arguments.
C. Within five days after the close of the hearing, or within eight days after
the grievance has been submitted to him if there be no hearing, the
department head, or his nominee, shall make his decision and
communicate the same to the employee presenting the grievance, and
to the employee's representative, if any.
§ 43-3 GENEVA CODE § 43-5
43:32
Chapter 47
PROPERTY, MUNICIPAL
§ 43-5 PROPERTY, MUNICIPAL § 43-5
47:33

ARTICLE I
Sale or Lease of Real Estate and Franchises
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 9 of the 1968 Code]
§ 47-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the purpose of establishing regulations for the
sale of city real estate and franchises.
§ 47-2. Regulations. [Amended 12-4-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16]
Sale or lease of city real estate or of a franchise may be sold at public or
private sale in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article.
A. Public sale.4
(1) Public auction. Disposition of city real estate or of a franchise shall
be by sale or lease at public auction to the highest bidder.
(2) Vote required. No sale or lease shall be made or authorized except
by vote of 3/4 of all the members of the City Council.
(3) Public notice. No sale or lease shall be made until after public
notice to be published at least once each week for three weeks in
the official paper of the city.
(4) Approval by City Manager. No sale or lease shall take effect until it
is also approved by the City Manager.
(5) Deposit required. No bid shall be accepted unless the successful
bidder shall pay a deposit of 10% thereof.
(6) Payment. Notice of the sale or lease shall specify that the purchase
price shall be paid in cash at such time and place as shall be
designated in the resolution authorizing the sale or lease.
(7) Restriction on use. The City Council shall have the power to
establish restrictions, limitations and conditions on the use of the
city real estate offered for sale or lease.
(8) Other restrictions. The City Council shall have the power to
establish by resolution such other terms or conditions in
connection with the sale or lease of real estate or of a franchise as
it deems to be in the best interests of the city.
(9) Term of franchise. No franchise shall be granted or be operated for
a period longer than 50 years.
(10) Extension of franchise. The City Council may, however, grant to the
owner or lessees of an existing franchise, under which operations
4. Editor's Note: Local Law No. 3-1994, § 3, states that all ordinances in conflict with said
local law are repealed. Thus these provisions, although not specifically repealed, are
repealed by implication to the extent that this subsection is inconsistent.
§ 47-1 PROPERTY, MUNICIPAL § 47-2
47:35
§ 47-3. Submission to voters of the city.
Upon a demand being filed as set forth in § 23, Subdivision 2b, of the
General City Law, as amended, the question whether any proposed sale or
lease of city real estate or of any franchise belonging to or under the control
of the city shall be approved, shall be submitted to the voters as specified in
said § 23, Subdivision 2b, of the General City Law, as amended.
§ 47-4. Intent.
It is the intention of this article to establish a method for the sale or lease
of city real estate or of a franchise and that this article is not intended to
restrict the exercise of any power now vested in the city.
are actually being carried on, such additional rights or extensions
in the street or streets in which said franchise exists, upon such
terms as the interests of the city may require, with or without
any advertisement, as the City Council may determine; provided,
however, that no such grant shall be operative unless approved by
the City Manager.5
5. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Private sale, provisions added 12-4-1985 by Ord. No.
85-16, was repealed by L.L. No. 3-1994 adopted 9-7-1994. See full text of L.L. No. 3-1994
and Geneva City Charter § 3.9, former Subdivision C, for effect of L.L. No. 3-1994.
§ 47-2 GENEVA CODE § 47-4
47:36
Chapter 50
PURCHASING AND PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
§ 47-4 PURCHASING AND PUBLIC WORKS § 47-4
50:37

ARTICLE I
Purchase Contracts
§ 50-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish rules and regulations for the
purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services
pursuant to Sections 64 and 65 of the Geneva City Charter.
§ 50-2. Purchases of $1,000 or less.
A. Competitive bidding for purchases involving an expenditure of $1,000
or less but more than $100 shall be governed by the following
regulations:
(1) Informal bids in writing shall be solicited from at least three
suppliers.
(2) Solicitation for bids shall be in writing and simultaneously mailed
to each of such suppliers.
(3) Bids received shall not be communicated by the City Comptroller or
any member of his department to any other bidder or unauthorized
person until such time as an actual award has been made.
(4) "Unauthorized person" shall mean any person other than the City
Manager, department head, commission or board and any
employee of the department, commission or board for whom the
purchase is being made and whose knowledge of the contents of
the bid is essential for the performance of his duties.
(5) Any city official or employee whether authorized or not to have
knowledge of any bid shall not communicate to any unauthorized
person or bidder the contents of any bid except as hereinabove
provided.
(6) Bidders shall have at least five days from the date of mailing of
solicitation to bid to submit their bids in writing.
(7) The City Comptroller shall have the right to reject any or all bids
and request additional bids if he considers same to be in the best
interests of the city.
B. Competitive bidding for purchases involving an expenditure of $100 or
less shall be governed by the following regulations:
(1) Wherever practicable quotations shall be solicited annually in
writing for contemplated purchases. All known suppliers in the city
shall be solicited for quotations.
(2) The City Comptroller shall purchase supplies and material from the
supplier furnishing the lowest quotation for the ensuing fiscal year,
except for good cause. Where the purchase is not made from the
§ 50-1 PURCHASING AND PUBLIC WORKS § 50-2
50:39
§ 50-3. Purchases in excess of $1,000.
Purchases in excess of $1,000 shall be governed by all applicable provisions
of the General Municipal Law.
supplier furnishing the lowest quotation, the reasons therefor shall
be made in writing and filed.
(3) Where quotations cannot be obtained annually or the solicitation of
same is impractical, the City Comptroller may solicit bids verbally
in person or by telephone from three or more suppliers. A record of
all bids so received shall be reduced to writing and filed specifying
the item or items, time and date of solicitation, name and address
of supplier, and amount of bid.
(4) The City Comptroller shall purchase supplies and material from the
supplier furnishing the lowest bid except for good cause. Where the
purchase is not made from the supplier furnishing the lowest bid,
the reasons therefor shall be made in writing and filed.
C. Equipment and contractual services shall conform to the above
regulations except where impractical.
§ 50-2 GENEVA CODE § 50-3
50:40
ARTICLE II
Public Works and Improvements Contracts
§ 50-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish rules and regulations under
which contracts shall be made and carried out for all public works and
improvements, pursuant to Section 66 of the Geneva City Charter.
§ 50-5. Public works and improvement contracts of $2,500 or less.
§ 50-6. Public works and improvement contracts in excess of
$2,500.
Public works and improvement contracts in excess of $2,500 shall be
governed by all applicable provisions of the General Municipal Law.
A. Public works and improvement contracts of $2,500 or less but more
than $1,000 shall be governed by the following regulations:
(1) A public notice shall be posted by the City Comptroller on the City
Hall bulletin board at least two weeks before the opening of bids.
(2) The notice shall contain the date, time and place where bids will be
opened and where plans, specifications, drawings and form of
contract may be obtained.
(3) Informal solicitation by mail shall be made to at least three
contractors who maintain a place of business within 15 miles of the
city limits.
(4) At the time and place designated, the City Comptroller shall open
the sealed bids in accordance with all applicable provisions of the
Geneva City Charter.
B. Public works and improvement contracts of $1,000 or less shall be
governed by the following regulations:
(1) A public notice specifying the time, date and place where bids will
be opened and where plans, specifications, drawings and form of
contract may be obtained shall be posted by the City Comptroller
on the City Hall bulletin board at least five days before the opening
of the bids.
(2) Informal solicitation by phone or mail shall be made to at least
three contractors. If made by phone, a memorandum in writing
shall be made and filed specifying the date, time and name of
contractor solicited and whether the contractor indicated that he
would submit a bid.
§ 50-4 PURCHASING AND PUBLIC WORKS § 50-6
50:41

ARTICLE III
Emergencies
§ 50-7. Emergencies.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, in case of emergency and
the need for immediate action, any of the foregoing regulations may be
waived by the City Manager but the reasons therefor shall be reduced to
writing and filed as soon as practicable thereafter.
§ 50-7 PURCHASING AND PUBLIC WORKS § 50-7
50:43
Chapter 59
ZONING APPEALS, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 59-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize a seven-member Board of Zoning
Appeals and to provide for appointment of said membership by the Geneva
City Council.
§ 59-2. Rules and procedure.
§ 59-3. Validity.
All local laws, ordinances, or part of any local laws that conflict herewith,
specifically § 350-52A of Chapter 350, Zoning, are hereby amended.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 64
ADVERTISING IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 64-1. Advertisements on sidewalk, hydrant or pole.
No person shall place upon or affix, or cause or procure to be placed upon
or affixed, to any sidewalk, hydrant, lamppost, tree, telephone, telegraph
or electric light pole or public building in any public street or place within
the city any words, characters, device, bill, placard, poster, notice, letters
or pictures of any kind as a notice of or reference to any article, business,
exhibition, profession, matter or event of any nature, including political
contests.
A. There shall be a Board of Zoning Appeals consisting of seven members
who shall be appointed by the Geneva City Council for a term of three
years.
B. The present members shall complete their existing terms and all
subsequent terms shall continue to be for a period of three years. Any
vacancies shall be filled by the Geneva City Council for the unexpired
portion of the term. The Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 50-7 GENEVA CODE § 64-2
59:44
§ 64-2. Presumptive evidence.
The placing or affixing of any words, characters, device, bill, placard, poster,
notice, letters or pictures of any kind upon any property or place specified
in this section is presumptive evidence that the proprietor, vendor, exhibitor
thereof or person or persons whose cause is being promoted, caused or
procured the same to be placed or affixed.
§ 64-3. Marking sidewalks.
No person shall place any word, letter, figure or drawing or any mark with
paint, chalk or any similar substance on any pavement, curb or sidewalk on
any public street in the city. This section shall not apply to words, letters or
marks placed on the pavements, curbs or sidewalks by employees of the city
for the purpose of directing traffic or regulating the parking of automobiles,
or otherwise assisting the enforcement of city laws and ordinances.
§ 64-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions"
of this Code.
Chapter 69
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 64-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 64-4
69:45

ARTICLE I
Chamber of Commerce Lake Site
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 65, §§ 65-17 and 65.100C, of the 1968
Code]
§ 69-1. Restriction on possession and consumption. [Added by Ord.
No. 81-20, eff. 9-2-1981; amended by Ord. No. 83-14, eff. 6-1-1983]
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage or possess any open
container of alcoholic beverage as provided by §§ 69-3, 69-4 and 69-5 of
this chapter in the area of the Chamber of Commerce Lake Site and the
property immediately adjacent thereto on the east, commonly known as the
Gil Waltz Memorial property, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
notwithstanding the exceptions stated in said sections.
§ 69-2. Penalties for offenses. [Added by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of the provisions of § 69-1 shall be punishable by a mandatory,
minimum fine of $25 and a maximum fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days or by both said fine and imprisonment.
§ 69-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 69-2
69:47

ARTICLE II
Open Beverage Containers
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 65, Art. IX and § 65.100A, of the 1968
Code]
§ 69-3. Legislative intent and purpose. [Amended by Ord. No. 69-10;
Ord. No. 72-7; 5-4-1983 by Ord. No. 83-12]
§ 69-4. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in certain public places.
[Amended 5-4-1983 by Ord. No. 83-11]
§ 69-5. Exceptions.
A. The City Council finds that the unrestricted consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places often leads to disorders and related
problems as well as the littering of such public places and is disturbing
to the public and threatens peace and good order.
B. The purpose of this article is to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places in order to prevent disorderly
behavior and the littering of public places; and to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and to promote the public good.
A. Prohibited. No person shall within the City of Geneva, drink or
otherwise consume liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages
while such person is in or upon any public sidewalk, street, highway,
parking lot, bathing beach, public park or such other public place as
defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
B. Possession of open containers. No person shall carry or have in his or
her possession, within the City of Geneva, any open bottle or open
container containing liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage with
the intent of the possessor or another to consume same in any of the
public places described in Subsection A of this section.
C. Presumptions.
(1) The possession of an open bottle or open container unwrapped or
with the top exposed in a public place as herein defined shall be
presumptive evidence that such open bottle or open container is
intended to be consumed in a public place.
(2) An open bottle or open container in any vehicle while in or on any
public sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot, bathing beach, public
park or other public place as defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law
of the State of New York shall be presumptive evidence that the
same is in the possession of all the occupants thereof.
A. The provisions of § 69-4 shall not apply to any public park, except
Pulteney Park and Genesee Park, or any bathing beach in the city
during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
§ 69-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 69-5
69:49
§ 69-6. Possession by persons under the age of 21 years of age.
[Added 2-3-1988 by Ord No. 88-1]
No person under 21 years of age shall possess any alcoholic beverage in a
public place as defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New
York, and any alcoholic beverage found to be in the possession of a person
under 21 years of age in such public place shall be confiscated.
§ 69-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The provisions of § 69-4 shall not apply to any activity sponsored by an
organization having proper license to dispense alcoholic beverages
upon public property in the city, said license having been issued by the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of Ontario County and such
organization having obtained permission from the City Manager for the
granting of this exception. No fee shall be charged for the granting of
this permission. This exception shall apply only to the public property in
the city upon which the alcoholic beverages are dispensed.
§ 69-5 GENEVA CODE § 69-7
69:50
Chapter 73
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 91.
Public entertainment — See Ch. 143.
Fortune telling — See Ch. 184.
Games of chance — See Ch. 191.
§ 69-7 AMUSEMENTS § 69-7
73:51

ARTICLE I
Places of Amusement
§ 73-1. Conduct of certain businesses.
No person shall conduct or operate any of the following businesses within
the city except as hereinafter provided in this article:
§ 73-2. License required.
§ 73-3. Fees.
The following fees for the conduct or operation of the above-mentioned
businesses shall be as follows:
A. Bowling alley, shooting gallery, poolroom and billiard parlor.
B. Circus, carnival, menagerie, temporary exhibition for profit of natural
or artificial curiosities or similar attractions, theatrical presentation of
a floor show held in any place where intoxicating beverages are sold at
retail. As used in this article, "carnival" shall include any entertainment
show having or comprised of side shows, a Ferris wheel, merry-goround
or other such or similar mechanical or hand-operated rides or
amusements. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-21, eff. 7-3-1974]
A. Any person desiring a license to pursue any business hereinabove
mentioned shall file a written application therefor in the City Clerk's
office which shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The period of time for which such license is required.
(3) The kind and character of the business to be conducted.
(4) The place where the business is to be conducted.
(5) Any other additional information that the City Manager may
require.
B. Upon approval by the City Manager and payment of the fee therefor as
hereinafter prescribed, the City Clerk shall issue a license for the
conduct or operation of such business, which license shall state the
business to be conducted, the place of operation and the time or period
during which it shall be valid, and such other information as the City
Manager may prescribe.
A. Bowling alley, poolroom and billiard parlor: $3 for the first and $1.50 for
each additional alley or table.
B. Shooting gallery: $25 per year or $1 per day.
C. Circus: $25 per day.
§ 73-1 AMUSEMENTS § 73-3
73:53
§ 73-4. Reduced fee.
For any license issued on an annual basis, the fee for any license issued on
or after July 1 in any year shall be 1/2 of the above mentioned rates.
§ 73-5. Expiration of licenses.
All licenses issued under this article shall expire on December 31 after
date of issue, except that all short-term licenses shall expire on the date
specified.
§ 73-6. Revocation of licenses.
Any license granted under this article may be revoked by the City Manager
for cause, but no refund of the fee shall be made.
§ 73-7. Additional regulations for bowling alleys, poolrooms and
billiard parlors.
D. Carnival and menagerie: $10 per day.
E. Temporary exhibition for profit of natural or artificial curiosities or
similar attractions: $3 per day.
F. Theatrical presentation of a floor show held in any place where
intoxicating beverages are sold at retail: $75 per year.
A. Bowling alleys. It shall be lawful for the owner, lessee, manager or
employee of a public bowling alley to permit a child between the ages of
nine and 16 to enter and remain in such place, daily, except Sunday,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in the afternoon when
school is not in session, and on Sunday between the hours of five
minutes past 1:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., provided that no alcoholic
beverages of any kind are sold or dispensed in such place during the
time such child is on the premises.
B. Poolrooms and billiard rooms. No person shall keep open to the public
any poolroom or billiard room parlor in the city between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., Monday through and including Saturday
of each week. No person shall keep open to the public any poolroom or
billiard parlor in the city before five minutes past 1:00 p.m. or later than
12:00 midnight on Sunday. [Amended by Ord. No. 76-4, eff.
3-3-1976]
§ 73-3 GENEVA CODE § 73-7
73:54
ARTICLE II
Jukeboxes, Shuffleboards and Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
§ 73-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
respective meanings:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any mechanical device used or
designed to be operated for amusement by the insertion of a coin.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine contrivance or device which upon
the insertion of a coin into any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the
payment of any price, operates or may operate for the emission of songs,
music or similar amusement.
SHUFFLEBOARD — Any board, surface, floor, table or structure on which
a game is played by pushing or moving pieces or articles to reach certain
marks or areas.
§ 73-9. Illegal devices not permitted.
The definitions as hereinabove stated shall not be deemed to include any
device, the possession or use of which is otherwise prohibited by law, and
nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, license or permit
any gambling device or any mechanism which is otherwise prohibited by
law.
§ 73-10. License required.
No person shall place or deliver for use any jukebox, shuffleboard, or any
coin-operated amusement device on any premises in the city, or permit the
use thereof in any place under his control without a license so to do, said
license having been first obtained from the City Clerk as hereinafter set
forth.
§ 73-11. Application for license.
The owner, conditional vendee or lessee of any such jukebox, shuffleboard
or coin-operated amusement device or their duly authorized agent who
desires to distribute or place any such jukebox, shuffleboard or coinoperated
amusement device for use shall make application to the City Clerk
for such permission upon blanks to be furnished by the City Clerk giving
the name and address of the applicant, date and place of birth, a detailed
description of the mechanical or other features of the device, the name
and address of the person having responsible charge of the premises upon
which the device is proposed to be located for use and the location of said
premises by street and number.
§ 73-8 AMUSEMENTS § 73-12
73:55
§ 73-12. Investigation and recommendation.
Said application shall be referred by the City Clerk to the Chief of Police
for his investigation and recommendation. The Chief of Police shall return
the application within a reasonable time to the City Clerk with his
recommendation as to approval or disapproval.
§ 73-13. Issuance of license.
The City Clerk, upon receipt of such application approved by the Chief of
Police, may issue a license to the applicant to place and permit the use upon
the premises designated in the application of the jukebox, shuffleboard
or coin-operated amusement device described therein. A license shall be
procured for each such jukebox, shuffleboard or coin-operated amusement
device as placed, and a suitable card bearing a number and expiration date
shall be obtained from the City Clerk and securely attached to the licensed
article.
§ 73-14. Transfer of license.
Any such license and card may be transferred from one jukebox,
shuffleboard or coin-operated amusement device to another similar
jukebox, shuffleboard or device at the same premises. Not more than one
such jukebox, shuffleboard or coin-operated amusement device shall be
operated under one license and card. All licenses and cards shall be
restricted in use to the premises designated in the application for such
license.
§ 73-15. Fees.
The City Clerk shall not issue any license hereunder for any jukebox,
shuffleboard or coin-operated device unless the amount hereinafter set
forth opposite the name of such machine has been paid to the City Clerk.
Such sums to be paid to the City Clerk are respectively as follows:
Machine Amount
Coin-operated amusement device $15
Jukebox $15
Shuffleboard $10
§ 73-16. Expiration date.
Every license and card issued under this chapter shall expire on June 30
next following date of issuance. The fee for such licenses granted after
January first of any fiscal year shall be one-half of the amounts set forth in
§ 73-15 of this article.
§ 73-17. Revocation of licenses.
§ 73-12 GENEVA CODE § 73-17
73:56
A. Every license and card issued under this article is subject to the right,
which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the
licensee directly or indirectly permit the operation of any jukebox,
shuffleboard or coin-operated amusement device contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, any other provisions of the Municipal Code,
local law, rule or regulation of the city or the laws of the State of New
York.
B. The City Manager may revoke a license issued under this article for
cause as stated in Subsection A herein. Prior to revoking a license,
however, the City Manager shall:
(1) Give or cause notice in writing to be served on the licensee
specifying the violation or violations with which the licensee is
charged and a time, date and place at which a hearing will be held,
which hearing shall be at least 10 days after the date of service of
the notice.
(2) Hold the hearing as specified in the notice. The licensee may be
represented by counsel. Failure of the licensee to appear at the
hearing shall be sufficient grounds to revoke the license.
(3) After the hearing, make his determination in writing and cause a
copy of same to be served on the licensee, and if he has appeared
by an attorney, a copy of same shall also be served on the attorney.
§ 73-17 AMUSEMENTS § 73-17
73:57

ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 73-18. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-13, eff.
7-5-1972]
Notwithstanding the penalty of revocation authorized by § 73-17 of Article
II, any person who shall violate any provision of either Article I or II
of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or
by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both said fine and
imprisonment.
§ 73-18 AMUSEMENTS § 73-18
73:59
Chapter 77
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hunting and trapping — See Ch. 206.
Noise — See Ch. 232.
Nuisances — See Ch. 236.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 247.
Sanitary Code — See Ch. 273.
§ 73-18 GENEVA CODE § 73-18
73:60
ARTICLE I
Keeping of Animals
§ 77-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the safety and health of the
inhabitants of the city; to establish safeguards for the keeping of bees,
animals and poultry within the city; and to provide for penalties for the
violations thereof.
§ 77-2. Keeping of bees.
No person shall keep or harbor any bees in the city. Any beehive used
or occupied by bees is hereby declared to be a nuisance; and it shall be
unlawful to keep or maintain any such hive in the city.
§ 77-3. Keeping of chickens, ducks, geese or fowl.
No person shall keep or harbor any chickens, ducks, geese or other
domesticated fowl in the city except in the AR, Agricultural Residential Use
Districts and F Industrial Use Districts and not closer than 200 feet to any
house, except the owner's, apartment building, church, school, hospital or
any other building customarily used or occupied by human beings, such as
but not limited to stores, hotels, restaurants, offices and factories.
§ 77-4. Keeping of cattle, horses and sheep.
No person shall keep or harbor any cattle, horses and sheep in the city
except as follows:
§ 77-5. Keeping of goats, pigs or swine.
No person shall keep or harbor any goats, pigs or swine in the city; and it
shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any goat pen, pig sty or other building
for the housing of goats, pigs or swine.
§ 77-6. Keeping of dogs, cats, birds and other domesticated pets.
A. Cattle, horses and sheep may be kept in the city in the AR, Agricultural
District if maintained not closer than 100 feet to any house except the
owner's, apartment building, church, school, hospital or any other
building customarily used or occupied by human beings, such as but not
limited to stores, hotels, restaurants, offices and factories.
B. Every person maintaining animals as permitted in Subsection A of this
section shall keep clean and sanitary every shed, barn or structure
housing said animals. Every such shed, barn or structure shall be
thoroughly cleaned at least once every 24 hours and refuse from the
same shall, when collected, be kept in airtight containers until disposed
of in accordance with any other provisions of this Code.
§ 77-1 AMUSEMENTS § 77-6
73:61
§ 77-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-17 of
Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions," of this Code.
A. No person, except a veterinarian at his regular place of business shall
maintain any establishment for hire or profit within the city for the
raising, training, boarding or selling of dogs or cats, or where more
than three dogs or cats are harbored or kept.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of a female dog or cat may
keep upon his premises the litter of such dog or cat for a period not to
exceed three months.
C. Birds and other domesticated pets may be maintained as pets if kept in
a clean and sanitary manner and are not offensive or dangerous.
§ 77-6 GENEVA CODE § 77-7
73:62
ARTICLE II
Pigeon Control
§ 77-8. Purpose and findings.
It is hereby determined that pigeons have become a public nuisance in the
city. They constitute a menace to public health by their roosting, nesting
and frequenting of various public and private buildings within the city.
§ 77-9. Permit authority.
The Health Officer shall have the authority to issue permits for the trapping
of pigeons in the city.
§ 77-10. Disposition of trapped pigeons.
Any pigeons trapped in the city shall be disposed of for food purposes only
unless sick or injured beyond recovery. Any Antwerp or homing pigeon
wearing a ring or seamless leg band with its registered number stamped
thereon shall be released immediately.
§ 77-8 AMUSEMENTS § 77-10
73:63

ARTICLE III
Dog Control and Licensing
[Amended by Ord. No. 80-11, eff. 4-2-1980; Ord. No. 80-24, eff.
10-1-1980; Ord. No. 81-15, eff. 4-7-1981; 4-1-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7;
6-13-1987 by Ord. No. 87-15; 8-5-1987 by Ord. No. 87-22; 3-6-1996
by Ord. No. 96-1; 7-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-7; 12-1-2010 by L.L. No.
4-20106]
§ 77-11. Definitions.
When used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONTROL — That the dog will respond to the command, order or signal
of the owner or other responsible person, and that the owner or other
responsible person shall at all times by his command, order or signal
prevent his dog from bothering, worrying, annoying, chasing or barking at
any person or animal.
DOG — Any dog of either sex and of any age unless otherwise indicated
herein.
DOG WARDEN — The person appointed to assist in the enforcement of this
article.
OWNER — Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog within the limits
of the City and the parent, guardian or other adult person with whom a
minor dog owner resides.
RUN AT LARGE — To move about, over, across or upon any public or
private property, premises, street, alley or thoroughfare other than that of
the owner.
§ 77-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the City and to contribute to the public welfare, safety and good
order of its people by establishing certain regulations and restrictions on
the activities of dogs that are consistent with the rights and privileges of
other residents of the City.
§ 77-13. Licensing of dogs; rabies vaccination requirement.
All dogs in the City of Geneva, unless otherwise exempted by New York
State Agriculture and Markets law, must be licensed with the City Clerk of
the City of Geneva by the age of six months. The owner of each dog required
to be licensed shall, for new applications and renewal applications, obtain,
complete and return to the City Clerk:
A. The owner of any dog then six months of age on the effective date of this
section or older shall immediately make application for a dog license.
6. Editor's Note: This local law also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 77-11 AMUSEMENTS § 77-13
73:65
§ 77-14. License fees.
The fees and surcharges for issuing dog licenses shall be fixed by the City
Council. Such fees and surcharges may from time to time be changed as the
City Council may determine. These fees and surcharges may include:
Said license shall be renewed after a period of one year, but no greater
than three years, beginning with the first day of the month following the
date of issuance and shall be renewable annually or every three years
thereafter prior to said expiration date.
B. Application for a dog license shall be made to the City Clerk and such
application shall state the sex, actual or approximate age, breed, color
and official identification number of the dog and other identification
marks, if any, and the name, address, telephone number, county and
town, City or village of residence of the owner.
C. The application shall be accompanied by the license fee and certificate
of rabies vaccination. In case of a spayed or neutered dog, every
application shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian or an affidavit signed by the owner, showing that the dog
has been spayed or neutered, provided such certificate or affidavit shall
not be required if the same is already on file with the Clerk or
authorized dog control officer.
D. Upon validation by the Clerk or authorized dog control officer, the
application shall become a license for the dog described therein. Once
an application has been validated, no refund therefor shall be made.
E. No license shall be transferable.
A. The license fee for a spayed or neutered dog;
B. The license fee for an unspayed or an unneutered dog (such fee having
to exceed the fee for a license for a spayed or neutered dog by such
amount as mandated by the New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law);
C. In addition to the license fee authorized by this law and established by
the City Council of the City of Geneva, a surcharge if the dog to be
licensed is altered (Such surcharge shall be, at a minimum, such
amount as mandated by the New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law.);
D. In addition to the license fee authorized by this law and established by
the City Council of the City of Geneva, a surcharge if the dog to be
licensed is not altered (Such surcharge shall be, at a minimum, such
amount as mandated by the New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law.);
E. In addition to the license fee authorized by this law and established by
the City Council of the City of Geneva, a surcharge to recover and
§ 77-13 GENEVA CODE § 77-14
73:66
§ 77-15. Restraint and leashing of dogs.
§ 77-16. Prohibition of nuisance by dog.
No person being the owner or agent of any dog shall permit such dog to
commit any nuisance within the City or cause damage to the person or
property of others. The following are declared public nuisances and are set
forth herein for explanatory purposes only and are not to be considered as
excluding other types of nuisances:
defray the cost of an enumeration of dogs living within the City of
Geneva.
F. There shall be no fee for any license issued for any guide dog, war dog
or police work dog.
A. The owner of any dog shall not allow, suffer or permit his/her dog to run
at large within the City at any time except when such dog is restrained
by a leash and under the immediate and full control of the owner or
person in charge thereof. All dogs in the City of Geneva are hereby
required to be restrained by a leash while off the premises of the owner
of said dog; provided, however, that dogs are permitted to be unleashed
when on the premises of another person with such person's consent. No
person who owns, keeps, harbors or has the care, custody or control of
any dog in the City of Geneva shall permit such dog to be unleashed or
at large in the City except as permitted by this chapter.
B. No unspayed female dog in season shall be permitted to be outside a
building or a fenced enclosure.
A. Engage in loud howling or habitual barking or to conduct itself in such a
manner so as to disturb the public peace.
B. Habitually chase and/or bark at moving vehicles or persons on foot.
C. Jumping upon any person or knocking any person over.
D. Being found upon the schoolyard of any of the schools of the City during
the time of year when said schools are open between one hour prior to
commencement of the school day to one hour after end of the school
day.
E. To run together in a pack or to in any way form a pack. For the purposes
of this article, the word "pack" is hereby defined to mean three or more
dogs.
F. Causing damage to property of others.
G. No dog shall be allowed at any time in any City-owned cemetery for any
purpose.
§ 77-14 AMUSEMENTS § 77-16
73:67
§ 77-17. Identification tag.
Each dog licensed pursuant to this article shall be assigned, at the time the
dog is first licensed, a municipal identification number. Such identification
number shall be carried by the dog on an identification tag which shall be
affixed to a collar on the dog at all times. No tag carrying an identification
number shall be affixed to the collar of any dog other than the one to which
that number has been assigned.
§ 77-18. Seizure of dogs.
§ 77-19. Dangerous dogs.
Any dog which shall attack any person or domestic animal within the
meaning of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New
York shall be dealt with in accordance with Article 7 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law.
§ 77-20. Jurisdiction.
Any Judge of the City Court of Geneva shall have jurisdiction to hear all
complaints under this article and of all actions and proceedings hereunder
and of all prosecutions for the violation of this article.
§ 77-21. Duty of Dog Warden.
The position of Dog Warden is hereby created. Said Dog Warden shall be
appointed by the City Council and shall be removable at the pleasure of
H. It shall be the specific responsibility of the owner of a dog or the person
having control of a dog to clean the property of another on which a dog
owned by or in the control of them has defecated.
A. The Dog Warden, any peace officer of the City or designated
representative of the Commission of Agriculture and Markets shall
seize any dog which is found at large in violation of §§ 77-13 and 77-14,
77-15, 77-16 or 77-17 of this article or any other provision of Article 7 of
the Agriculture and Markets Law.
B. Each dog which is not identified, whether or not licensed, shall be held
for a period of five days from the day seized, during which period the
dog may be redeemed by its owner, provided that such owner produces
proof that the dog has been licensed and has been identified pursuant
to the provisions of this article and further provided that the owner pays
the appropriate impoundment fees.
C. Promptly upon seizure of any identified dog, the owner of record of such
dog shall be notified personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the facts of seizure and the procedure for redemption.
The owner may redeem such dog upon payment of the impoundment
fees and by producing proof that the dog has been licensed.
§ 77-16 GENEVA CODE § 77-21
73:68
the City Council. It shall be the duty of the Dog Warden to enforce the
provisions of this article, as well as the Agriculture and Markets Law of the
State of New York, with respect to dogs in the City of Geneva, and to seize
all dogs found at large in violation of this article or which are ordered seized
by a Judge of the City Court of Geneva, and for the purposes of this article
such a Dog Warden is deemed to be a peace officer.
§ 77-22. Filing of complaint; contents.
Any person who observes or has knowledge of a dog causing damage to
property of a person other than its owner, or violating any section of this
article, or permitting a nuisance upon the premises of a person other than
its owner, may file a signed complaint under oath with the Dog Warden of
the City of Geneva, specifying the objectionable conduct of the dog, the date
thereof, the damage caused, the description of the dog and the name of
residence, if known, of the owner or other person harboring said dog.
§ 77-23. Authority of Dog Warden.
Upon receipt by the Dog Warden of any complaint against the conduct of
any particular dog for a violation of any provision of this article, or in the
event any dog is found by the Dog Warden of the City of Geneva to be
in violation of any provision of this article, the Dog Warden may summon
the alleged owner or other person harboring said dog to appear before the
Judge of the City Court of the City of Geneva, said summons to be issued by
the Dog Warden or other peace officer of the City and to state the name and
residence, if known, of the owner or other person harboring said dog, the
complainant, the date and time of the alleged violation, the nature of the
violation and the time and place at which the owner of said dog is required
to appear in Court. If the summons is disregarded, the Dog Warden may file
an information with the Judge of the City Court of Geneva and such Court
shall then issue a warrant for the arrest of such person.
§ 77-24. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any violation of § 77-15 or of § 77-16 of this chapter shall be punishable
as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, of this Code.
B. It shall be a violation punishable as provided in Subsection C of this
section for:
(1) Any owner to fail to license any dog.
(2) Any owner to fail to have any dog identified as required by this
chapter.
(3) Any person to knowingly affix to any dog any false or improper
identification tag or purebred license tag.
(4) Any person to fail to comply with any further provisions of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York insofar as
§ 77-21 AMUSEMENTS § 77-24
73:69
the same is applicable to identification, licensing, rabies
vaccination and euthanasia.
C. It shall be the duty of the Dog Control Officer to bring an action against
any person who has committed, within the City, any violation set forth in
Subsection B of this section. Violation of Subsection B of this section
shall be prosecuted pursuant to the Penal Law and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $25 for the first offense, $50 for a second
offense within five years and $100 or imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both, for two or more violations within the preceding five
years.
§ 77-24 GENEVA CODE § 77-24
73:70
Chapter 86
BICYCLES
§ 77-24 BICYCLES § 77-24
86:71

ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 65, Art. VIII and § 65-100B, of the 1968
Code]
§ 86-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Any device propelled by human power which any person may
ride having two tandem wheels, either of which is 20 inches in diameter or
more.[Amended by Ord. No. 73-5, eff. 3-7-1973]
§ 86-2. License and license plates required.
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public
path unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate has been
attached thereto as provided herein.
§ 86-3. License application. [Amended 7-7-1982 by Ord. No. 82-22]
Application for a bicycle license and license plate shall be made upon a form
provided by the City and the City Clerk shall have the authority to issue
upon the application, in the manner indicated herein, bicycle licenses and
license plates. The license fee of 25¢ for each year applied proportionately
for a total of 75¢ shall be paid to the City Clerk before each bicycle license
is granted.
§ 86-4. Terms of license. [Amended 7-7-1982 by Ord. No. 82-22]
All bicycle licenses shall be dated January 1 of the year of issue, and all
bicycle licenses and license plates shall expire on December 31 of the third
year as indicated on the license.
§ 86-5. Restrictions on the issuance of licenses and license plates.
The City Clerk shall not issue a license or license plate for any bicycle when
he knows or has reasonable ground to believe that the applicant is not the
owner of or entitled to possession of such bicycle.
§ 86-6. Issuance of license; procedure.
A. Records. The City Clerk shall keep a record of:
(1) The number of each license.
(2) The date issued.
(3) The name and address of the person to whom the license is issued.
(4) The number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued.
§ 86-1 BICYCLES § 86-6
86:73
§ 86-7. Attachment of license plates.
The owner of the bicycle or the person in charge thereof shall cause the
license plate to be firmly attached to the rear mud guard of the frame of the
bicycle for which issued, in such a position as to be plainly visible from the
rear, and such license plate shall not be removed from the bicycle during
the period for which it is issued, except upon a transfer of ownership or in
the event the bicycle is dismantled.
§ 86-8. Transfer of ownership. [Amended 7-7-1982 by Ord. No.
82-22]
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall
destroy the license plate and may upon proper application, but without the
payment of an additional fee, have said plate assigned to another bicycle
owned by the applicant.
§ 86-9. Riding on sidewalks. [Amended by Ord. No. 86-5, eff.
9-3-1986]
§ 86-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-16, eff.
7-5-1972]
The violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding the sum of $5 for each violation or by imprisonment not
exceeding five days, or both said fine and imprisonment. In lieu of the
foregoing fine or imprisonment, the punishment for the first violation may,
and in the discretion of the City Judge, be a reprimand, and for the second
violation by the offender a deprivation of the issue of a bicycle for one week,
and for a third violation by the offender a deprivation of the use of a bicycle
for one month.
(5) A record of all bicycle license fees collected by him.
B. License plates. The City Clerk upon issuing a bicycle license shall also
issue a license plate bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle
and the name City of Geneva.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk. This provision shall not
apply, however, to children 12 years of age or under or to handicapped
persons who cannot walk.
B. No person, except handicapped persons, as indicated in the above
subsection, shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the Downtown
Business District, specifically Exchange Street between Seneca to
Lewis Street; Main Street between Seneca and Castle Street; Seneca
Street; Castle Street between Main Street to the railroad tracks on E.
Castle Street; Linden Street.
§ 86-6 GENEVA CODE § 86-10
86:74
ARTICLE II
Lost Bicycles
[Adopted 8-4-1971]
§ 86-11. Return of lost bicycle to owner or police.
Any person who finds a lost bicycle shall within 10 days after the finding
or acquisition of possession thereof, either return it to the owner or report
such finding or acquisition of possession and deposit such bicycle in a police
station or police headquarters of the City of Geneva where the finding
occurred or possession was acquired.
§ 86-12. Police to retain custody; receipt.
The police with whom a found bicycle is deposited shall accept and retain
custody of the bicycle and shall give to the person depositing it a receipt
identifying the transaction of the deposit and identifying the bicycle.
§ 86-13. Record of report and deposit of bicycle.
Such bicycle shall be transmitted, together with the report of the person
who deposited it with the police, to the police officer or other official
designated to hold such bicycle, who shall make entry in his records of such
deposit and the report of the person depositing such bicycle with the police.
§ 86-14. Notice of finding.
§ 86-15. Disposition of bicycle at expiration of retention period.
A. If the report of the person who deposited the bicycle shows that the
bicycle was found in a place other than a public street or highway, the
police with whom it is deposited shall give notice of the finding and
deposit, including the location of the office to which the bicycle is
transmitted, to the occupant of the premises where the bicycle was
found or to the person in charge of such premises.
B. The police with whom a bicycle is deposited shall give notice of the
deposit to each person whose name and address appears upon the
bicycle or whose name so appears and whose address is known to the
police.
A. Upon the expiration of six months from the date of the acceptance and
retention of the bicycle by the Police Department, or upon the
expiration of six months from the date of possession of the bicycle by
the Police Department, the police may sell at public auction to the
highest bidder after publishing in the Geneva Times a notice of sale,
once, and not less than seven days before the date of sale upon due
notice of such public sale; such notice of sale being made pursuant to a
motion by City Council of the City of Geneva, New York.
§ 86-11 BICYCLES § 86-15
86:75
§ 86-16. Disposition of money received for bicycle sold at auction.
If the bicycle is sold at public auction, then the moneys received therefrom
shall be retained in a special fund for a period of six months and if no claim
made thereon during such period, then at the end of such period, all moneys
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City of Geneva, New York.
B. If no bids are received at public sale, and the bicycle has no value, it
may be destroyed by the police or if it has salvage value only, it may be
sold by the police in such manner as may be reasonable in the
circumstances.
§ 86-15 GENEVA CODE § 86-16
86:76
Chapter 91
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 73. Games of chance — See Ch. 191.
§ 91-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of the game of
bingo by authorized organizations in the City of Geneva pursuant to Article
One, Section Nine of the Constitution of the State of New York, and as
implemented by the State Bingo Control Law and the Bingo Licensing Law.
§ 91-2. Right to conduct games of bingo. [Amended by Ord. No.
77-3, eff. 5-6-1977]
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined by § 476 of
Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, upon
obtaining the required license, to conduct the game of bingo on any day
of the week, including Sunday, within the territorial limits of the City of
Geneva, New York, subject to the provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H
of the General Municipal Law, Article 19-B of the Executive Law and any
amendments to said law.
§ 91-3. Restrictions upon conduct of bingo games.
The conduct of bingo games authorized by this chapter shall be subject to
the following restrictions:
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law or from another authorized organization.
§ 86-16 BINGO § 91-3
91:77
§ 91-4. Delegation of authority to City Clerk.
The City Clerk is hereby designated to exercise all of the authority granted
to the City Council of the City of Geneva under § 498, Article 14-H of
the General Municipal Law, in relation to the issuance, amendment and
cancellation of licenses, the conduct of investigations and hearings, the
supervision of the operation of the games and the collection and
transmission of fees.
Chapter 96
BOAT DOCKING
§ 96-1. Time limit.
No person shall dock, park or leave any boat at any public dock for a period
longer than 48 hours without first obtaining the authorization in writing
from the Director of Public Works or Police Chief.
§ 96-2. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable
by the City authorizing the removal of any boat and any costs for such
including storage fees plus 50% and/or a fine not exceeding $250 for each
violation. Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate violation.
Chapter 100
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $250 in any single game of
bingo.
F. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than $1,000.
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provisions of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
J. Limited period bingo shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and the rules
and regulations of the State Bingo Control Commission.
§ 91-3 GENEVA CODE § 96-2
100:78
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 264.
§ 100-1. Control of growth; harmful vegetation.
§ 100-2. Duty of owner or occupant.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, or occupant or person having control
of any lot or land in the city to cultivate more than 10% of said lot or
land or 1/10 of an acre, whichever is less, for the purpose of
establishing a natural area of wildflowers and shrubs. The area must be
clearly defined by the utilization of fencing, mulching or other form of
delineation and shall be located not nearer than 25 feet to any public
highway, street or right-of-way. The remainder of said property, lot or
land, to include the area between the property line and the curb or for
10 feet outside the property line if there is no curb, shall be maintained
to ensure that no growth of weeds or grass shall exceed six inches on
average or to allow any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush.
[Amended 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 93-7]
B. It shall also be unlawful for any such person to cause, suffer or allow
poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants or plants detrimental to
health to grow on any such lot or land in such manner that any part of
such ivy, ragweed or other poisonous weed shall extend upon, overhang
or border any public place or allow seeds, pollen or other poisonous
particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any
public place.
C. It is prohibited to allow hedges, shrubs or trees to encroach onto public
sidewalks and lines of sight of public roadways. [Added 9-7-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-7]
A. It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant or person having control of
any lot or land to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed all
such weeds, grass or other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as
often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of § 100-1.
[Amended 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5]
B. For the purpose of the City of Geneva leaf pickup, it shall be the duty of
any owner, occupant or person having control of any lot to ensure that
the collected leaves shall be placed between the sidewalk and curb and
shall not in any way hinder the free access by the public to the sidewalk
or street. If collected leaves are placed in containers, the containers
shall be made of paper or other biodegradable material. The use of
plastic bags is specifically prohibited, and leaves placed in plastic bags
will not be picked up. [Added 7-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-6]
§ 96-2 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 100-3
100:79
§ 100-3. Abatement of nuisance by city.
§ 100-4. Interference with Superintendent, agents or employees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, obstruct or interfere with
the Superintendent of Public Works or any agent or employee of the city
in the cutting and removal of weeds, grass or rank, poisonous or harmful
vegetation as set forth in § 100-3 herein.
§ 100-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
A. If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall serve written notice upon the
owner, occupant or any person having the control of any such lot or land
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses
to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed such weeds, grass or
other vegetation within five days after receipt of such notice, or if no
person can be found in the city who either is or claims to be the owner
of such lot or land or who either represents or claims to represent such
owner, the Superintendent of Public Works shall cause such weeds,
grass and other vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed,
and the actual cost of such cutting and removal plus a service charge of
50% thereof to cover cost of supervision and administration shall be
certified by the Superintendent of Public Works to the City Comptroller
and such certified amount shall thereupon become and be a lien upon
the property on which such weeds, grass and other vegetation were
located and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear
interest at the same rate as city real estate taxes and shall be collected
and enforced in the same manner as such taxes.
C. The owner, occupant or any person having control over any lot, land or
property found in violation of § 100-1 shall be notified in writing only
once in any given year for a particular violation. Subsequent violations
of a similar nature at the same location during the same year shall be
corrected by the city or its agent without notice to the owner, occupant
or person having control of said property. After initial notification, such
owner, occupant or person having control of said property will be
presumed to have been given sufficient notice of infraction for the
entire season. [Added 7-6-1988 by Ord. No. 88-5]
§ 100-3 GENEVA CODE § 100-5
100:80
Chapter 105
(RESERVED)
Chapter 111
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 105.
Abandoned excavation and
construction — See Ch. 151.
Housing standards — See Ch. 202.
§ 111-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the removal or repair of
buildings in the City of Geneva that from any cause may now be or shall
hereinafter become dangerous or unsafe to the public.
§ 111-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDINGS — A structure wholly or partly enclosed within exterior walls,
or within exterior or party walls, and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE BUILDING — A building or structure which is
structurally unsound, unsanitary, or not provided with adequate ingress or
egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or which has become unsafe
by reason of damage by fire, the elements, age or general deterioration,
or which, in relation to an existing use, constitutes a hazard to the public
health, safety or welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
obsolescence or abandonment, or which is otherwise dangerous to human
life.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction, framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
§ 111-3. Inspection and report; notice to owner.
A. Any complaint of a dangerous or unsafe building or collapsed structure
shall be investigated, inspected and reported upon by the City of
Geneva Code Enforcement Office.
B. Upon the determination of the Code Enforcement Office that the
building or structure is unsafe or in danger of collapse, notice of the
same shall be served upon the owner of said building or structure or on
§ 100-5 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 111-3
111:81
§ 111-4. Repair or removal.
the owner's executor, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other
person having a vested or contingent interest in the same, either
personally or by certified mail, addressed to the last known address, if
any, of the owner, or on the owner's executors, legal representatives,
agents, lessees or other persons having a vested or contingent interest
in the same, as shown by the records of the Receiver of Taxes7 and/
or in the office of the County Clerk or County Registrar, containing
a statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is
dangerous or unsafe and an order, as further described below, requiring
the same to be made safe and secure or removed. If said service shall
be made by certified mail, a copy of such notice shall be posted on the
premises.
A. The owner or the owner's executors, legal representatives, agent,
lessees or any other person having a vested or contingent interest in
said property shall submit a satisfactory plan for the repair or removal
of the building or structure within 90 days after the service of the notice
and complete the work within the time frames set forth below. Said plan
shall include drawings and specifications sufficiently complete that a
building permit could be issued therefor, the qualifications and/or work
experience of the individuals who will do the work, an itemized estimate
of both the time required and the funds required to accomplish the
work, and evidence of financial capability to pay for the work. As the
building or structure rather than the property owner is what is to be
cited as being in violation, the transfer of property from one owner to
another shall in no way affect these time limits. The Code Enforcement
Office shall make the determination as to the adequacy of the plan in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the City of Geneva
Municipal Code and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, and issue either a building permit or a demolition permit
upon approval. [Amended 7-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6]
(1) Time frames for completion of the work shall be as follows:
(a) For residential buildings of one or two dwelling units and all
other buildings under 4,000 square feet in area, work shall be
completed within six months after the service of the notice.
(b) For residential buildings of three to five dwelling units and all
other buildings between 4,000 and 7,500 square feet in area,
work shall be completed within nine months after the service
of the notice.
(c) For residential buildings of six or more dwelling units and all
other buildings over 7,500 square feet in area, work shall be
completed within 12 months after the service of the notice.
7. So in original. Should read "City Comptroller."
§ 111-3 GENEVA CODE § 111-4
111:82
§ 111-5. Failure of owner to submit plan or to complete work;
hearing; costs.
(d) If the plan submitted is for the demolition and removal of the
building, work shall be completed within six months after
service of the notice.
(2) None of the above shall preclude compliance with all applicable
zoning regulations and/or the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
B. If the owner fails to submit a plan for the repair or removal of said
building or structure within the time prescribed in Subsection A, or if
the owner fails to complete the repair or removal of said building or
structure within the time prescribed in Subsection A, the Code
Enforcement Office shall file a copy of the notice served upon the owner
or his representative in the office of the County Clerk of Ontario County,
which notice shall be filed by such Clerk in the same manner as a notice
of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules,
and shall have the same effect as a notice of pendency as therein
provided, except as otherwise hereinafter provided in this subsection.
The notice so filed shall be effective for a period of one year from the
date of filing; provided, however, that it may be vacated upon the order
of a Judge of a court of record or upon the consent of the City Attorney.
The Clerk of Ontario County shall mark such notice and any record or
docket thereof as canceled or record upon the presentation and filing of
such consent or of a certified copy of the order.
A. In the event that the owner or his representative shall not submit a plan
or complete the work within the time provided in § 111-4A, the City
Council shall call a public hearing, and shall give notice of the time and
place thereof, said public hearing to be held not less than two weeks nor
more than four weeks from the date of service of said notice. The
purpose of said public hearing shall be to require repair or demolition
of said building or structure. Said notice shall be served upon the owner
and such persons having an interest in the property or structure as
determined by the Code Enforcement Office. Service of said notice shall
be as is provided in § 111-3 of this chapter. [Amended 7-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-6]
B. After said public hearing, the City Council may order repair or removal
of the building or structure by the city in the event that the owner fails
or refuses to repair or remove the same within a time period provided
by the City Council. [Amended 7-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6]
C. The City Council shall assess all costs and expenses incurred by the city
in connection with the proceedings, including legal fees, to remove or
secure the building or structure; which shall include the cost of actually
repairing or removing said building or structure; and said assessment
shall be a lien against the land upon which the building or structure is
located and shall be added on the next tax roll to be filed.
§ 111-4 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 111-5
111:83
§ 111-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter, removes notices
without authorization or interferes with city officials in the enforcement of
this chapter, shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment as provided in
§ 1-17 of the City of Geneva Municipal Code.
Chapter 114
D. Requests for additional time to complete work. [Added 7-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-6]
(1) In the event that the owner or his representative requires
additional time beyond that specified in § 111-4A to complete the
work, he or she shall make a written request to City Council to hold
a public hearing as described above to determine whether such an
extension shall be granted. Said request shall specify:
(a) The full name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s).
(b) The address of the property cited.
(c) The specific amount of time required to complete the work.
(d) The reason(s) why such a request is made.
(e) A detailed week-by-week work plan describing what work will
be done in the time requested.
(2) City Council shall consider such a request, and if it determines that
compelling reasons for the extension have been given and the
amount of time requested is reasonable, grant such a request, with
such conditions as are deemed appropriate.
(3) If an extension is granted as described above, but the work is still
not complete by the end of said extension, and substantial progress
toward completion of the work is made, the Code Enforcement
Office shall administratively grant an additional extension of no
more than 60 days, on the following conditions:
(a) "Substantial progress" shall be defined as the completion of no
less than 75% of the work to be done.
(b) The owner shall agree to waive any rights to a further hearing
before City Council.
(c) The owner shall agree to an administrative penalty to be
assessed by an administrative panel consisting of the City
Manager, the City Attorney and the Zoning and Building
Coordinator, in the event that work is not completed within the
60 days, said penalty not to exceed $250 for each day that the
work remains incomplete.
§ 111-5 GENEVA CODE § 111-6
111:84
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firesafety — See Ch. 169. Smoke abatement — See Ch. 294.
§ 114-1. Outdoor burning prohibited.
Except as permitted herein, outdoor open burn is not permitted in the City
of Geneva.
§ 114-2. Exceptions.
Outdoor open burn is prohibited except under the following conditions:
A. All burning material must be contained in a fire pit/grill, fire pit table,
chiminea or outdoor fireplace. All must have covers not to allow embers
to fly freely out of the burn container. The burn area opening is not to
exceed 36 inches in diameter. No person shall kindle or maintain any
such fire on any property less than 15 feet from any structure and/or
combustible; i.e., house, porch, garage, trees, bushes, fencing. Flames
not to exceed two feet in height. No person shall kindle or maintain any
bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or
maintained on or in any public street, alley, road or other public ground
without proper authorization. Burning that produces excessive smoke
will not be allowed at any time. At no times the fire shall be left
unattended until extinguished.
B. Fires may only utilize nontreated wood or charcoal as fuel. No leaves or
other organic materials are permitted.
C. Excepted outdoor burning may only take place between May 15 and the
following March 15.
D. Ceremonial or celebratory bonfires may be conducted where not
otherwise prohibited by law, provided that only untreated wood is used
as fuel and the fire is not left unattended until extinguished. All such
fires must be approved in writing by the Fire Chief, and may be
prohibited at his discretion, for any reason.
E. Small fires that are used to dispose of a flag or religious item and small
fires or other smoke-producing process where not otherwise prohibited
by law that are used in connection with a religious ceremony are
accepted.
F. Burning on an emergency basis if explosive or other dangerous or
contraband material by police or other public safety organization is
accepted.
§ 111-6 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 114-2
111:85
§ 114-3. Fire Chief's sole discretion to extinguish.
All permitted exceptions listed above, as well as any other fire burning
in violation of this chapter may be extinguished at the Fire Chief's sole
discretion. Fires determined to be producing excessive smoke or noxious
fumes will be ordered immediately extinguished by the Fire Chief or his
designee.
§ 114-4. Penalties for offenses.
Those individuals who fail to comply with this chapter will be guilty of
a violation, punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 per violation. For
the purposes of this chapter, each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
Chapter 116
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
G. Fire training, including firefighting, fire rescue and fire/arson
investigation training, performed under applicable rules and guidelines
of the NYS Department of State's Office of Fire Prevention and Control
is accepted.
§ 114-2 GENEVA CODE § 114-4
116:86
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Statutory Provisions
[Adopted 5-1-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985]
§ 116-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to adopt the provisions of Article 2-B of the
General City Law.8
§ 116-2. Applicability of statutory provisions.
The provisions of Article 2-B of the General City Law, entitled "City Business
Improvement District Law," are hereby adopted for the City of Geneva, New
York so as to be applicable to the establishment or extension of districts in
the city.
8. Editor's Note: Article 2-B of the General City Law was repealed by L.1989, c. 282.
§ 116-1 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 116-2
116:87

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts
[Adopted 12-4-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
§ 116-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to approve the establishment of the Geneva
City Business Improvement District.
§ 116-4. Approval of establishment of Business Improvement
District.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Article 2-B of the General City Law,9
the City of Geneva hereby approves the establishment of the Geneva City
Business Improvement District in accordance with the provisions of the
General City Law and the District Plan submitted to the city and on file
in the City Clerk's office and further approves of the construction of the
improvement and the providing of the services in said district as contained
in said District Plan.
9. Editor's Note: Article 2-B of the General City Law was repealed by L.1989, c. 282.
§ 116-3 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 116-4
116:89
Chapter 122
CEMETERIES
§ 122-1. Cemetery regulations.
No person shall commit any of the following acts within any city cemetery:
§ 122-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 138
EMPIRE ZONES
A. Walk or drive any vehicle or other conveyance over or upon any lot or
plot except over or upon the paths or roadways provided therefor.
B. Leave any vehicle standing in any path or roadway so as to hinder the
free passage of other persons or vehicles using said path or roadway.
C. Enter into or upon cemetery premises except through the gates and
entrances thereto.
D. When signs are erected, enter into or upon cemetery premises between
the hours of 8:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without the permission of the
Superintendent of Cemeteries.
E. Drive any vehicle faster than 15 miles per hour.
F. Enter cemetery premises if under 16 years of age unless accompanied
by a parent or guardian.
G. It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motordriven
cycle on the paths or roadways, at any time, unless the operator
is duly licensed to operate pursuant to § 501 or 503 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York and the vehicle must be properly
registered pursuant to § 401 or 401-1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York, and vehicle must be inspected pursuant to § 306
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and has financial
security pursuant to § 318 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York. [Added by Ord. No. 69-12, eff. 9-3-1969]
§ 116-4 GENEVA CODE § 138-1
122:90
§ 138-1. Statutory authorization.
Section 961 of Article 18-B of the General Municipal Law has authorized
applications by cities for designation as an economic development zone
within the meaning of said statute.
§ 138-2. Benefits of designation as economic development zone.
Such a designation could greatly benefit the City of Geneva in that new
businesses would be encouraged to locate in the zone area, existing
businesses would be encouraged to expand in the zone area, and new and
expanded businesses would generate new jobs for Geneva residents.
§ 138-3. Authorization for application. [Amended 3-22-2006 by L.L.
No. 1-2006; 6-21-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
The City Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to submit an
application for redesignation of certain areas within the City of Geneva,
Town of Geneva and Town of Victor as an Empire Zone; provided, however,
that such authorization and empowerment shall be conditioned upon the
concurrence, through properly adopted resolution(s) with respect to such
application of the governing bodies of any and all cities, towns and villages
in which such Zone is located.
§ 138-4. Boundaries.
The boundaries of said areas shall be as set forth in Schedule A which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof.10
§ 138-5. Certification of eligible business enterprises. [Amended
3-22-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006; 6-21-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
Pursuant to requirements of Section 963(a) of the General Municipal Law,
the City of Geneva Comptroller shall continue to serve as the local Empire
Zone certification officer of the City of Geneva's Empire Zone, and shall,
pursuant to the regulations promulgated pursuant to Article 18-B of the
General Municipal Law, perform the following duty, to wit: certify, jointly
with the New York State Commissioner of Economic Development and the
New York State Commissioner of Labor, those businesses enterprises that
are eligible to receive those benefits referred to in § 966 of the General
Municipal Law, and any other applicable statutes.
§ 138-6. Local economic development zone administrative board.
[Amended 3-22-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006; amended 6-21-2006 by L.L.
No. 2-2006]
Pursuant to Article 18-B of the General Municipal Law, the Local Empire
Zone Administrative Board as presently constituted is hereby continued.
The Local Empire Zone Administrative Board, pursuant to § 963(a) of the
10.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 138-1 EMPIRE ZONES § 138-6
138:91
General Municipal Law, as amended, shall approve for certification by the
zone certification officer, the New York State Commissioner of Economic
Development, and the New York State Commissioner of Labor, the
applications of those businesses eligible for certification to receive the
benefits referred to in § 966 of the General Municipal Law, and shall
perform all other duties required of it pursuant to § 963(b) of the General
Municipal Law.
A. Pursuant to the requirements of the aforesaid statute, a local economic
development zone administrative board is hereby established to consist
of not less than 15 members. Initial appointments to the board shall be
made by nomination by the Mayor with the consent of the Geneva City
Council. Membership of the administrative board shall be comprised of
the City Manager, as Chairman, and the Mayor, as standing members
with the remaining membership comprised of individuals from the
following categories: local business, organized labor, financial
institutions, educational institutions, community groups and zone
residents. Initial terms shall be for a period of three years for 1/3 of the
membership; two years for 1/3 of the membership; and one year for
balance of membership.
B. All subsequent new appointments and reappointments shall be for a
term of three years and shall be filled by the majority vote of the then
current membership of the administrative board. Expired terms shall be
filled for the duration of the unexpired term.
C. The local economic development zone administrative board shall
perform the following duties, to wit:
(1) Submit an annual report to the Commissioner of Commerce
regarding economic development zone activities, including an
analysis of the extent to which the goals set forth in the economic
development zone application have been met.
(2) Undertake efforts to ensure meaningful participation by minority
and women businesses in economic development zone activities.
(3) Enter into an agreement with the office of business permits and
regulatory assistance to participate in a business permit assistance
program to be provided to applicants for business permits required
by county, city, town or village or for a business undertaking.
(4) Enter into agreements with the commissions of commerce, labor
and special services, local education agencies as defined in
paragraph (b) of Subdivision 1 of § 3032 of the Education Law, local
community-based organizations, private employers, labor unions,
the administrative entity and established under the job training
partnership act (P.L. 97-300) that includes the economic
development zone, and any other person or state or federal agency
for the purpose of establishing, implementing and coordinating job
training programs for employees and businesses to be located in an
economic development zone; provided, however, that:
§ 138-6 GENEVA CODE § 138-6
138:92
§ 138-7. Zone capital corporation.
There shall also be established a zone capital corporation pursuant to
General Municipal Law, Article 18-B, § 964.
(a) Any agreement to establish a job training program designed to
meet the specific needs of private employers shall require such
employer to retain in his employ for not less than six months an
employee who has satisfactorily completed a course of training
for a particular job opening.
(b) Any job training program established pursuant to this
subsection shall make use of the job service division of the
Labor Department as well other sources for the purpose of
recruitment.
(5) In cooperation with local services officials, establish a job training
opportunities program sponsored by private employers in
accordance with the provisions of § 164-b or § 350-l of the Social
Services Law.11
(6) Enter into agreements with local departments of social services
and community-based organizations to facilitate the provision of
ancillary or enhanced social services in any such zone.
(7) Ensure that job training programs meet standards of instructional
quality established in regulations promulgated by the commission
of education.
(8) Provide within the zone, or contract with a new or existing
community-based local development corporation or entity to
provide strategic economic development planning for the zone,
marketing and promotion of the zone, assistance to companies in
applying for available benefits, preparation of application for
financing assistance and other technical assistance services;
coordination of the delivery of state and local programs with the
zones; and operation of such economic development assistance
programs in furtherance of the economic development plan as shall
be determined by the designee. Provided, however, within the
amount appropriated therefor and allocated by the director of the
budget, the commissioner shall, to the maximum extent feasible,
make equally available financial support, through contracts or
other means, to assist with the administrative expenses of the local
zone administrative bodies or community-based development
organizations. No funds shall be made available for this purpose
unless the amount to be provided has been matched by private and
governmental sources, other than state sources, in amounts at least
equaling that to be provided by the state.
11.Editor's Note: Sections 164-b and 350-l of the Social Services Law were repealed by
L.1990, c. 453, § 6.
§ 138-6 EMPIRE ZONES § 138-7
138:93
Chapter 140
ENERGY
§ 138-7 GENEVA CODE § 138-7
138:94
ARTICLE I
Municipal Building Energy Benchmarking
[Adopted 6-7-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
§ 140-1. Purpose.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BENCHMARKING INFORMATION — Information generated by Portfolio
Manager®, as herein defined, including descriptive information about the
physical building and its operational characteristics.
BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING — The process of measuring a
building's energy use, tracking that use over time, and comparing
performance to similar buildings.
COMMISSIONER — The head of the Department.
COVERED MUNICIPAL BUILDING — A building or facility that is owned or
occupied by the City of Geneva that is 1,000 square feet or larger in size.
DEPARTMENT — The Office of the Comptroller.
ENERGY — Electricity, natural gas, steam, hot or chilled water, fuel oil,
or other product for use in a building, or renewable on-site electricity
generation, for purposes of providing heating, cooling, lighting, water
heating, or for powering or fueling other end uses in the building and
related facilities, as reflected in utility bills or other documentation of actual
energy use.
ENERGY PERFORMANCE SCORE — The numeric rating generated by
Portfolio Manager® that compares the energy usage of the building to that
of similar buildings.
A. Buildings are the single largest user of energy in the State of New York.
The poorest performing buildings typically use several times the energy
of the highest performing buildings for the exact same building use. As
such, this article will use building energy benchmarking to promote the
public health, safety, and welfare by making available good, actionable
information on municipal building energy use to help identify
opportunities to cut costs and reduce pollution in the City of Geneva,
New York.
B. Collecting, reporting, and sharing building energy benchmarking data
on a regular basis allows municipal officials and the public to
understand the energy performance of municipal buildings relative to
similar buildings nationwide. Equipped with this information, the City
of Geneva, New York, is able to make smarter, more cost-effective
operational and capital investment decisions, reward efficiency, and
drive widespread, continuous improvement.
§ 140-1 EMPIRE ZONES § 140-2
138:95
ENERGY USE INTENSITY (EUI) — The kBTUs (1,000 British thermal units)
used per square foot of gross floor area.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total number of enclosed square feet measured
between the exterior surfaces of the fixed walls within any structure used
or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
PORTFOLIO MANAGER® — Energy star Portfolio Manager®, the Internetbased
tool developed and maintained by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy performance of
buildings nationwide, or its successor.
UTILITY — An entity that distributes and sells energy to covered municipal
buildings.
WEATHER-NORMALIZED SITE EUI — The amount of energy that would
have been used by a property under thirty-year average temperatures,
accounting for the difference between average temperatures and yearly
fluctuations.
§ 140-3. Applicability; exemptions.
§ 140-4. Benchmarking required for covered municipal buildings.
§ 140-5. Disclosure and publication of benchmarking information.
A. This article is applicable to all covered municipal buildings as defined in
§ 140-2 of this article.
B. The Commissioner may exempt a particular covered municipal building
from the benchmarking requirement if the Commissioner determines
that it has characteristics that make benchmarking impractical.
A. No later than May 1 every year, the Commissioner or his or her
designee from the Department shall enter into Portfolio Manager® the
total energy consumed by each covered municipal building, along with
all other descriptive information required by Portfolio Manager® for
the previous calendar year.
B. For new covered municipal buildings that have not accumulated 12
months of energy use data by the first applicable date following
occupancy for inputting energy use into Portfolio Manager®, the
Commissioner or his or her designee from the Department shall begin
inputting data in the following year.
A. The Department shall make available to the public on the Internet
benchmarking information for the previous calendar year:
(1) No later than September 1 of each year thereafter for covered
municipal buildings; and
B. The Department shall make available to the public on the Internet and
update, at least annually, the following benchmarking information:
§ 140-2 GENEVA CODE § 140-5
138:96
§ 140-6. Maintenance of records.
The Department shall maintain records as necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this article, including but not limited to energy bills and other
documents received from tenants and/or utilities. Such records shall be
preserved by the Department for a period of three years.
§ 140-7. Enforcement and administration.
§ 140-8. When effective.
This article shall be effective immediately upon passage.
(1) Summary statistics on energy consumption for covered municipal
buildings derived from aggregation of benchmarking information;
and
(2) For each covered municipal building individually:
(a) The status of compliance with the requirements of this article;
and
(b) The building address, primary use type, and gross floor area;
and
(c) Annual summary statistics, including site EUI, weathernormalized
source EUI, annual GHG emissions, and an energy
performance score, where available; and
(d) A comparison of the annual summary statistics (as required by
§ 140-5B(2)(c) of this article) across calendar years for all
years since annual reporting under this article has been
required for said building.
A. The Comptroller or his or her designee from the Department shall be
the chief enforcement officer of this article.
B. The chief enforcement officer of this article may promulgate
regulations necessary for the administration of the requirements of this
article.
C. Within 30 days after each anniversary date of the effective date of this
article, the chief enforcement officer shall submit a report to the City
Council, including but not limited to summary statistics on energy
consumption for covered municipal buildings derived from aggregation
of benchmarking information, a list of all covered municipal buildings
identifying each covered municipal building that the Commissioner
determined to be exempt from the benchmarking requirement and the
reason for the exemption, and the status of compliance with the
requirements of this article.
§ 140-5 EMPIRE ZONES § 140-9
138:97
§ 140-9. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, provision, or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as
declared by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to
be unconstitutional, shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any
other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 140-9 GENEVA CODE § 140-9
138:98
ARTICLE II
Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program
[Adopted 9-4-2019 by L.L. No. 1-201912]
§ 140-10. Legislative findings, intent and purpose, authority.
§ 140-11. Definitions.
A. It is the policy of both the Municipality and the State of New York (the
"State") to achieve energy efficiency and renewable energy
improvements, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate the effect of
global climate change, and advance a clean energy economy. The
Municipality finds that it can fulfill this policy by providing property
assessed clean energy financing to Qualified Property Owners (as
defined below) for the installation of renewable energy systems and
energy efficiency measures. This article establishes a program that will
allow the Energy Improvement Corporation (as defined below, "EIC"), a
local development corporation, acting on behalf of the Municipality
pursuant to the municipal agreement (the "Municipal Agreement") to
be entered into between the Municipality and EIC, to make funds
available to Qualified Property Owners that will be repaid through
charges on the real properties benefited by such funds, thereby
fulfilling the purposes of this article and accomplishing an important
public purpose. This article provides a method of implementing the
public policies expressed by, and exercising the authority provided by,
Article 5-L of the General Municipal Law (as defined below, the
"Enabling Act").
B. The Municipality is authorized to execute, deliver and perform the
Municipal Agreement and otherwise to implement this Energize NY
Open C-PACE Financing Program pursuant to the Constitution and laws
of New York, including particularly Article IX of the Constitution,
Section 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Enabling Act and this
article.
C. This article, which is adopted pursuant to Section 10 of the Municipal
Home Rule Law and the Enabling Act shall be known and may be cited
as the "Energize NY Open C-PACE Local Law."
A. Capitalized terms used but not defined herein have the meanings
assigned in the Enabling Act.
B. For purposes of this article, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context requires, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANNUAL INSTALLMENT AMOUNT — Shall have the meaning assigned
in § 140-17B.
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program, adopted 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2-2017, as amended.
§ 140-10 EMPIRE ZONES § 140-11
138:99
ANNUAL INSTALLMENT LIEN — Shall have the meaning assigned in
§ 140-17B.
AUTHORITY — The New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority.
BENEFIT ASSESSMENT LIEN — Shall have the meaning assigned in
§ 140-12A.
BENEFITED PROPERTY — Qualified Property for which the Qualified
Property Owner has entered into a Finance Agreement for a Qualified
Project.
BENEFITED PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record of a Benefited
Property.
EIC — The Energy Improvement Corporation, a local development
corporation, duly organized under § 1411 of the Not-For-Profit
Corporation Law of the State, authorized hereby on behalf of the
Municipality to implement the Program by providing funds to Qualified
Property Owners and providing for repayment of such funds from
money collected by or on behalf of the Municipality as a charge to be
levied on the real property.
ELIGIBLE COSTS — Costs incurred by the Benefited Property Owner in
connection with a Qualified Project and the related Finance Agreement,
including application fees, EIC's Program administration fee, closing
costs and fees, title and appraisal fees, professionals' fees, permits, fees
for design and drawings and any other related fees, expenses and costs,
in each case as approved by EIC and the Financing Party under the
Finance Agreement.
ENABLING ACT — Article 5-L of the General Municipal Law of the
State, or a successor law, as in effect from time to time.
FINANCE AGREEMENT — The finance agreement described in
§ 140-15A of this article.
FINANCING CHARGES — All charges, fees and expenses related to
the loan under the Finance Agreement, including accrued interest,
capitalized interest, prepayment premiums, and penalties as a result
of a default or late payment and costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Financing Party as a result of a foreclosure or other
legal proceeding brought against the Benefited Property to enforce any
delinquent Annual Installment Liens.
FINANCING PARTIES — Third-party capital providers approved by EIC
to provide financing to Qualified Property Owners or other financial
support to the Program which have entered into separate agreements
with EIC to administer the Program in the Municipality.
MUNICIPAL LIEN — A lien on Qualified Property which secures the
obligation to pay real property taxes, municipal charges, or
governmentally imposed assessments in respect of services or benefits
to a Qualified Property.
§ 140-11 GENEVA CODE § 140-11
138:100
§ 140-12. Establishment of an Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing
Program.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Geneva, a municipality of the State
constituting a tax district as defined in § 1102 of the RPTL of the State.
NONMUNICIPAL LIEN — A lien on Qualified Property which secures
any obligation other than the obligation to pay real property taxes,
municipal charges, or governmentally imposed assessments in respect
of services or benefits to a Qualified Property Owner or Qualified
Property.
PROGRAM — The Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program
authorized hereby.
QUALIFIED PROJECT — The acquisition, construction, reconstruction
or equipping of Energy Efficiency Improvements or Renewable Energy
Systems or other projects authorized under the Enabling Act on a
Qualified Property, together with a related Energy Audit, Renewable
Energy System Feasibility Study and/or other requirements under or
pursuant to the Enabling Act, with funds provided in whole or in part
by Financing Parties under the Program to achieve the purposes of the
Enabling Act.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY — Any real property, other than a residential
building containing less than three dwelling units, which is within the
boundaries of the Municipality that has been determined to be eligible
to participate in the Program under the procedures for eligibility set
forth under this article and the Enabling Act and has become the site of
a Qualified Project.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record of Qualified
Property which has been determined by EIC to meet the requirements
for participation in the Program as an owner, and any transferee owner
of such Qualified Property.
RPTL — The Real Property Tax Law of the State, as amended from time
to time.
SECURED AMOUNT — As of any date, the aggregate amount of
principal loaned to the Qualified Property Owner for a Qualified Project,
together with Eligible Costs and Financing Charges, as provided herein
or in the Finance Agreement, as reduced pursuant to § 140-17C.
STATE — The State of New York.
A. An Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program is hereby established
by the Municipality, whereby EIC, acting on its behalf pursuant to the
Municipal Agreement, may arrange for the provision of funds by
Financing Parties to Qualified Property Owners in accordance with the
Enabling Act and the procedures set forth under this article, to finance
the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, and installation of
Qualified Projects and Eligible Costs and Financing Charges approved
by EIC and by the Financing Party under the Finance Agreement. EIC,
§ 140-11 EMPIRE ZONES § 140-12
138:101
§ 140-13. Procedures for eligibility.
§ 140-14. Application criteria.
Upon the submission of an application, EIC, acting on behalf of the
Municipality, shall make a positive or negative determination on such
application based upon the following criteria for the making of a financing:
on behalf of the Municipality, and with the consent of the Benefited
Property Owner, will record a Benefit Assessment Lien on the Benefited
Property in the Secured Amount (the "Benefit Assessment Lien") on the
land records for the Municipality. Such recording shall be exempt from
any charge, mortgage recording tax or other fee in the same manner as
if recorded by the Municipality.
B. Before a Qualified Property Owner and a Financing Party enter into a
Finance Agreement which results in a loan to finance a Qualified
Project, repayment of which is secured by a Benefit Assessment Lien, a
written consent from each existing mortgage holder of the Qualified
Property shall be obtained, permitting the Benefit Assessment Lien and
each Annual Installment Lien to take priority over all existing
mortgages.
A. Any property owner in the Municipality may submit an application to
EIC on such forms as have been prepared by EIC and made available to
property owners on the website of EIC and at the Municipality's offices.
B. Every application submitted by a property owner shall be reviewed by
EIC, acting on behalf of the Municipality, which shall make a positive or
negative determination on such application based upon the criteria
enumerated in the Enabling Act and § 140-14 of this article. EIC may
also request further information from the property owner where
necessary to aid in its determination.
C. If a positive determination on an application is made by EIC, acting on
behalf of the Municipality, the property owner shall be deemed a
Qualified Property Owner and shall be eligible to participate in the
Program in accordance with § 140-15 of this article.
A. The property owner may not be in bankruptcy and the property may not
constitute property subject to any pending bankruptcy proceeding;
B. The amount financed under the Program shall be repaid over a term not
to exceed the weighted average of the useful life of Renewable Energy
Systems and Energy Efficiency Improvements to be installed on the
property as determined by EIC;
C. Sufficient funds are available from Financing Parties to provide
financing to the property owner;
D. The property owner is current in payments on any existing mortgage on
the Qualified Property;
§ 140-12 GENEVA CODE § 140-14
138:102
§ 140-15. Energize NY Finance Agreement.
§ 140-16. Terms and conditions of repayment.
The Finance Agreement shall set forth the terms and conditions of
repayment in accordance with the following:
E. The property owner is current in payments on any real property taxes
on the Qualified Property; and
F. Such additional criteria, not inconsistent with the criteria set forth
above, as the State, the Municipality, or EIC acting on its behalf, or
other Financing Parties may set from time to time.
A. A Qualified Property Owner may participate in the Program through the
execution of a finance agreement made by and between the Qualified
Property Owner and a Financing Party, to which EIC, on behalf of the
Municipality, shall be a third-party beneficiary (the "Finance
Agreement"). Upon execution and delivery of the Finance Agreement,
the property that is the subject of the Finance Agreement shall be
deemed a "Benefited Property."
B. Upon execution and delivery of the Finance Agreement, the Benefited
Property Owner shall be eligible to receive funds from the Financing
Party for the acquisition, construction, and installation of a Qualified
Project, together with Eligible Costs and Financing Charges approved
by EIC and by the Financing Party, provided the requirements of the
Enabling Act, the Municipal Agreement and this article have been met.
C. The Finance Agreement shall include the terms and conditions of
repayment of the Secured Amount and the Annual Installment Amounts.
D. EIC may charge fees to offset the costs of administering the Program
and such fees, if not paid by the Financing Party, shall be added to the
Secured Amount.
A. The principal amount of the funds loaned to the Benefited Property
Owner for the Qualified Project, together with Eligible Costs and
Financing Charges approved by EIC and by the Financing Party, shall
be specially assessed against the Benefited Property and will be
evidenced by a Benefit Assessment Lien recorded against the Benefited
Property on the land records on which liens are recorded for properties
within the Municipality. The special benefit assessment shall constitute
a "charge" within the meaning of the Enabling Act and shall be
collected in annual installments in the amounts certified by the
Financing Party in a schedule provided at closing and made part of the
Benefit Assessment Lien. Said amount shall be annually levied, billed
and collected by EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, and shall be paid to
the Financing Party as provided in the Finance Agreement.
B. The term of such repayment shall be determined at the time the
Finance Agreement is executed by the Benefited Property Owner and
§ 140-14 EMPIRE ZONES § 140-16
138:103
§ 140-17. Levy of Annual Installment Amount and creation of
Annual Installment Lien.
the Financing Party, not to exceed the weighted average of the useful
life of the systems and improvements as determined by EIC, acting on
behalf of the Municipality.
C. The rate of interest for the Secured Amount shall be fixed by the
Financing Party in conjunction with EIC, acting on behalf of the
Municipality, as provided in the Finance Agreement.
A. Upon the making of the loan pursuant to the Finance Agreement, the
Secured Amount shall become a special Benefit Assessment Lien on the
Benefited Property in favor of the Municipality. The amount of the
Benefit Assessment Lien shall be the Secured Amount. Evidence of the
Benefit Assessment Lien shall be recorded by EIC, on behalf of the
Municipality, in the land records for properties in the Municipality. Such
recording shall be exempt from any charge, mortgage recording tax or
other fee in the same manner as if recorded by the Municipality. The
Benefit Assessment Lien shall not be foreclosed upon by or otherwise
enforced by the Municipality.
B. The Finance Agreement shall provide for the repayment of the Secured
Amount in installments made at least annually, as provided in a
schedule attached to the Benefit Assessment Lien (the "Annual
Installment Amount"). The Annual Installment Amount shall be levied
by EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, on the Benefited Property in the
same manner as levies for municipal charges, shall become a lien on the
Benefited Property as of the first day of January of the fiscal year for
which levied (the "Annual Installment Lien") and shall remain a lien
until paid. The creation or any recording of the Annual Installment Lien
shall be exempt from any charge, mortgage recording tax or other fee
in the same manner as if recorded by the Municipality. Payment to the
Financing Party shall be considered payment for this purpose. Such
payment shall partly or wholly discharge the Annual Installment Lien.
Delinquent Annual Installment Amounts may accrue Financing Charges
as may be provided in the Finance Agreement. Any additional Financing
Charges imposed by the Financing Party pursuant to the Finance
Agreement shall increase the Annual Installment Amount and the
Annual Installment Lien for the year in which such overdue payments
were first due.
C. The Benefit Assessment Lien shall be reduced annually by the amount
of each Annual Installment Lien when each Annual Installment Lien
becomes a lien. Each Annual Installment Lien shall be subordinate to all
Municipal Liens, whether created by § 902 of the RPTL or by any other
State or local law. No portion of a Secured Amount shall be recovered
by the Municipality, EIC, or an assignee upon foreclosure, sale or other
disposition of the Benefited Property unless and until all Municipal
Liens are fully discharged. Each Annual Installment Lien, however,
§ 140-16 GENEVA CODE § 140-17
138:104
§ 140-18. Verification and report.
EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, shall verify and report on the installation
and performance of Renewable Energy Systems and Energy Efficiency
Improvements financed by the Program in such form and manner as the
Authority may establish.
§ 140-18.1. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
shall have priority over all Nonmunicipal Liens, irrespective of when
created, except as otherwise required by law.
D. Neither the Benefit Assessment Lien nor any Annual Installment Lien
shall be extinguished or accelerated in the event of a default or
bankruptcy of the Benefited Property Owner. Each Annual Installment
Amount shall be considered a charge upon the Benefited Property and
shall be collected by EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, at the same time
and in the same manner as real property taxes or municipal charges.
Each Annual Installment Lien shall remain a lien until paid. Amounts
collected in respect of an Annual Installment Lien shall be remitted to
EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, or the Financing Party, as may be
provided in the Finance Agreement.
E. EIC shall act as the Municipality's agent in collection of the Annual
Installment Amounts. If any Benefited Property Owner fails to pay an
Annual Installment Amount, the Financing Party may redeem the
Benefited Property by paying the amount of all unpaid Municipal Liens
thereon, and thereafter shall have the right to collect any amounts in
respect of an Annual Installment Lien by foreclosure or any other
remedy available at law. Any foreclosure shall not affect any subsequent
Annual Installment Liens.
F. EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, may sell or assign for consideration
any and all Benefit Assessment Liens and Annual Installment Liens to
Financing Parties that provide financing to Qualified Properties
pursuant to Finance Agreements. The Financing Parties may sell or
assign for consideration any and all Benefit Assessment Liens and
Annual Installment Liens received from EIC, on behalf of the
Municipality, subject to certain conditions provided in the
administration agreement between EIC and the Financing Party. The
assignee or assignees of such Benefit Assessment Liens and Annual
Installment Liens shall have and possess the same powers and rights at
law or in equity as the Municipality would have had if the Benefit
Assessment Lien and the Annual Installment Liens had not been
assigned with regard to the precedence and priority of such lien, the
accrual of interest and the fees and expenses of collection.
§ 140-17 EMPIRE ZONES § 140-18.1
138:105
section, or part thereof involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 140-18.1 GENEVA CODE § 140-18.1
138:106
ARTICLE III
Community Choice Aggregation Program
[Adopted 3-7-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 140-19. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
§ 140-20. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context otherwise requires, the terms in this article shall have the
A. It is the policy of both the City of Geneva ("Municipality") and the State
of New York to reduce costs and provide price certainty for the purpose
of consumer protection and economic development, to expand access
and opportunities for consumers in retail energy markets, as well as to
promote the sustainability and resilience of energy systems through the
proliferation of renewable energy, energy efficiency, and distributed
energy resources (DER, as defined below). Among the initiatives that
may advance these objectives in New York is Community Choice
Aggregation ("CCA"), a policy that empowers local governments to
determine the source of electricity and/or natural gas supply on behalf
of its residents and small businesses, reflecting local resources,
priorities, and challenges. Energy delivery remains the responsibility of
the distribution utility.
B. This article establishes the authority for the City of Geneva, in
connection with the implementation a CCA program, to acquire utility
data, to select, through competitive solicitation, energy suppliers on
behalf of default consumers within the jurisdictional boundaries of the
City of Geneva and to maximize value for participating consumers
through enhanced services related to DER. The municipality may
choose to collaborate with other local governments to form an
intermunicipal program. As a result, consumers will have the
opportunity to lower and stabilize their energy costs, to spur local clean
energy innovation and investment, and to reduce their environmental
impact; thereby, fulfilling the purposes of this article and fulfilling an
important public purpose.
C. The City of Geneva is authorized to implement this Community Choice
Aggregation Program pursuant to § 10(1)(ii)(a)(12) of the New York
Municipal Home Rule Law; and consistent with State of New York
Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding on Motion
of the Commission to Enable Community Choice Aggregation Programs
(issued April 21, 2016) as may be amended, including subsequent
orders of the Public Service Commission issued in connection with or
related to Case No. 14-M-0224, to the extent that orders related to Case
No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the municipality.
D. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Community Choice
Aggregation Program Law of the City of Geneva."
§ 140-19 EMPIRE ZONES § 140-20
138:107
meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service Commission's
Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as indicated below:
AGGREGATED DATA — Aggregated and anonymized information including,
but not limited to, the number of consumers by service and rate class,
the aggregated peak demand (kW) (for electricity) by month for the past
12 months by service and rate class, and the aggregated energy (kWh)
for electricity or volumetric consumption for gas by month for the past 12
months by service and rate class.
CCA ADMINISTRATOR — The City of Geneva, duly authorized to request
aggregated and customer-specific data, competitively solicit suppliers for
the aggregated demand for electricity and/or natural gas on behalf of
default consumers, and to offer participating consumers additional
opportunities to participate or enroll in programs or projects related to
distributed energy resources. The CCA Administrator is responsible for
program organization, administration, procurement, communications, and
for meeting all requirements for program implementation specified in the
PSC CCA Order, unless otherwise specified.
CUSTOMER-SPECIFIC DATA — Customer-specific information, personal
data and utility data for all default consumers including the customer of
record's name, mailing address, telephone number, account number, and
primary language, if available, and any customer-specific alternate billing
name, address, and phone number.
DEFAULT CONSUMERS — Customers of electricity and/or natural gas
within opt-out eligible service classes (as delineated in the PSC CCA Order),
who receive supply service from the distribution utility as of the date
the supply contract goes into effect, or consumers within these service
classes that subsequently become eligible to participate in the Program
including those that have terminated a supply contract with an ESCO,
removed a freeze or block on their account, have voluntarily suspended
service pursuant to a special rate, or are new residents of the municipality.
Consumers within opt-out eligible service classes, as of the date the supply
contract goes into effect, taking service from an ESCO, those that have
placed a freeze or block on their account, and those for whom enrollment in
the CCA program would interfere with a choice they have already made to
take service pursuant to a special rate are not considered default consumers
and will not be enrolled on an opt-out basis. For the avoidance of doubt,
all default consumers must reside or be otherwise located at one or more
locations within the geographic boundaries of the municipality, as such
boundaries exist as of the date the supply contract with the goes into effect.
DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES (DER) — Local renewable energy
projects, community distributed generation (e.g., shared solar), peak
demand management, energy efficiency, demand response, energy storage,
community resilience microgrid projects, and other innovative Reforming
the Energy Vision (REV) initiatives that further engage and/or reduce cost
of service for participating consumers, optimize system benefits, and/or
address infrastructure and demand challenges within geography of the
CCA.
§ 140-20 GENEVA CODE § 140-20
138:108
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — Owner or controller of the means of distribution
of the natural gas or electricity in the municipality. The distribution utility
also serves as the default supplier of electricity and natural gas preceding
the establishment of a CCA program.
ESCO or ENERGY SERVICES COMPANY — An entity duly authorized to
conduct business in the State of New York as an ESCO.
PARTICIPATING CONSUMERS — Default consumers who have not opted
out, and non-default consumers of any service class that have voluntarily
enrolled in the Program.
PSC CCA ORDER — The PSC's Order Authorizing Framework for
Community Choice Aggregation Opt-Out Program, issued on April 21, 2016,
in Case 14-M-0224, "Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Enable
Community Choice Aggregation Programs."
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION or PSC — New York State Public Service
Commission.
SUPPLIER — An ESCO that procures electric power and natural gas for
participating consumers in connection with this article or, alternatively,
generators of electricity and natural gas or other entities who procure and
resell electricity or natural gas.
§ 140-21. Authorization of a Community Choice Aggregation
Program.
A. A Community Choice Aggregation Program is hereby authorized by the
municipality, whereby the municipality may implement a CCA program
to the full extent permitted by the PSC CCA Order, as set forth more
fully herein.
B. The municipality may enter into contracts with one or more suppliers
for electric and/or natural gas supply and other services on behalf of
default consumers.
C. The municipality may enter into agreements and contracts with other
municipalities, non-profits, consultants, and/or other third parties to: i)
develop and implement the CCA program; ii) act as CCA Administrator;
and/or iii) develop offers of opt-in DER products and services to
participating consumers.
D. The operation and ownership of the utility service shall remain with the
distribution utility. The municipality's participation in a CCA program
constitutes neither the purchase of a public utility system, nor the
furnishing of utility service. The municipality shall not take over any
part of the electric or gas transmission or distribution system and will
not furnish any type of utility service, but will instead negotiate with
suppliers on behalf of participating consumers.
E. The Public Service Commission supervises retail markets and
participants in these markets through legislative and regulatory
authority and the Uniform Business Practices, which includes rules
§ 140-20 EMPIRE ZONES § 140-21
138:109
§ 140-22. Eligibility.
§ 140-23. Opt-out process.
§ 140-24. Data protection requirements.
relating to the eligibility of participating ESCOs, the operation by which
ESCOs provide energy services, and the terms on which customers may
be enrolled with ESCOs.
A. All default consumers shall be enrolled on an opt-out basis. Default
consumers will have the right to opt out before the supply contract goes
into effect, or disenroll any time thereafter with no penalty. Those that
do not opt out before the supply contract goes into effect will be
enrolled automatically.
B. All non-default consumers within the municipality, regardless of service
class, shall be eligible to participate in the CCA program on an opt-in
basis.
C. CCA Administrator, on behalf of the City of Geneva, shall issue one or
more requests for proposals to suppliers to provide energy to
participants and may then award a contract in accordance with the CCA
program.
A. A program notification letter, printed on municipal letterhead, shall be
mailed to default consumers at least 30 days prior to customer
enrollment. The letter shall include information on the CCA program
and the contract signed with the selected supplier(s) including specific
details on rates, services, contract term, cancellation fee, and methods
for opting out of the CCA program. The letter shall explain that
consumers that do not opt out will be enrolled in the program under the
contract terms and that information on those consumers, including
energy usage data and APP status, will be provided to the ESCO.
B. After the thirty-day opt-out period, all consumers shall have the option
to disenroll from the CCA program at any time without penalty.
A. The municipality, or CCA Administrator on its behalf, may request
aggregated data and customer-specific data from the distribution
utility.
B. Customer-specific data shall be protected in a manner compliant with,
collectively: (i) all national, state and local laws, regulations or other
government standards relating to the protection of information that
identifies or can be used to identify an individual that apply with
respect to the municipality or its representative's processing of
confidential utility information; (ii) the utility's internal requirements
and procedures relating to the protection of information that identifies
or can be used to identify an individual that apply with respect to the
municipality or its representative's processing of confidential utility
§ 140-21 GENEVA CODE § 140-24
138:110
§ 140-25. Administration fee.
The municipality or CCA Administrator may collect, or cause to be collected,
funds from customer payments to pay for administrative costs associated
with running the CCA program.
§ 140-26. Reporting.
§ 140-27. Effective date.
This article shall be effective immediately upon passage.
§ 140-28. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, provision, or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as
declared by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to
information; and (iii) the PSC CCA Order and PSC rules, regulations
and guidelines relating to confidential data.
C. For the purpose of protecting customer data, the municipality must
enter into an agreement with the distribution utility that obligates each
party to meet, collectively: (i) all national, state and local laws,
regulations or other government standards relating to the protection of
information that identifies or can be used to identify an individual
Default Consumer or Participating Consumer with respect to the CCA
Administrator or its representative's processing of confidential utility
information; (ii) the distribution utility's internal requirements and
procedures relating to the protection of information that identifies or
can be used to identify individual Default Consumer or Participating
Consumer with respect to the CCA Administrator or its representative's
processing of confidential utility information; and (iii) the PSC CCA
Order and PSC rules, regulations and guidelines relating to confidential
data.
A. Annual reports shall be filed with the City of Geneva by March 31 of
each year and cover the previous calendar year.
B. Annual reports shall include, at a minimum: number of consumers
served; number of consumers cancelling during the year; number of
complaints received; commodity prices paid; value-added services
provided during the year (e.g., installation of DER or other clean energy
services); and administrative costs collected. The first report shall also
include the number of consumers who opted out in response to the
initial opt-out letter or letters.
C. If a CCA supply contract will expire less than one year following the
filing of the annual report, the report must identify current plans for
soliciting a new contract, negotiating an extension, or ending the CCA
program.
§ 140-24 EMPIRE ZONES § 140-28
138:111
be unconstitutional, shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any
other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 140-28 GENEVA CODE § 140-28
138:112
Chapter 143
ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 73.
Bingo — See Ch. 91.
Games of chance — See Ch. 191.
§ 140-28 ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC § 140-28
143:113

ARTICLE I
Sunday Observance
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 65, Art. II and § 65.100A, of the 1968
Code]
§ 143-1. Public sports and exercises.
It shall be lawful to conduct, witness, participate or engage in any form
of public sports, exercises or shows which are conducted or engaged in
primarily for the entertainment of spectators, not specifically prohibited by
any provision of the law, on the first day of the week after five minutes past
one o'clock in the afternoon, to witness which the public is invited or an
admission fee is charged, either directly or indirectly, except auto racing,
which is expressly prohibited.
§ 143-2. Public entertainment.
It shall be lawful to conduct or participate in any public entertainment on
the first day of the week after five minutes past one o'clock in the afternoon,
to witness which the public is invited or an admission is charged either
directly or indirectly.
§ 143-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 143-1 ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC § 143-3
143:115
Chapter 147
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 310. Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 147-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement for the City of Geneva SEQR
and Part 617.
§ 147-2. Definitions.
§ 147-3. Compliance with chapter, state law and regulations.
No action, other than an exempt, excluded or Type II action, shall be carried
out, approved or funded by any agency, board, body or officer of the City of
Geneva, unless it has complied with SEQR, Part 617 to the extent applicable
and this chapter.
§ 147-4. Procedure for review of environmental significance.
A. Generally. The terms and words used in this chapter shall have the
same meaning as such terms and words are defined in Article 8 of the
Environmental Conservation Law and Part 617, unless the context
requires a different meaning.
B. Specific terms. The following terms shall have the following meaning:
CITY — The City of Geneva.
EAF — Environmental assessment form.
EIS — Environmental impact statement.
PART 617 — The rules and regulations set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.
SEQR — The State Environmental Quality Review Act as set forth in
Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
A. Preparation of EAF. An EAF shall be prepared by or on behalf of any
agency, board, body or officer of the City of Geneva in connection with
any Type I action such agency, board, body or officer contemplates or
proposes to carry out directly. For an unlisted action an EAF in a short
or long form may be prepared to facilitate a preliminary determination
of environmental significance.
B. Preliminary determination; time limit. An application for permit or
funding of a Type I action shall be accompanied by an EAF, and for an
unlisted action may be accompanied by a short or long EAF as may be
§ 143-3 GENEVA CODE § 147-4
147:116
§ 147-5. Procedure after determination that an EIS is required.
If the lead agency determines that an EIS is required, it shall proceed as
provided in Part 617.8, 617.9 and 617.10. Commencing with the acceptance
of the draft EIS, the time limitation for processing the application for
approval or funding of the action, and a public hearing on the draft EIS,
if any, shall be held concurrently with any hearing to be held on such
application. The draft EIS shall be prepared by the applicant. Failure by
the applicant to prepare an EIS acceptable to the lead agency shall, at the
option of the lead agency, be deemed an abandonment and discontinuance
of the application.
§ 147-6. Designation of lead agency.
The lead agency shall be determined and designated as provided in Part
617.6 and 617.7, except that in the following Type I and unlisted actions the
lead agency shall be as provided herein13:
needed to assist the lead agency in making a preliminary determination
of environmental significance. An applicant may prepare a draft EIS
to accompany the application in place of the EAF. In lieu of an EAF
the Planning Board or a lead agency having authority to adopt its own
regulations may adopt different procedure for reviewing environmental
significance of unlisted actions. The lead agency shall make a
preliminary determination of environmental significance of the action
on the basis of the EAF, draft EIS or with respect to unlisted actions
in accordance with its own procedures, as the case may be, and such
other information it requires. Such determination shall be made within
15 days of its designation as lead agency or within 15 days of its
receipt of all information it requires, whichever is later. For Type I
actions a determination of nonsignificance shall be noticed and filed
as provided in Part 617.10(b); for unlisted actions a determination
for nonsignificance shall be sent to the applicant and maintained in
accordance with Part 617.7(e) and 617.10(f). After a determination of
nonsignificance, the action, including one involving a permit or funding,
shall be processed without further regard to SEQR, Part 617 or this
chapter.
C. Computation of time limit. The time of filing an application for approval
or funding of an action shall commence to run from the date the
preliminary determination of environmental nonsignificance is
rendered, or if in lieu of an EAF the applicant prepares a draft EIS, from
the date the applicant files a draft EIS acceptable to the lead agency.
A. Adoption, amendment or change in zoning regulations not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval: The City Council.
13.The list of lead agencies in this section is not intended to indicate a complete or ironclad
predetermination of lead agencies within the municipality, but rather to serve as an
example. Lead agencies will emerge through normal processing of actions, by agreement
and by designation of the Environmental Conservation Commissioner. Thus, the list could
change.
§ 147-4 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 147-6
147:117
§ 147-7. Planning Board to recommend designation of lead agency.
The Planning Board shall act as the city clearinghouse for lead agency
designation. Such clearinghouse shall assist agencies and applicants to
identify other agencies, including federal and state, that may be involved
in approving, funding or carrying out Type I and unlisted actions. The
clearinghouse shall also make recommendations on the designation of a
lead agency.
§ 147-8. Actions involving federal agency.
Environmental review of actions involving a federal agency shall be
processed in accordance with Part 617.16.
§ 147-9. Establishment of fees.
The fees for review or preparation of an EIS involving an applicant for
approval or funding of an action shall be fixed from time to time by a
resolution of the City Council.
§ 147-10. Designation of critical areas of concern.
Critical areas of environmental concern may be designated by resolution of
the City Council in accordance with Part 617.4(j).
§ 147-11. Additional Type I actions.
The following are deemed Type I actions in addition to those set forth in
Part 617.12: None.
B. Construction or expansion of city buildings, structures and facilities
within the city not requiring a federal or state agency permit or
approval: The City Council.
C. Variances not requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval:
Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Purchase, sale and lease of real property by the City of Geneva not
requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval: The City
Council.
E. Planned unit development or cluster zoning not requiring a federal or
state agency permit or approval: Planning Board.
F. Site plan review and special use permit not requiring a federal or state
agency permit or approval: Planning Board.
G. Construction or expansion of nonresidential facility not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval: Planning Board.
H. Parking lot not requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval:
Planning Board.
§ 147-6 GENEVA CODE § 147-12
147:118
§ 147-12. Additional Type II actions.
The following are deemed Type II actions in addition to those set forth in
Part 617.13: None.
Chapter 151
EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION, ABANDONED
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED BUILDING MATERIAL OR CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT -
— Any building material or construction equipment, whether created in the
course of the building operation or otherwise, and regardless of whether
a building permit has been issued for the same, which remains upon the
premises which are not secured in a permanent type building or enclosure,
for a period of one month after building material or construction equipment
has been placed upon the premises and no work has been commenced upon
same; or if work has been commenced, one month after work has ceased on
said premises.
ABANDONED EXCAVATION — Any excavation whether created in the
course of a building operation or otherwise and regardless of whether a
building permit has been issued for the same, which said excavation has
remained in an open and unfinished condition for a period of six months
or more, and further an abandoned excavation shall mean any excavation
as herein defined for which a building permit was issued and where the
building operation under the said permit is arrested prior to completion and
the permit therefor allowed to lapse.
BUILDING MATERIAL — Any lumber, siding, roofing material, masonry
material, electrical wiring, plumbing, plumbing fixtures and parts of fixtures
or any other item or items used in the trades for the construction of
buildings of any substance or material.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Any scaffolding, planks, tools, forms, saw
horses, construction shanties, or any other item or items used in the trades
as tools or equipment for the construction of a building of any substance or
material.
EXCAVATION — Any uncovered cutting or cavity in the earth, of any depth
or size, created by the removal of earth, stone, topsoil or any substance.
§ 151-2. Abandoned excavations, building materials and
construction equipment deemed a nuisance.
Any excavation, building material and construction equipment which has
been abandoned as herein defined is hereby declared to be a menace to the
public health and safety and a nuisance. All abandoned excavations shall be
§ 147-12 EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION, § 151-2
151:119
filled in to the original level of the ground, and any topsoil removed shall
be replaced by the owner, lessee or occupant of the property where such
excavation exists. All building material and construction equipment must be
removed from the property or enclosed in a permanent building suitable for
storage of said equipment or material which building must comply with the
Chapter 350, Zoning, of the city.
§ 151-3. Duty of Enforcement Officer; notice.
It shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officer of this chapter to investigate
the existence of any abandoned excavations, building materials and/or
construction equipment, and upon the discovery thereof, said Enforcement
Officer shall by written notice order such owner, lessee or occupant to fill in
such excavation and replace any topsoil removed, or to remove or properly
store all building materials or construction equipment abandoned on said
property, as the case may be. Should any such owner, lessee or occupant fail
to fill in such excavation or replace any topsoil removed within 30 days after
notice in writing, delivered personally or by certified mail, the Enforcement
Officer shall notify the Director of Public Works, and the Director of Public
Works shall forthwith cause such abandoned excavation to be filled in and
replace any topsoil removed. The cost of such refilling and replacement of
topsoil shall be assessed against the property where such excavation exists,
in the manner set forth in § 151-6 herein.
§ 151-4. Failure to comply; sale of material or equipment.
Should any such owner, lessee or occupant fail to remove or store building
materials or construction equipment as hereinabove provided within seven
days after notice in writing, delivered personally or by certified mail, the
Enforcement Officer shall notify the Director of Public Works, and the
Director of Public Works of the city shall forthwith cause such building
materials and construction equipment to be removed from the premises and
disposed of in such manner as he deems proper. In the event the Director
of Public Works determines that the building materials and construction
equipment are of sufficient value to cause the same to be sold, he shall
cause a public notice of sale to be published in the same manner as for the
sale of surplus property of the city, and sell the same. The net proceeds of
sale of said building materials and construction equipment, after deducting
therefrom the expenses of said notice and sale, shall be applied against the
cost of removal and storage of same, including a service charge of 50% of
the cost thereof, pending said sale. If there is a balance remaining after the
application of the proceeds as hereinabove specified, the same shall be paid
to the owner of said building materials and construction equipment, and
unless otherwise notified, it shall be presumed that the owner of record of
the premises is also the owner of the building materials and/or construction
equipment. In the event there is a deficit, then the amount still due and
owing to the city shall be collected in the manner provided in § 151-6 herein.
§ 151-2 GENEVA CODE § 151-5
151:120
§ 151-5. Method of serving notice.
The notice specified in § 151-3 herein shall be mailed and delivered to the
last known address of the owner of the property on which said abandoned
excavation exists or upon which the building materials and construction
equipment is abandoned, as the same appears on the records of the City
Assessor, and if there be an occupant or lessee on the premises, then to such
occupant or lessee of the premises.
§ 151-6. Ascertaining cost; publication and hearing; collection.
§ 151-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-14, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any order of the
Enforcement Officer as set forth in § 151-3 shall also be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day that such violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 158
FAIR HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — — See Ch. 202. Property maintenance — — See Ch. 264.
A. The Director of Public Works shall ascertain the cost of any filling in or
replacement of topsoil that may be necessary, or removal and storage of
building materials and/or construction equipment, and upon
ascertaining the cost of the same, shall prepare a list specifying the
property affected by lot and block number as the same appears on the
official assessment map of the city, and shall file the list in his office and
give public notice of such filing by publication in the official newspaper
that the said list has been filed and that for 10 days after the publication
of said list, the list may be examined by any person interested therein,
and that upon a time specified in such notice and at least 10 days after
publication of said list, he will attend at his office to hear any objections
to the said list. The Director of Public Works shall have authority to
make such corrections in the list as may be necessary. After the hearing
has been completed and any corrections made, the Director of Public
Works shall file the said list with the City Comptroller, together with a
copy of the notice published and from the hour of filing, the amount of
the charges specified in the said list shall be a lien upon the property
affected thereby and collected in the same manner as city taxes.
B. Thirty days after the filing of said list with the City Comptroller, interest
at the rate of 6% per annum shall be charged for any unpaid amounts on
said list.
§ 151-5 FAIR HOUSING § 151-7
158:121
§ 158-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Geneva's Fair
Housing Local Law."
§ 158-2. Declaration of policy.
§ 158-3. Definitions.
Definitions as used in this chapter, unless additional meaning clearly
appears from the context, shall have the meanings subscribed:
AGGRIEVED PERSON — A person who claims to have been injured by, or
believes that he or she will be injured by, an unfair real estate practice.
BOARD — The Fair Housing Board.
CHARGING PARTY — The person aggrieved by an unfair practice, or the
person making a charge on another person's behalf, or the Executive
Director when the Executive Director files a charge.
A. The general purposes of this chapter are to promote the availability and
accessibility of housing and real property to all persons; to prohibit
unfair practices in real property transactions, whether direct or
indirect, which inexcusably and unjustifiably deny those persons equal
rights and opportunities in acquiring, disposing of, or occupying real
property; to provide enforcement mechanisms for the accomplishment
of such purposes; and to these ends the provisions of this chapter shall
be liberally construed. The role of the Geneva Human Rights
Commission is to enforce the provisions of this chapter in furtherance
of this policy.
B. This chapter shall not be construed to endorse specific beliefs,
practices, or lifestyles.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to deny any person the right to
institute any action or to pursue any civil or criminal remedy for the
violation of such person's civil rights.
D. Remedies under this chapter should include such relief authorized by
law as may be appropriate and reasonable to provide appropriate
temporary or preliminary relief as well as to make the aggrieved person
whole and eliminate the unfair practice.
E. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be nor shall be
construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the
City, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage
resulting from or by reason of any act or omission in connection with
the implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of the
City by its officers, employees, or agents.
§ 151-7 GENEVA CODE § 158-3
158:122
CITY — The City of Geneva, New York.
COMMISSION — The Geneva Human Rights Commission.
COMPLAINANT — The person (including the Executive Director) who files
a complaint under this statute.
CONCILIATION — The attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint,
or by the investigation of such complaint, through informal negotiations
involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, and the Executive Director.
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT — A written agreement setting forth the
resolution of the issues in conciliation.
DIRECTOR — The Executive Director of the Geneva Human Rights
Commission.
DISABILITY/HANDICAP —
DISCRIMINATE — Any conduct, whether by single act or as part of a
practice, the effect of which is to adversely affect, or differentiate between
or among, individuals or groups of individuals, because of race, color,
religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, familial
status, or disability.
DWELLING — Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied
as, or is designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more
individuals or families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or
portion thereof.
FAMILIAL STATUS — Being a parent, step-parent, adoptive parent,
guardian, foster parent or custodian of a minor child or children under the
age of 18 years, or the designee of a parent or other person having legal
custody of a child or children under the age of 18 years, with the written
permission of such parent or other person, which child or children shall
reside permanently or temporarily with such parent or other person. In
addition, familial status shall refer to any person who is pregnant or who
is in the process of acquiring legal custody of any person who has not yet
attained the age of 18 years.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS — Includes any dwelling, rooming unit,
rooming house, lot or parcel of land in the City which is used, intended to be
used, or arranged or designed to be used as, or improved with, a residential
structure for one or more human beings.
A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more
of such person's major life activities;
A.
A record of having such an impairment or being regarded as having
such an impairment.
B.
The term "disability" does not include current, illegal use of or addiction
to a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled
Substance Act (21 U.S.C.S., § 802).
C.
§ 158-3 FAIR HOUSING § 158-3
158:123
LENDER — Includes any bank, insurance company, savings or building and
loan association, credit union, trust company, mortgage company, or other
person or agent thereof, engaged wholly or partly in the business of lending
money for the financing or acquisition, construction, repair or maintenance
of real property.
MARITAL STATUS — The presence or absence of a marital relationship
and includes the status of married, separated, divorced, engaged, widowed,
single or cohabitating.
OCCUPANT — Includes any person who has established residence or has
the right to occupancy of real property.
OWNER — Includes persons who own, lease, sublease, rent, operate,
manage, have charge of, control or have the right of ownership, possession,
management, charge, or control of real property on their own behalf or on
behalf of another.
PARTY — Includes the person charging or making a charge or complaint
or upon whose behalf a complaint is made alleging an unfair practice, the
person alleged or found to have committed an unfair practice, and the
Executive Director of the Geneva Human Rights Commission.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, partnerships, organizations,
trade or professional associations, corporations, legal representatives,
trustees, trustees in bankruptcy and receivers. It includes any owner,
lessee, proprietor, manager, agent or employee, whether one or more
natural persons.
PREVAILING PARTY — Has the same meaning as such term has in Section
722 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. § 1988).
PROSPECTIVE BORROWER — Includes any person who seeks to borrow
money to finance the acquisition, construction, repair, or maintenance of
real property.
PROSPECTIVE OCCUPANT — Includes any person who seeks to purchase,
lease, sublease or rent real property.
REAL ESTATE AGENT, SALESPERSON OR EMPLOYEE — Includes any
person employed by, associated with or acting for a real estate broker to
perform or assist in the performance of any or all of the functions of a real
estate broker.
REAL ESTATE BROKER — Includes any person who, for a fee, commission,
or other valuable consideration, lists for sale, sells, purchases, exchanges,
leases or subleases, rents, or negotiates or offers or attempts to negotiate
the sale, purchase, exchange, lease, sublease or rental of real property
of another, or holds himself/herself out as engaged in the business of
selling, purchasing, exchanging, listing, leasing, subleasing, or renting real
property of another, or collects the rental for use of real property of another.
REAL-ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION — Any of the following:
The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
A.
§ 158-3 GENEVA CODE § 158-3
158:124
REAL PROPERTY — Includes housing accommodations, buildings,
structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, interests in real estate
cooperatives, condominiums, and hereditaments, corporeal and
incorporeal, or any interest therein.
RESPONDENT — Any person who is alleged to have committed an unfair
practice prohibited by this chapter.
ROOMING UNIT — Includes one or more rooms within a dwelling or
rooming house containing space for living and sleeping.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Actual or perceived male or female
heterosexuality, bisexuality, or homosexuality, and includes a person's
attitudes, preferences, beliefs and practices pertaining thereto.
TO RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
§ 158-4. Unfair practices prohibited.
§ 158-5. Unfair practices generally.
For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining
real property, or
(1)
(2) Secured by real property; or
B. The selling, brokering, or appraising of real property.
A. Unfair practices as defined in §§ 158-5 through 158-12 are contrary to
the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare and are prohibited
by the City in the exercise of its police power.
B. Unless the context otherwise requires, "unfair practice" includes
"unfair real estate practice."
A. It is an unfair real estate practice for any owner, assignee, real estate
broker, real estate agent, salesperson or employee, or other person
having the right to sell, rent, lease, sublease, assign, transfer, or
otherwise dispose of real property, to discriminate by undertaking or
refusing to sell, rent, lease, sublease, assign, transfer or otherwise deny
to or withhold from any person or group of persons such real property,
or refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental, lease, sublease, assignment
or transfer of real property, or segregate the use thereof, or represent
that such real property is not available for inspection, when in fact it is
so available, or expel or evict an occupant from real property or
otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling because of the person's
race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual
orientation, familial status, or disability, or to discriminate against or
segregate any person because of such person's race, color, religion,
national origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, familial
status, or disability in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale,
rental, lease, sublease, assignment, transfer or other disposition of any
§ 158-3 FAIR HOUSING § 158-5
158:125
§ 158-6. Retaliation, harassment or coercion.
such real property, including but not limited to the setting of rates
for rental or lease, or establishment of damage deposits, or other
financial conditions for rental or lease, or in the furnishing of facilities
or services in connection therewith.
B. It is an unfair real estate practice to unreasonably prohibit
modifications needed by a handicapped tenant. Whether or not the
landlord permits tenants in general to make alterations or additions to a
structure or fixtures, it is an unfair practice for a landlord to refuse to
make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or
services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford a
handicapped person equal opportunity to use and enjoy any dwelling, or
to refuse to allow a person to make alterations or additions to existing
premises occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, which
are necessary to make the rental property accessible by handicapped
persons, under the following conditions:
(1) The landlord is not required to pay for the alterations, additions, or
restoration.
(2) The landlord may reserve the right to approve the design, quality,
and construction of the alterations or additions in order to
minimize damage to the building and enforce standards of quality
and architectural compatibility.
(3) The landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition
permission for modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the
interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
C. It is an unfair real estate practice under this chapter for any person to
design a building or structure that does not conform with the Federal
Fair Housing Act as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq., the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, any other applicable
federal, state, or local laws pertaining to access by handicapped
persons, or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder. Whenever
the requirements of the applicable laws shall differ, those which require
greater accessibility for handicapped persons shall govern.
A. It is an unfair practice under this chapter for any person to:
(1) Aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of any act defined in
this chapter as an unfair practice; or to intimidate, harass,
retaliate, obstruct or discriminate against a person in any manner
because such person has complied with or proposes to comply with
provisions of this chapter or has filed a charge or complaint, has
testified, or has assisted in any proceeding under this chapter, or
any order issued thereunder; or to attempt, either directly or
indirectly, to commit any act defined in this chapter to be an unfair
§ 158-5 GENEVA CODE § 158-6
158:126
§ 158-7. Refusal or failure to list or show property.
It is an unfair real estate practice for any real estate broker or real estate
agent, salesperson or employee, because of race, color, religion, national
origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, familial status, or
disability of an occupant, purchaser, prospective occupant, or prospective
purchaser, to:
§ 158-8. Discrimination in provision of brokerage services.
It is an unfair real estate practice to deny any person access to or
membership or participation in, any multiple listing service, real estate
brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him
or her in terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation,
on account of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
sexual orientation, familial status, or disability.
§ 158-9. Discrimination in real-estate-related transactions.
practice; or to apply any economic sanctions or to deny
membership privileges because of compliance with the provisions
of this chapter; or
(2) Coerce, intimidate, threaten, or otherwise interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having
aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment
of any right granted or protected under this chapter.
B. Any unfair practice under this section which has the purpose or effect of
denying a person the right to be free from discrimination in real estate
practices or the right to quiet or peaceful possession or enjoyment of
real property, interfering with a person's compliance with the
provisions of this chapter prohibiting unfair real estate practices, or
interfering with a person's filing of a charge or assisting in any
proceeding relating to an unfair real estate practice under this chapter,
is an unfair real estate practice.
A. Refuse or intentionally fail to list or discriminate in listing real property
for sale, rent, lease or sublease;
B. Refuse or intentionally fail to show a prospective occupant real
property listed for sale, rental, lease or sublease;
C. Refuse or intentionally fail to accept and/or transmit to an owner any
reasonable offer to purchase, lease, rent or sublease real property.
A. It is an unfair real estate practice for any lender, or any agent or
employee thereof, to whom application is made for financial assistance
for the purchase, lease, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair,
§ 158-6 FAIR HOUSING § 158-9
158:127
§ 158-10. Unfair inquiries or advertisements.
It is an unfair real estate practice for any owner, real estate agent,
salesperson or employee, real estate broker, or any other person, to:
or maintenance of any real property, or any other person whose
business includes engaging in real estate-related transactions, to:
(1) Discriminate against any person, prospective occupant or tenant of
real property in the granting, withholding, extending, making
available, modifying or renewing, or in the rates, terms, conditions
or privileges of, any such financial assistance, or in the extension of
services in connection therewith; or
(2) Use any form of application for such financial assistance or make
any record of inquiry in connection with applications for such
financial assistance which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification, or discrimination because of race, color,
religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual
orientation, familial status, or disability, unless required or
authorized by local, state or federal laws or agencies for the
purpose of preventing discrimination in real property; provided
that nothing in this provision shall prohibit any party to a credit
transaction from requesting designation of marital status for the
purpose of considering application of community property law to
the individual case or from taking reasonable action thereon or
from requesting information regarding age, or familial status when
such information is necessary to determine the applicant's ability to
repay the loan.
B. Appraisal exemption. Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person
engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from
taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion,
national origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, familial
status, or disability.
A. Require any information, make or keep any record, or use any form of
application containing questions or inquiries concerning race, color,
religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation,
familial status, or disability in connection with the sale, rental, lease or
sublease of any real property, unless used solely:
(1) For making reports required by agencies of the federal, state, or
local government for the purposes of preventing and eliminating
discrimination or of overcoming its effects or for other purposes
authorized by federal, state, or local agencies or laws or rules
adopted thereunder;
(2) As to "marital status," for the purpose of determining applicability
of community property law to the individual case; and
§ 158-9 GENEVA CODE § 158-10
158:128
§ 158-11. Unfair inducement to sell or rent; blockbusting; steering
persons to particular areas.
It is an unfair real estate practice for any owner, real estate agent,
salesperson or employee, real estate broker, or any other person, to, for
profit:
§ 158-12. Denial of rights granted hereunder.
§ 158-13. Exclusions.
Nothing in this chapter shall:
(3) As to "age," for the purpose of determining that the applicant has
attained the age of majority, or in the case of housing exclusively
for older persons as described in § 158-13E, for the purpose of
determining the eligibility of the applicant.
B. Publish, circulate, issue or display or cause to be published, circulated,
issued or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, or sign
of any kind relating to the sale, rental, lease, sublease, assignment,
transfer, or listing of real property which indicate any preference,
limitation, or specification based on race, color, religion, national
origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, familial status, or
disability.
A. Promote, induce, or attempt to promote or induce any person to sell or
rent any real property by representation regarding the entry or
prospective entry into the neighborhood or area of a person or persons
of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital
status, sexual orientation, familial status, or disability;
B. Show or otherwise take any action, the design or effect of which is to
steer a person or persons to any section of the City or to particular real
property in a manner tending to segregate or maintain segregation on
the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital
status, sexual orientation, familial status, or disability.
A. It is an unfair practice under this chapter for any person, whether or
not acting for profit, to harass, intimidate, or otherwise abuse or
discriminate against any person or person's friends or associates
because of the race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital
status, sexual orientation, familial status, or disability with the purpose
or effect of denying to such person the rights granted in this chapter or
the right to quiet or peaceful possession or enjoyment of any real
property.
B. Any unfair practice under this section which has the purpose or effect of
denying a person the right to be free from discrimination in real estate
practices or the right to quiet or peaceful possession or enjoyment of
real property is an unfair real estate practice.
§ 158-10 FAIR HOUSING § 158-13
158:129
§ 158-14. Powers and duties of Geneva Human Rights Commission.
A. Apply to the renting, subrenting, leasing, or subleasing of a singlefamily
dwelling, wherein the owner or person entitled to possession
thereof maintains a permanent residence, home, or abode;
B. Be interpreted to prohibit any person from making a choice among
prospective purchasers or tenants of real property on the basis of
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital
status, sexual orientation, familial status, or disability where such
factors are not designed, intended, or used to discriminate;
C. Prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any
nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled
by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or
society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the
same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or
national origin;
D. Prohibit any person from limiting the rental or occupancy of housing
accommodations in any YWCA, YMCA, sorority, fraternity, school
dormitory, or similar residential hall to persons of one sex;
E. Prohibit any person from limiting the rental or occupancy of housing
accommodations to persons who are elderly or handicapped in any
housing facility designed, constructed or substantially rehabilitated and
operated exclusively for older persons, as defined by the Federal Fair
Housing Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 3607 (b)(1) through (4) as of the
effective date of the local law codified in this chapter, or for the
handicapped;
F. Require any person to rent or lease a housing accommodation to an
unemancipated minor;
G. Require any person to rent or lease a housing accommodation in
violation of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code;
H. Be construed to prohibit treating handicapped persons more favorably
than nonhandicapped persons;
I. Be construed to protect criminal conduct;
J. Prohibit any person from limiting the rental or occupancy of housing
accommodations on the basis of conduct by an occupant or prospective
occupant which involves the use of force or violence or advocacy
directed to producing or inciting imminent force or violence to the
person or property of the owner, manager, or other person having the
right to sell, rent, lease, assign, transfer or otherwise dispose of the real
property occupied or sought to be occupied.
§ 158-13 GENEVA CODE § 158-14
158:130
§ 158-15. Creation of Fair Housing Board.
§ 158-16. Powers and duties of Fair Housing Board.
The Board shall have the following functions, powers, and duties:
A. Authority and responsibility. The authority and responsibility for
administering this chapter shall be the Commission.
B. The Commission shall formulate policies to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter and may make recommendations to agencies and officers
of the City in aid of such policies and purposes.
C. The Commission shall have the power to adopt, promulgate, amend,
and rescind suitable rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of
this chapter and the policies and practices of the Fair Housing Board.
D. The Commission shall annually report to City Council, the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, and Geneva's New
Horizons Task Force any outcomes, activities, and statistics related to
fair housing and the enforcement of this chapter.
E. This chapter shall not affect any powers granted to the Commission
under its enabling statute (Article 29, Municipal Law).
A. There is hereby created a Fair Housing Board (Board). Such Board shall
consist of three qualified members who shall be appointed by the City
Council of the City of Geneva from the membership of the Commission;
one of whom shall be designated as Chairperson by the Commission.
The members of the Board shall serve at the pleasure of the City
Council of the City of Geneva.
B. Each Board member shall serve a term which parallels his or her
renewable three-year term as a Commissioner. City Council shall have
the power to appoint alternate Board members in the event that a
current member is unable to serve out his or her term.
C. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose
of conducting the business thereof. Each member of the Board shall
serve without compensation.
A. To establish and maintain its principal headquarters at the office of the
Commission.
B. To adopt an official seal.
C. To hold hearings, subpoena witnesses, and compel their attendance,
administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under oath and, in
connection therewith, to require the production for examination of any
books or papers relating to any matter under investigation or in
question before the Board.
§ 158-14 FAIR HOUSING § 158-16
158:131
§ 158-17. Administrative Procedure: preliminary matters.
D. The authority to appoint one or more hearing officers as shall be
necessary to carry out its functions and duties. The hearing officer shall
have the same powers possessed by the Board to hold and conduct
hearings. The hearing officer shall function under the supervision of the
Board and shall make findings of fact and recommendations to the
Board.
E. To issue and to have served cease-and-desist orders and orders
dismissing complaints and to pass upon compliance with such orders.
F. To award damages as set forth in § 158-20.
G. The authority to request the assistance of the City of Geneva Attorney in
carrying out the purposes of this chapter which includes the ability to
seek temporary injunctive relief pending the completion of an
investigation.
H. To render each year to the Commission a written report of all of its
activities and its recommendations.
A. Charge; filing.
(1) A charge alleging an unfair practice under this chapter shall be in
writing and signed under oath or affirmation by or on behalf of a
charging party before any person authorized to administer oaths.
The charge shall describe the unfair practice complained of and
should include a statement of the dates, places and circumstances,
and the persons responsible for such acts and practices. Upon the
filing of a charge alleging an unfair practice, the Director shall
cause to be served upon the charging party a written notice
acknowledging the filing, and notifying the charging party of the
time limits and choice of forums provided in this chapter.
(2) Whenever charges are made on behalf of a person claiming to be
aggrieved, the person making the charge must provide the Director
with the name, address and telephone number of the individual on
whose behalf the charge is made. Thereafter, the Director shall
verify the authorization of such charge by the person on whose
behalf the charge is made and upon the request of such person may
keep his or her identity confidential.
(3) A charge shall not be rejected as insufficient because of failure to
include all required information so long as it substantially satisfies
the informational requirements necessary for processing.
(4) A charge alleging an unfair practice or pattern of unfair practices
under this chapter may also be filed by the Director whenever the
Director has reason to believe that any person has been engaged or
is engaging in an unfair practice under this chapter.
§ 158-16 GENEVA CODE § 158-17
158:132
B. Time for filing charges. Charges filed under this chapter must be filed
with the Director within 180 days after the occurrence of the alleged
unfair practice.
C. Amendments to charge.
(1) The charging party or the Director may amend a charge:
(a) To cure technical defects or omissions;
(b) To clarify allegations made in the charge;
(c) To add allegations related to or arising out of the subject
matter set forth or attempted to be set forth in the charge; or
(d) To add or substitute as a respondent a person who was not
originally named as a respondent, but who is, during the
course of the investigation, identified as a respondent. For
jurisdictional purposes, such amendments shall relate back to
the date the original charge was first filed.
(2) The charging party may amend a charge to include allegations of
retaliation which arose after the filing of the original charge. Such
amendment must be filed within 180 days after the occurrence of
the retaliation, and prior to the Director's issuance of findings of
fact and determination with respect to the original charge. Such
amendments may be made at any time during the investigation of
the original charge so long as the Director will have adequate time
to investigate the additional allegations and the parties will have
adequate time to present the Director with evidence concerning
the additional allegations before the issuance of findings of fact and
a determination.
(3) When a charge is amended to add or substitute a respondent, the
Director shall serve upon the new respondent:
(a) The amended charge;
(b) The notice required under § 158-17D(1); and
(c) A statement of the basis for the Director's belief that the new
respondent is properly named as a respondent. For
jurisdictional purposes, amendment of a charge to add or
substitute a respondent shall relate back to the date the
original charge was first filed.
D. Notice of charge.
(1) The Director shall promptly, and in any event within 20 days of
filing of the charge, cause to be served on or mailed, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the respondent, a copy of the
charge along with a notice advising the respondent of respondent's
§ 158-17 FAIR HOUSING § 158-17
158:133
procedural rights and obligations under this chapter. The Director
shall promptly make an investigation of the charge.
(2) The investigation shall be directed to ascertain the facts
concerning the unfair practice alleged in the charge and shall be
conducted in an objective and impartial manner.
(3) During the investigation, the Director shall consider any statement
of position or evidence with respect to the allegations of the charge
which the charging party or the respondent wishes to submit,
including the respondent's answer to the charge. The Director shall
have authority to sign and issue subpoenas requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses, the production of evidence
including but not limited to books, records, correspondence or
documents in the possession or under the control of the person
subpoenaed, and access to evidence for the purpose of examination
and copying, and conduct discovery procedures which may include
the taking of interrogatories and oral depositions.
(4) The Director may require a fact-finding conference or participation
in another process with the respondent and any of respondent's
agents and witnesses and charging party during the investigation
in order to define the issues, determine which elements are
undisputed, resolve those issues which can be resolved, and afford
an opportunity to discuss or negotiate settlement. Parties may have
their legal counsel present if desired.
(5) Witnesses summoned by a subpoena under this chapter shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as witnesses in
proceedings in New York State Supreme Court. Fees payable to a
witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a party
shall be paid by that party or, where a party is unable to pay the
fees, by the Commission.
E. Investigation of charges. The following procedure shall apply to the
investigation of charges of unfair real estate practices filed under this
chapter:
(1) A respondent may file with the Director an answer to the charge no
later than 20 days after receiving notice of the charge.
(2) The Director shall commence investigation of the charge within 30
days after the filing of the charge. An investigation must be
completed within 100 days, except under special circumstances
which must be documented and conveyed to the parties. If the
Director is unable to complete the investigation within 100 days
after the filing of the charge, the Director shall notify the charging
party and the respondent of the reasons therefor. The Director shall
make final administrative disposition of a charge within one year of
the date of filing of the charge, unless it is impracticable to do so. If
the Director is unable to make a final administrative disposition
§ 158-17 GENEVA CODE § 158-17
158:134
within one year of the filing of the charge, the Director shall notify
the charging party and the respondent of the reasons therefor.
(3) If the Director determines that it is necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter, the Director may, in writing, request the
City Attorney to seek prompt judicial action for temporary or
preliminary relief to enjoin any unfair real estate practice pending
final disposition of a charge.
F. Conciliation and investigative reports.
(1) During the period beginning with the filing of such complaint and
ending with the filing of a charge or a dismissal by the Director, the
Director shall, to the extent feasible, engage in conciliation with
respect to such complaint.
(a) A conciliation agreement arising out of such conciliation shall
be an agreement between the respondent and the complainant
and shall be subject to approval by the Director.
(b) A conciliation agreement may provide for binding arbitration
of the dispute arising from the complaint. Any such arbitration
that results from a conciliation agreement may award
appropriate relief, including monetary relief.
(c) Each conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the
complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the Director
determines that disclosure is not required to further the
purposes of this title.
(d) Failure to comply with conciliation agreement. Whenever the
Director has reasonable cause to believe that a respondent has
breached a conciliation agreement, the Director shall refer the
matter to the City Attorney with a recommendation that a civil
action be filed for the enforcement of such agreement.
(e) Prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of
information.
[1] Nothing that transpires during the conciliation process,
whether successful or unsuccessful, may be publicly
disclosed or used in subsequent proceedings.
[2] Notwithstanding Subsection F(1)(e)[1], the Director shall
make available to the aggrieved person and the
respondent, at any time, upon request following
completion of the Director's investigation, information
derived from an investigation and any final investigative
report relating to that investigation.
(2) At the end of each investigation under this section, the Director
shall prepare a final investigative report containing:
§ 158-17 FAIR HOUSING § 158-17
158:135
(a) The names and dates of contacts with witnesses;
(b) A summary and the dates of correspondence and other
contacts with the aggrieved person and the respondent;
(c) A summary description of other pertinent records;
(d) A summary of witness statements; and
(e) Answers to interrogatories.
(3) A final report under this subsection may be amended if additional
evidence is later discovered.
G. Findings of fact and determination of reasonable cause or no
reasonable cause.
(1) The results of the investigation shall be reduced to written findings
of fact and a determination shall be made by the Director that there
is or is not reasonable cause for believing that an unfair practice
has been or is being committed, which determination shall also be
in writing and issued with the written findings of fact.
(2) The findings of fact and determination shall be mailed promptly to
the respondent and charging party.
(3) Once issued to the parties, the Director's findings of fact,
determination, and order may not be amended or withdrawn except
upon the agreement of the parties or in response to an order by the
Board after an appeal taken pursuant to § 158-17H(2), provided,
that the Director may correct clerical mistakes or errors arising
from oversight or omission upon the request from a party or upon
the Director's own discretion.
H. Determination of no reasonable cause; appeal from and dismissal.
(1) If the Director determines that no reasonable cause exists to
believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is
about to occur, the Director shall promptly dismiss the complaint.
The Director shall make public disclosure of each such dismissal.
(2) If a determination is made that there is no reasonable cause for
believing an unfair practice under this chapter has been
committed, the charging party shall have the right to appeal such
determination to the Board within 30 days of the date the
determination is signed by the Director by filing a written
statement of appeal with the Board. The Board shall promptly
deliver a copy of the statement to the Director and respondent and
shall promptly consider and act upon such appeal by either
affirming the Director's determination or remanding it to the
Director with appropriate instructions. In the event no appeal is
taken or such appeal results in affirmance or if the Board has not
decided the appeal within the 60 days allotted, the determination of
§ 158-17 GENEVA CODE § 158-17
158:136
the Director shall be final and the charge deemed dismissed. Any
party aggrieved by the final dismissal may appeal the order on the
record to an appropriate court.
I. Determination of reasonable cause; conciliation and settlement.
(1) If a determination is made that reasonable cause exists to believe
that an unfair practice has occurred, the Director shall endeavor to
eliminate the unfair practice by conference, conciliation and
persuasion. Conditions of settlement may include (but are not
limited to) the elimination of the unfair practice, rent refunds or
credits, reinstatement to tenancy, affirmative recruiting or
advertising measures, payment of actual damages, damages for
loss of the right to be free from discrimination in real estate
transactions, attorney's fees or such other remedies that will
effectuate the purposes of this chapter, including action which
could be ordered by a court. In charges alleging an unfair real
estate practice, filed under this chapter, the Director may also
require payment of a civil penalty, as set forth in § 158-20.
(2) Any settlement or conciliation agreement shall be an agreement
between the charging party and the respondent and shall be
subject to the approval of the Director. An order shall then be
entered by the Director setting forth the terms of the agreement.
Copies of such order shall be delivered to all affected parties.
(3) If conciliation is not successful and no agreement can be reached,
the Director shall issue a written finding to that effect and furnish a
copy of the finding to the charging party and to the respondent.
Such a finding:
(a) Shall consist of a short and plain statement of the facts upon
which the Director has found reasonable cause to believe that
a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to
occur;
(b) Shall be based on the final investigative report; and
(c) Need not be limited to the facts or grounds alleged in the
complaint filed under § 158-17A; and
(d) Shall be delivered to the charging parting and to the
respondent.
(4) Upon issuance of the finding, the Director shall promptly cause to
be delivered the entire investigatory file, including the charge and
any and all findings made, to the Board for further proceedings and
hearing under this chapter pursuant to § 158-18.
(5) If the Director determines that the matter involves the legality of
any State or local zoning or other land use law or local law, the
§ 158-17 FAIR HOUSING § 158-17
158:137
§ 158-18. Administrative procedure: complaint and hearing.
Director shall immediately refer the matter to the City Attorney for
appropriate action, instead of issuing a charge.
A. Following submission of the investigatory file to the Board, the Director
shall prepare a complaint against such respondent relating to the
charge and facts discovered during the investigation thereof and
prosecute the same in the name and on behalf of the Commission and
the City at a hearing therefor before the Board sitting alone or with a
Hearing Examiner as provided in this chapter and to appear for and
represent the interests of the Commission and the City at all
subsequent proceedings.
B. The complaint shall be served on the respondent, in the usual manner
provided by law for service of complaints and filed with the Board. A
copy of such complaint shall be furnished the charging party.
C. Within 20 days of the service of such complaint upon it, the respondent
shall file its answer with the Board and serve a copy of the same on the
Director.
D. Upon the filing of the complaint, the Board shall promptly establish a
date for the hearing of such complaint and give notice thereof to the
Director, the City Attorney, the complainant, and respondent, and shall
thereafter hold a public hearing on the complaint, which hearing shall
commence no earlier than 90 days nor later than 120 days from the
filing of the complaint, unless otherwise ordered by the Board.
E. After the filing of a complaint with the Board, it may be amended only
with the permission of the Board, which permission shall be granted
when justice will be served thereby and all parties are allowed time to
prepare their case with respect to additional or expanded charges
which they did not and could not have reasonably foreseen would be in
issue at the hearing.
F. The hearing shall be conducted by the Board and/or a hearing examiner
appointed by the Board from a list approved by the Commission, sitting
alone or with the Board. Such hearings shall be conducted in
accordance with written rules and procedures consistent with this
chapter.
G. If a Hearing Examiner is appointed, it shall be done within 30 days after
notice of the date of hearing from the Board.
H. Rights of parties. At a hearing under this chapter, each party may
appear in person, be represented by counsel, present evidence, crossexamine
witnesses, and obtain the issuance of subpoenas. Any
aggrieved person may intervene as a party in the proceeding. The
Federal Rules of Evidence shall apply to the presentation of evidence in
such hearing as they would in a civil action in a U.S. District Court.
§ 158-17 GENEVA CODE § 158-18
158:138
§ 158-19. Administrative decision and order.
§ 158-20. Civil penalty in cases alleging unfair real estate practices.
I. A court reporting stenographer shall be present at all hearings.
J. A hearing under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously and
inexpensively as possible, consistent with the need of all parties to
obtain a fair hearing and complete record.
K. Resolution of charge. Any resolution of a charge before a final order
under this section shall require the consent of the aggrieved person on
whose behalf the charge is issued.
A. Within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing, the chairperson of the
Board presiding at the hearing (or the Examiner as the case may be)
shall prepare a written decision and order. The final decision shall be
filed as a public record with the City Clerk, and copies thereof mailed to
each party of record and to the Commission.
B. Such decision shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered
and shall contain findings of fact, conclusions of law upon which the
decision is based, and an order detailing the relief deemed appropriate,
together with a brief statement of the reasons therefor.
C. In the event the Board (or a majority of the panel composed of the
Examiner and Board), determines that a respondent has committed an
unfair practice under this chapter, the Board (or panel majority) may
order the respondent to take such affirmative action or provide for such
relief as is deemed necessary to correct the practice, effectuate the
purpose of this chapter, and secure compliance therewith, including but
not limited to rent refund, or credit, reinstatement to tenancy,
affirmative recruiting and advertising measures, attorney's fees or to
take such other action as in the judgment of the Board (or panel
majority) will effectuate the purposes of this chapter. The Board (or
panel majority) may grant any relief that could be ordered by a court,
including actual damages, damages for loss of the right to be free from
discrimination in real estate transactions, injunctive or equitable relief,
any other appropriate remedy set forth in the Federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act (P.L. 100-430), and assessment of civil penalties as set
forth in § 158-20. An order may include the requirement for a report on
the matter of compliance.
D. Any person aggrieved by a final order of the Board (or panel majority)
may appeal the order on the record to an appropriate court.
E. The Board in the performance of its functions may enlist the aid of all
departments of City government, and all said departments are directed
to fully cooperate therewith.
A. In cases alleging unfair real estate practices filed under this chapter, in
addition to any other award of damages or grant of injunctive relief, or
§ 158-18 FAIR HOUSING § 158-20
158:139
§ 158-21. Enforcement of administrative orders.
other equitable relief, a penalty may be assessed against the
respondent. Payment of the penalty may be required as a term of a
conciliation agreement entered into under § 158-17I, or may be ordered
by the Board (or panel majority) in a decision rendered under § 158-19
by a court of competent jurisdiction in a proceeding filed under
§ 158-22.
B. The penalty assessed against a respondent shall not exceed the
following amount:
(1) Ten thousand dollars if the respondent has not been determined to
have committed any prior unfair real estate practice;
(2) Twenty-five thousand dollars if the respondent has been
determined to have committed one other unfair real estate practice
during the five-year period ending on the date of the filing of this
charge; or
(3) Fifty thousand dollars if the respondent has been determined to
have committed two or more unfair real estate practices during the
seven-year period ending on the date of the filing of this charge;
except that if acts constituting the unfair real estate practice that is
the subject of the charge are committed by the same natural person
who has been previously determined to have committed acts
constituting an unfair real estate practice, then the penalties set
forth in Subsection B(2) and (3) of this section may be imposed
without regard to the period of time within which those prior acts
occurred.
A. In any case in which a final order of the Director or of the Board
directed to the City, or to any department, division, board or agency
thereof, is not complied with, a copy of the order shall be transmitted to
the City Manager and the Mayor, who shall take appropriate action to
secure compliance therewith.
B. In the event that any final order of the Director or of the Board is not
complied with, the Director or the Board, as the case may be, shall
notify the City Attorney, who shall petition the appropriate court to
secure enforcement of or compliance with the order, or to impose
penalties as set forth in this chapter, or both. The City Attorney shall
certify and file with the court the final order sought to be enforced. The
City Attorney shall cause a notice of the petition to be sent by certified
mail to all parties or their representatives.
C. If, within 60 days after the date the Board's order concerning an unfair
housing practice is entered, no petition has been filed under Subsection
B of this section, any person entitled to relief under the final order may
petition the appropriate court for a decree enforcing the order.
§ 158-20 GENEVA CODE § 158-22
158:140
§ 158-22. Election of civil action in cases of unfair real estate
practices.
§ 158-23. Enforcement by private persons.
A. Following the issuance of a finding of unsuccessful conciliation, any
charging party on whose behalf the reasonable cause finding was made,
or a respondent, may, with respect to an unfair real estate practice,
elect to have the claims on which reasonable cause was found decided
in a civil action under this section in lieu of an administrative hearing
under §§ 158-18 and 158-19. This election must be made not later than
20 days after issuance of the finding of unsuccessful conciliation. The
person making such election shall give notice of doing so to the Director
and to all other charging parties and respondents to whom the charge
relates.
B. If an election is made under Subsection A of this section, the City
Attorney shall commence, within 30 days after the election is made, a
civil action in the appropriate court to decide on the claim.
C. Any aggrieved person may intervene as of right in the civil action.
D. In a civil action under this section, if the court finds that an unfair real
estate practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may grant
any relief, including but not limited to actual damages, injunctive or
equitable relief, and any other appropriate remedy set forth in the
Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act (P.L. 100-430). The court may
also assess a civil penalty as set forth in § 158-20. If monetary relief is
sought for the benefit of a person who could have intervened under
Subsection C of this section, but who did not intervene in the civil
action, the court shall not award such relief if that person has not
complied with discovery orders entered by the court.
E. In any proceeding under this section, the court may award attorney fees
and costs to the prevailing party. Attorney fees and costs may be
assessed against a person who intervenes by filing a notice of
independent appearance in the civil action only to the extent that the
intervening participation was frivolous or vexatious, or was for the
purpose of harassment.
A. Any person who claims to have been injured by an unfair real estate
practice, or who believes that he or she will be injured by an unfair real
estate practice that is about to occur, may commence a civil action in
the appropriate court of jurisdiction not later than one year after the
occurrence or the termination of an alleged unfair real estate practice,
whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief with respect to such
unfair real estate practice.
B. The computation of such one-year period shall not include any time
during which an administrative proceeding under this chapter was
pending with respect to a complaint or charge under this chapter
§ 158-22 FAIR HOUSING § 158-23
158:141
§ 158-24. Unlawful conduct and penalties.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully engage in an unfair practice
under this chapter or willfully resist, prevent, impede or interfere with the
Director, the Board, the City Attorney, or in the performance of their duties
under this chapter, or to fail, refuse, or neglect to comply with any lawful
order of the Director, the Board, or the City.
§ 158-25. Construction with other laws.
Nothing in this chapter shall invalidate or restrict any right or remedy of
any charging party or respondent under state or federal law nor preclude
alleging an unfair real estate practice based on the same facts or
occurrences.
C. A complaint may be filed under this section whether or not an
administrative charge has been filed under § 158-17A, and without
regard to the status of such charge, but if the Department or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development has obtained a prefinding
or post-finding settlement or conciliation agreement with the
consent of the charging party, no action may be filed under this section
with respect to the alleged unfair real estate practice which forms the
basis for such complaint, except for the purpose of enforcing the terms
of such agreement.
D. No civil action may be commenced under this section with respect to an
alleged unfair real estate practice which forms the basis of a complaint
if a hearing on the record has been commenced by the Fair Housing
Board.
E. In a civil action under this section, if the court finds that an unfair real
estate practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may grant as
relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction,
temporary restraining order, or other order, including an order
enjoining the defendant from engaging in such practice or ordering
such affirmative action as may be appropriate. The court may also
award actual damages, including damages for humiliation and mental
suffering, and any other appropriate remedy set forth in the Federal
Fair Housing Amendments Act (P.L. 100-430). The court may also allow
reasonable attorney's fees and costs to the prevailing party.
F. Relief granted under this section shall not affect any contract, sale,
encumbrance, or lease consummated before the granting of such relief
and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant, without
actual notice of the filing of a charge or civil action under this chapter.
G. Upon timely application, the City Attorney may intervene in such civil
action, if the City Attorney certifies that the case is of general public
importance, and may obtain such relief as would be available in an
action brought under § 158-22.
§ 158-23 GENEVA CODE § 158-25
158:142
such party from seeking judicial review of any final administrative decision
or order made under this chapter.
§ 158-26. Cooperative agreements.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent the receiving,
referring, or other processing of complaints, in accordance with any
cooperative agreement with the New York State Division of Human Rights
or with other agencies concerned with the enforcement of laws against
discrimination.
§ 158-27. Application to pending charges and complaints.
The procedures for administration and enforcement under this chapter shall
apply to charges pending which have not had a date certain set for hearing
as of the effective date of the local law codified in this chapter. However,
this section shall not be construed to invalidate any administrative action
taken or determinations and orders made on pending charges because of
the procedures provided by this chapter.
§ 158-28. Violations; bodily injury; death, penalties.
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
A. Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, national origin,
age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, familial status, or disability,
and because he or she is or has been selling, purchasing, renting,
financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale,
purchase rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying
for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
B. Any person because he or she has been, or in order to intimidate such
person or any other person or any class of persons from:
(1) Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual
orientation, familial status, or disability, in any of the activities,
services, organizations or facilities described in this chapter; or
(2) Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
C. Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such
citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other
persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation,
familial status, or disability in any of the activities, services,
organizations, or facilities described in Subsection A of this section, or
participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any
§ 158-25 FAIR HOUSING § 158-28
158:143
Chapter 164
FIREARMS
denial of the opportunity to so participate, shall be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and if bodily
injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not
more than 10 years, or both; and if death results shall be subject to
imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
§ 158-28 GENEVA CODE § 158-28
164:144
ARTICLE I
Discharge and Carrying of Loaded Weapons
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 65, §§ 65.7 and 65.100A, of the 1968
Code]
§ 164-1. Restrictions.
§ 164-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Discharge within city prohibited. No person shall discharge any
firearm, air-gun, spring gun or other similar instrument within the city
except in self-defense or discharge of official duty. [Amended by Ord.
No. 69-8, eff. 8-6-1969]
B. Carrying of loaded weapon. No person shall carry any loaded firearm,
air-gun, spring gun or other similar instrument or weapon upon any
public street or place except in the discharge of official duty.
§ 164-1 FIREARMS § 164-2
164:145

ARTICLE II
Possession of Weapons in City-Owned Buildings
[Adopted 5-6-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
§ 164-3. Legislative intent.
The City of Geneva, by its City Council in its proprietary capacity, declares
that it is necessary for the security, safety, protection and well-being of
its employees, its property and individuals present thereupon, to place
restrictions on the bearing and possession of firearms and other dangerous
weapons and instruments by individuals while entering into and being
present in buildings owned, leased and operated by the City of Geneva.
§ 164-4. Possession of weapons prohibited.
This article prohibits any individual from bearing or having in his or her
possession, either openly or concealed, any firearm, gun, explosive device
or substance, lethal or debilitating chemical or gas, or any dangerous or
deadly weapon or instrument of any description, including but not limited
to a handgun, pistol, target pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, dangerous knife,
dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or imitation pistol, while entering into or while
being present in any building owned, leased or operated by the City of
Geneva.
§ 164-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any authorized peace officer or police officer,
as defined in the New York State Criminal Procedure Law, or any other
authorized official of the county, state or federal government, and Fire
Department personnel who are permanent residents of a city-owned facility.
§ 164-6. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to comply with this article shall be punishable by confinement in the
Ontario County Jail for a term not to exceed three months and/or a fine not
to exceed $500.
§ 164-3 FIREARMS § 164-6
164:147
Chapter 169
FIRESAFETY
§ 169-1. False alarm.
No person shall give or cause to be given any false alarm of fire in any
manner whatsoever in the city.
§ 169-2. Interference with signal boxes.
No person shall operate or attempt to operate any connected fire alarm
signal box within the city except in case of fire, nor interfere in any way with
a signal box connected to the city fire alarm system except with consent of
the Fire Chief or Board of Fire Commissioners.
§ 169-3. Unauthorized possession of signal box key.
No person shall make or cause to be made or have in his possession any key,
or impression or duplicate of any key of any signal box of the city fire alarm
system without the consent of the Board of Fire Commissioners.
§ 169-4. Injuring fire hose or other apparatus.
No person shall injure or interfere in any way with any hose or apparatus
belonging to or in use by the City Fire Department or any other fire
department operating in the city or otherwise assisting the City Fire
Department.
§ 169-5. Obstructions near fire hydrant.
No person shall place any lumber, stone or other obstruction nearer than
15 feet to any fire hydrant within the city without the permission of the Fire
Chief or his designated assistants.
§ 169-6. Interfering with Fire Chief.
No person shall interfere in any way with the Fire Chief or his designated
assistants in the placing of fire lines or any proper measure that he or his
assistants may direct for the purpose of controlling or extinguishing a fire.
§ 169-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 170
§ 164-6 GENEVA CODE § 169-7
169:148
(RESERVED)
Chapter 171
(RESERVED)
Chapter 173
FIREWORKS
§ 173-1. Designation of City Manager as permit authority.
Pursuant to Subdivision 1 of § 405.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New
York, the City Manager is hereby designated the permit authority to grant
and issue permits for the public display of fireworks in accordance with the
provisions of § 405.00 of the Penal Law.
§ 173-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 177
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 177-1. Findings.
The City Council of the City of Geneva, New York, finds that the potential
and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to
the residents of the City of Geneva and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 177-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 169-7 FIREWORKS § 177-2
173:149
§ 177-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
§ 177-4. Word usage and definitions.
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 177-2 GENEVA CODE § 177-4
177:150
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths
from one foot to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate
and where velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-99, V, VO, VE or V1-30. It is also commonly referred to as
the base floodplain or one-hundred-year floodplain.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation
system.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for
occupancy or storage.
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — The area subject to high-velocity
waters, including but not limited to hurricane wave wash. The area is
designated on a FIRM as Zone V1-30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations
located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear
walls.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
§ 177-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 177-4
177:151
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
defined but no water surface elevation is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood
profiles as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map and the water
surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The
term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest level, including basement or cellar, of the
lowest enclosed area. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 177-4 GENEVA CODE § 177-4
177:152
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers
and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180
consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in
1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 177-12B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges
or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The initiation, excluding planning and
design, of any phase of a project or physical alteration of the property
and shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations; or the erection of temporary forms.
It also includes the placement and/or installation on the property of
accessory buildings (garages or sheds), storage trailers and building
materials. For manufactured homes the actual start means affixing of
the manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, substantial improvement is considered to commence when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
§ 177-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 177-4
177:153
§ 177-5. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Geneva.
§ 177-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 6-9-1989 by Ord. No. 89-14]
The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood
Insurance Study of the City of Geneva, New York, Ontario County, New
York," dated October 15, 1981, with Flood Insurance Rate Maps
enumerated on Map Index No. 360599 0001-0002, dated April 15, 1982,
and with accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps enumerated
on Map Index No. 360599 0001-0002 dated April 15, 1982. The above
documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter and
are filed at the Department of Public Works, Castle Street, Geneva, New
York.
§ 177-7. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local building, fire, health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
(2)
A. This chapter is adopted in response to revisions to the National Flood
Insurance Program effective October 1, 1986, and shall supersede all
previous laws adopted for the purpose of establishing and maintaining
eligibility for flood insurance.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the highest standards, shall govern.
§ 177-4 GENEVA CODE § 177-8
177:154
§ 177-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted
or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute
a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more
than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day
of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City of Geneva from taking such other lawful
action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found
not compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which the developer
and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved variance under
§§ 177-16 and 177-17 will be declared noncompliant and notification sent to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 177-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
City of Geneva, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 177-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Building Inspector is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 177-11. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before the start of construction or
any other development within the area of special flood hazard as established
in § 177-6. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the local administrator and may include but not be limited
to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing.
A. Application stage. The following information is required where
applicable:
§ 177-8 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 177-11
177:155
§ 177-12. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of all structures.
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed.
(3) When required, a certificate from a licensed professional engineer
or architect that the utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in
§ 177-13C(1).
(4) Certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 177-14.
(5) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or
floodproofing by whatever means, it shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the local administrator a certificate of the elevation
of the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea
level. The elevation certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
building, the floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and
certified by the same. Any further work undertaken prior to submission
and approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall:
(1) Review all development permit applications to determine that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permit applications to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or
local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development adversely affects the area of special flood
hazard. For the purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means
physical damage to adjacent properties. An engineering study may
be required of the applicant for this purpose.
(a) If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 177-11 GENEVA CODE § 177-12
177:156
(b) If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation
measures shall be made a condition of the permit.
(4) Review all development permits for compliance with the provisions
of § 177-13E, Encroachments.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
data has not been provided in accordance with § 177-6, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard, the local administrator shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including
data developed pursuant to § 177-13D(4), in order to administer
§ 177-14, Specific standards, and § 177-15, Floodways.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The local administrator
shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement or cellar.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, to which the structure has been floodproofed.
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §§ 177-13
and 177-14.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter, including variances when granted and
certificates of compliance.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Regional Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Region II, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
(1) The local administrator shall have the authority to make
interpretations when there appears to be a conflict between the
limits of the federally identified area of special flood hazard and
actual field conditions.
§ 177-12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 177-12
177:157
§ 177-13. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following standards are required:
(2) Base flood elevation data established pursuant to § 177-6 and/or
§ 177-12B, when available, shall be used to accurately delineate the
area of special flood hazard.
(3) The local administrator shall use flood information from any other
authoritative source, including historical data, to establish the
limits of the area of special flood hazard when base flood elevations
are not available.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) All floodplain development found ongoing without an approved
permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the
local administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject
to the penalties described in § 177-8 of this chapter.
(2) All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions
of this chapter and/or the conditions of the approved permit shall
be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the local
administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject to
the penalties described in § 177-8 of this chapter.
G. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify that the
development is in compliance with the requirements of either the
development permit or the approved variance.
H. Certificate of compliance.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating that
the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) All other development occurring within the designated flood hazard
area will have upon completion a certificate of compliance issued
by the local administrator.
(3) All certifications shall be based upon the inspections conducted
subject to Subsection G and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic
information, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or
encroachment analysis which may have been required as a
condition of the approved permit.
A. Anchoring.
§ 177-12 GENEVA CODE § 177-13
177:158
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes must
be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Manufactured homes shall be elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or two feet above the highest adjacent grade
when no base flood elevation has been determined. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-thetop
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. When
designed for location below the base flood elevation, a professional
engineer's or architect's certification is required.
(2) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
§ 177-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 177-13
177:159
§ 177-14. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in § 177-6, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, and § 177-12B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals
for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than either
50 lots or five acres.
E. Encroachments.
(1) All proposed development in riverine situations where no flood
elevation data is available (unnumbered A Zones) shall be analyzed
to determine the effects on the flood-carrying capacity of the area
of special flood hazard set forth in § 177-12A(3), Permit review. This
may require the submission of additional technical data to assist in
the determination.
(2) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data is available pursuant to § 177-12B or 177-13D(4) and no
floodway has been determined, the cumulative effects of any
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard where floodway data is provided
or available pursuant to § 177-12B the requirements of § 177-15,
Floodways, shall apply.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any residential structure shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation.
(2) Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
§ 177-13 GENEVA CODE § 177-14
177:160
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation or be floodproofed so that the structure
is watertight below the base flood level with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components located
below the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(1) If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the
base flood elevation shall be designed to automatically (without
human intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) If the structure is to be floodproofed:
(a) A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/
or review structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice to make the structure watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy.
(b) A licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
shall certify the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is floodproofed.
§ 177-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 177-14
177:161
§ 177-15. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as
floodways (see definition, § 177-4). The floodway is an extremely hazardous
area due to high-velocity floodwaters carrying debris and posing additional
threats from potential erosion forces. When floodway data is available for
a particular site as provided by §§ 177-6 and 177-12B, all encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development, are prohibited within the limits of the floodway unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that such encroachments shall not result
in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
§ 177-16. Appeals Board.
(3) The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of all such
certificates noted in this section.
C. Construction standards for areas of special flood hazard without base
flood elevations. New construction or substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation as
may be determined in § 177-12B or two feet above the highest adjacent
grade where no elevation data is available.
(1) New construction or substantial improvements of structures,
including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to at least two feet above the highest
adjacent grade next to the proposed foundation of the structure.
(2) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically (without human
intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the City of Geneva shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 177-14 GENEVA CODE § 177-16
177:162
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and Floodplain Management Program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations and
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
§ 177-16 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 177-16
177:163
§ 177-17. Conditions for variances.
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that § 177-16D(1)
through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures and contributing structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places without regard to the contributing structures procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
§ 177-16 GENEVA CODE § 177-17
177:164
Chapter 180
FOOD SERVICE AND FOOD PROCESSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary Code — See Ch. 273.
§ 180-1. Food service establishments. [Added by Ord. No. 83-16, eff.
8-3-198314 ]
This chapter shall be deemed to include all of the provisions and regulations
of the New York State Sanitary Code entitled "Food Service
Establishments," Part 14, Subpart 14-1 as authorized under provisions of
§ 225 of the Public Health Law of the State of New York and any
amendments thereto with the exception of the enforcement regulations of
said Sanitary Code which shall be deemed to be as set forth in §§ 180-3 and
180-4 of this chapter.
§ 180-2. Retail frozen desserts. [Added by Ord. No. 83-16, eff.
8-3-1983]
This chapter shall be deemed to include all of the provisions and regulations
of the New York State Sanitary Code entitled "Retail Frozen Desserts," Part
14, Subpart 14-3 as authorized under the provisions of § 225 of the Public
Health Law of the State of New York and any amendments thereto with the
exception of the enforcement regulations of said Sanitary Code which shall
be deemed to be set forth in §§ 180-3 and 180-4 of this chapter.
§ 180-3. Enforcement provisions.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.
A. Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service
establishment, food processing establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery
store or supermarket within the city or its police jurisdiction, who does
not possess a valid permit issued to him by the health authority. Only a
person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be
entitled to receive and retain such a permit. Permits shall not be
transferable from one person to another person or place. A valid permit
shall be posted in every food service establishment, food processing
establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store or supermarket. Permits
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Sections 61.1 through
61.9.
§ 177-17 FOOD SERVICE AND FOOD PROCESSING § 180-3
180:165
for temporary food service establishments shall be issued for a period
of time not to exceed 14 days.
(1) Issuance of permits.
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment,
food processing establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store
or supermarket shall make written application for a permit on
forms provided by the health authority. Such application shall
include the applicant's full name and post office address and
whether such applicant is an individual, firm, corporation, and,
if a partnership, the names of the partners, together with their
addresses shall be included; the location and type of the
proposed food service establishment, food processing
establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store or supermarket;
and the signature of the applicant or applicants. If
incorporated, attach a properly executed list of officers, signed
by an officer of the firm impressed with a corporate seal. If the
application is for a temporary food service establishment, it
shall also include the inclusive dates of the proposed
operations.
(b) The permit and all renewals thereof shall be for an annual
period. The applicant shall pay to the health authority of the
City of Geneva a fee of $10 to be paid when the permit
application and all renewals thereof is filed; no part of said fee
is refundable. Temporary food service establishments shall pay
the same fee, file the same application and secure the same
permit for each temporary food service establishment operated
and for each period of time the temporary food service
establishment operates during the calendar year. [Amended
by Ord. No. 82-17, eff. 4-7-1982]
(c) The health officer, before issuing a permit shall cause an
inspection to be made of the food service establishment and at
least annually thereafter and shall cause additional inspections
to be made as he deems necessary for the proper enforcement
of this chapter.
(d) One copy of the inspection report shall be given by the health
officer or his authorized representative to the manager or
operator of the establishment and the latest inspection report
shall be kept on file and shall not be defaced or removed by any
person except the health officer or his authorized
representative. The original of the inspection report shall be
filed with the records of the health officer.
(e) The person operating the food service establishment, food
processing establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store or
supermarket shall upon request of the health officer or his
authorized representative permit access to all parts of the
§ 180-3 GENEVA CODE § 180-3
180:166
establishment and shall furnish copies on demand, or permit
copying of any or all records of food purchased.
(2) Suspension of permits.
(a) Permits may be suspended temporarily by the health authority
for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(b) Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply
with any notice issued under the provisions of this section, the
permit holder or operator shall be notified in writing that the
permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended
and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a
written request for a hearing is filed with the health authority
by the permit holder within five days of the service of said
notice.
(c) Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, whenever
the health authority finds insanitary or other conditions in the
operation of a food service establishment, food processing
establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store or supermarket
which, in his judgment, constitutes a substantial hazard to the
public health, he may without warning, notice or hearing, issue
a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such
conditions, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and
specifying the time period within which such action shall be
taken; and, if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the
permit is immediately suspended, and all food service
operations are to be immediately discontinued. Any person to
whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately
therewith, but upon written petition filed within five days of the
service of said notice to the health authority, shall be afforded a
hearing as soon as possible.
(3) Reinstatement of suspended permits. Any person whose permit has
been suspended may, at any time, make application for a
reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit. Upon
receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the
applicant that in his opinion the conditions causing suspension of
the permit have been corrected, the health authority shall make a
reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of
this chapter, the permit may be reinstated.
(4) Revocation of permits. For serious or repeated violations of any of
the requirements of this chapter, or for interference with the health
authority in the performance of his duties, the permit may be
permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been
provided by the health authority. Prior to such action, the health
authority shall notify the permit holder in writing, stating the
reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising
§ 180-3 FOOD SERVICE AND FOOD PROCESSING § 180-3
180:167
that the permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of five days
following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is
filed with the health authority, by the permit holder, within such
five-day period. A permit may be suspended for cause pending its
revocation or a hearing relative thereto.
(5) Hearings. The hearings provided for in this section shall be
conducted by the health authority at a time and place designated
by him. Based upon the record of such hearing, the health authority
shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any
official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report
of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by
the health authority.
B. Inspection of food service and food processing establishments.
(1) Access to establishments. The health authority or his
representative, after proper identification, shall be permitted to
enter, at any reasonable time, any food service establishment, food
processing establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store or
supermarket within the city or its police jurisdiction, for the
purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this
chapter. He shall be permitted to examine the records of the
establishment to obtain pertinent information pertaining to food
and supplies purchased, received or used, and persons employed.
(2) Inspection records. Whenever the health authority makes an
inspection of a food service establishment, food processing
establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store or supermarket, he
shall record his findings on an inspection report form provided for
this purpose.
(3) Issuance of notices. Whenever the health authority makes an
inspection of a food service establishment, food processing
establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store or supermarket and
discovers that any of the requirements of § 180-3 through § 180-915
of this chapter have been violated, he shall notify the permit holder
or operator of such violations by means of an inspection report
form or other written notice.
C. Examination and condemnation of food. Food may be examined or
sampled by the health authority as often as may be necessary to
determine freedom from adulteration or misbranding. The health
authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge,
place a hold order on any food which he determines or has probable
cause to believe to be unwholesome or otherwise adulterated or
misbranded. Under a hold order, food shall be permitted to be suitably
stored. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold
order, notice or tag placed on food by the health authority, and neither
15.Editor's Note: These former sections were repealed by Ord. No. 83-16, eff. 8-3-1983.
§ 180-3 GENEVA CODE § 180-3
180:168
such food nor the container thereof shall be relabeled, repacked,
reprocessed, altered, disposed of or destroyed without permission of
the health authority, except on order by a court of competent
jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has had a hearing and
on the basis of evidence produced at such hearing, or on the basis of his
examination in the event a written request for a hearing is not received
within 10 days, the health authority may vacate the hold order, or may
by written order direct the owner or person in charge of the food which
was placed under the hold order to denature or destroy such food or
to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter, provided
that such order of the health authority to denature or destroy such food
or bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction
within three days.
D. Food service and food processing establishments outside jurisdiction of
the health authority. Food from food service and food processing
establishments outside the jurisdiction of the health authority of the
city may be sold within the city if such food service and food processing
establishments conform to the provisions of this chapter or to
substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of
compliance with such provisions, the health authority may accept
reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such
food service and food processing establishments are located.
E. Plan review of future construction. When a food service or food
processing establishment is hereafter constructed or extensively
remodeled, or when an existing structure is converted for use as a food
service or food processing establishment, properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling or alteration, showing
layout, arrangement, including water supply and sewage disposal
systems, and construction materials of work areas, and the location,
size and type of fixed equipment and facilities, shall be submitted to the
health authority for approval before such work is begun.
F. Procedure when infection is suspected. When the health authority has
reasonable cause to suspect possibility of disease transmission from
any food service establishment, food processing establishment, retail
meat, fish, grocery store or supermarket employee, the health authority
shall secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee, or make
such other investigation as may be indicated, and take appropriate
action. The health authority may require any or all of the following
measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service
establishments, food processing establishments, retail meat, fish,
grocery stores and supermarkets.
(2) The immediate closure of the food service establishment, food
processing establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store or
§ 180-3 FOOD SERVICE AND FOOD PROCESSING § 180-3
180:169
§ 180-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-16, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by
a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or
by both said fine and imprisonment. In addition thereto, such persons may
be enjoined from continuing such violations. Each day upon which such a
violation occurs shall constitute separate violation.
Chapter 184
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 184, Fortune Telling, adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 65, §§ 65.2
and 65.100A of the 1968 Code, as amended, was repealed 2-4-2015
by Ord. No. 3-2015.]
Chapter 191
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 73. Bingo — See Ch. 91.
§ 191-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law of the City of
Geneva, New York."
§ 191-2. Definitions.
supermarket concerned until, in the opinion of the health authority,
no further danger of disease outbreak exists.
(3) Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting
disease.
(4) Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee, of
other employees, and of his and their body discharges.
G. Enforcement interpretation. This chapter shall be enforced by the
health authority in accordance with the interpretations thereof
contained in the compliance provisions of the 1962 Edition of the
United States Public Health Service Food Service Sanitation Ordinance
and Code.
§ 180-3 GENEVA CODE § 191-2
191:170
§ 191-3. Games of chance authorized.
Authorized organizations may, upon the obtainment of a license from the
City Clerk, conduct games of chance within the City of Geneva as provided
in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and as provided further in this
chapter. Such games of chance shall be conducted in accordance with the
general state law and with the rules and regulations of the New York State
Racing and Wagering Board and this chapter.
§ 191-4. Restrictions upon conduct of games of chance.
The conduct of games of chance authorized by this chapter shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
A. Specific terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Any bona fide religious or charitable
organization or bona fide educational or service organization or bona
fide organization of veterans or volunteer firemen, which by its charter,
certificate of incorporation, constitution, or act of the legislature, shall
have among its dominant purposes one or more of the lawful purposes
as defined in § 186 of the General Municipal Law, provided that each
shall operate without profit to its members, and provided that each
such organization has engaged in serving one or more of the lawful
purposes as defined in § 186 of the General Municipal Law for a period
of three years immediately prior to applying for a license under this
chapter and Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
BOARD — New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
CITY — The City of Geneva, New York.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Specific games of chance, in which prizes are
awarded on the basis of a designated winning number or numbers,
color or colors, symbol or symbols determined by chance, but not
including games commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto" which are
controlled under Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and also
not including "slot machines," "bookmaking" and "policy or numbers
games" as defined in § 225.00 of the Penal Law. No game of chance
shall involve wagering of money by one player against another player.
B. Other terms. All other terms used in this chapter shall have, for the
purpose of this chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
§ 186 of the General Municipal Law.
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of this chapter, shall conduct such game
or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting games of
chance a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever,
direct or indirect, except as provided in § 190 of the General Municipal
Law.
§ 191-2 GAMES OF CHANCE § 191-4
191:171
§ 191-5. Incorporation of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
This chapter shall be deemed to include all of the provisions of Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law, except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
B. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or
partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived
from the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment
specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of
chance from other than a supplier licensed by the Board or from
another authorized organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance and of any rental shall
be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $100 in any operation or
conducting of a single game of chance as provided in § 186 of the
General Municipal Law. No single wager shall exceed $10.
F. No series of prizes on any one occasion of games of chance shall
aggregate more than $1,000 as provided in § 186 of the General
Municipal Law.
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization, its
auxiliary or affiliated organization, shall participate in the management
or operation of such game, as set forth in § 195-c of the General
Municipal Law.
H. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play any
game of chance or conduct or assist in the conducting of any game of
chance conducted pursuant to this chapter.
I. No game of chance shall be conducted under any license issued more
often than 12 times in any calendar year. Games shall be conducted only
between the hours of noon and midnight on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday and Thursday and only between the hours of noon on Friday
and 2:00 a.m. Saturday and only between the hours of noon on Saturday
and 2:00 a.m. Sunday. Games of chance on Sunday may be conducted
only between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and midnight.
J. No games of chance shall be conducted on Easter Sunday, Christmas
Day or New Year's Eve.
K. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any such game.
L. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
§ 191-4 GENEVA CODE § 191-5
191:172
and any amendment to the provisions in such article to the extent such
provisions and amending acts are otherwise applicable to games of chance
authorized under this chapter.
§ 191-6. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall exercise control over and supervision of all
games of chance conducted under an appropriately issued license. Such
Department shall have all those powers and duties set forth in Article 9-A of
the General Municipal Law.
Chapter 199
HOSPITALS AND SIMILAR FACILITIES
§ 199-1. License required.
No person shall operate or maintain a private proprietary hospital, private
nursing home, private sanitarium, convalescent home, home for the aged
or for chronic patients or other private proprietary institution within the
city wherein over three human beings are or may receive medical care or
attention and/or nursing care or custodial supervision unless the person
operating such private hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, convalescent
home, home for the aged or for chronic patients or other proprietary
institutions furnishing supervision shall have procured and have in full force
and effect a license to operate such home at a specific address from the
Health Department of the city issued under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 199-2. Application for license.
Application for licenses shall be made at the office of the Health Officer.
Such applications shall be in writing and shall contain such information as
the Health Officer may require and shall be verified by the applicant.
§ 199-3. Inspection of premises.
Upon receipt of such application, the Health Officer shall refer the same
to the Fire Chief and the Enforcement Officer. Inspection of the premises
where said institution is to be conducted shall be made by the Enforcement
Officer and the Fire Chief who shall certify to the Health Officer whether
the premises are safe and proper for the operation of such an institution.
§ 199-4. Issuance of license by Health Officer.
The Health Officer, upon the receipt of the certificate of approval from
the Fire Chief and the Enforcement Officer, shall, if in his opinion, the
applicant is fit and qualified to operate such an institution and the premises
are satisfactory to them, and if, in his judgment, public health, safety and
welfare are not endangered by the operation of such an institution on said
premises, issue a license.
§ 191-5 HOSPITALS AND SIMILAR FACILITIES § 199-5
199:173
§ 199-5. Contents and expiration of licenses.
§ 199-6. License fees.
The fee for licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be $10
per license per annum. If a license is issued on or after July 1 and before
December 31 in any year, the license fee for that period of time shall be 1/2
of the fee herein provided.
§ 199-7. Posting of license.
The license issued by the Health Officer shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the building to which the license applies.
§ 199-8. Right of entry.
The Health Officer, the Enforcement Officer, the Fire Chief or their
subordinates may enter upon any premises for which a license is sought or
for which a license has been issued at any time for the purpose of inspection
and examination.
§ 199-9. Rules and regulations.
A. All licenses shall state the location, name of licensee, the type of the
institution for which the license was issued, date of issuance, date of
expiration, fee paid and the number of rooms to be used for the purpose
so licensed and the legal number of occupants who may be
accommodated therein under such license.
B. All licenses shall automatically expire on the 31st day of December
following the date of issuance, and applications for new licenses shall
be made in the same manner as for the original license except that the
time for filing for said license shall be during the last three months of
the original or existing license.
C. Licenses shall not be transferable either as to person or place.
A. The Health Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to make
necessary rules and regulations to carry out the purpose of this chapter
to protect the public health, safety and welfare, a copy of which rules
and regulations shall be delivered to the applicant upon making
application for license. The applicant shall sign a receipt for such rules
and regulations, which receipt shall be a part of his application.
B. A copy of any new rules or regulations made by the Health Officer shall
be mailed to each person licensed hereunder and a copy of any special
rules or regulations which are deemed necessary in individual cases
shall be delivered either personally or by registered mail.
§ 199-5 GENEVA CODE § 199-10
199:174
§ 199-10. Revocation of license.
The Health Officer may at any time after giving notice to the licensee and an
opportunity to be heard, suspend or revoke any license, if in his judgment,
public health, safety and welfare are not secure by reason of the violation
of any rule or regulation of the Health Officer, promulgated pursuant to the
terms of this chapter or for any other cause, including but not limited to
any of the terms of this chapter or of the State Multiple Residence Law. The
Health Officer shall cause notice of such hearing to be served at least five
days prior to the hearing upon the licensee personally or by registered mail.
§ 199-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
Chapter 202
(RESERVED)
Chapter 206
HUNTING AND TRAPPING
§ 206-1. Hunting and trapping restrictions.
No person shall hunt, or attempt to take deer or any other wildlife with
either firearm or bow and arrow or attempt to take deer or any other
wildlife with any trap or snare device within the city limits.
§ 206-2. Hunting or trapping of Seneca Lake Monster prohibited.
[Added 8-5-2015 by Ord. No. 8-201516]
The hunting, trapping, or cause of harm to the serpent termed the Seneca
Lake Monster or any of its descendants is prohibited. No person shall use
any City facility, including access points to Seneca Lake on City shorelines,
to launch a hunting or trapping party aimed at killing, trapping, or injuring
the Seneca Lake Monster or any of its descendants. Possession of the
carcass of said creatures, or of any live creature meeting this description,
will be considered presumptive evidence of a violation of this section.
§ 206-3. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 26-2 AS
§ 26-3.
§ 199-10 HOSPITALS AND SIMILAR FACILITIES § 206-3
199:175
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 209
IMPROVEMENTS, LOCAL
§ 206-3 GENEVA CODE § 206-3
209:176
ARTICLE I
Assessments for Local Improvements
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 8 of the 1968 Code]
§ 209-1. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement, work or benefit whether done
by the city with its own employees or by contract, the cost of which, or part
thereof, is to be borne by the abutting property or the property benefited,
or its owner.
§ 209-2. Resolution to initiate local improvement.
Upon the recommendation of the City Manager, the City Council may by
resolution provide for the undertaking of a local improvement. The Council
shall by resolution determine initially the property to be benefited by said
local improvement, and shall order a public notice to be published twice
in the official newspaper of the city. The first notice shall be published not
less than 10 days and not more than 30 days prior to the public hearing.
The second notice shall be published at least five days prior to the public
hearing.
§ 209-3. Contents of public notice.
The public notice shall generally describe the nature of the proposed local
improvement, and shall also generally describe the area deemed to be
benefited by said local improvement. The notice shall further specify the
time, date and place of public hearing to be held before the City Council.
§ 209-4. Public hearing.
Before the city shall undertake any project the cost of which, or part
thereof, is to be borne by the abutting property, or the property benefited
or its owner, the City Council shall hold a public hearing after public notice
as hereinabove provided. Upon such hearing, the City Council shall hear
the objections of interested parties, and may adjourn from time to time
to complete such hearing. After such hearing, the City Council may make
such changes, additions or omissions as it deems proper in the proposed
local improvement without the necessity of a further hearing, and may by
resolution direct the commencement of said local improvement either by
city forces or by contract.
§ 209-5. Amount to be borne by property benefited.
The City Council shall, in its resolution authorizing and directing the
undertaking of said local improvement, state the estimated cost of said
improvement and establish the manner and method of determining the
proportionate share of all or part of the cost to be borne by the abutting
§ 209-1 IMPROVEMENTS, LOCAL § 209-5
209:177
property, or the property benefited, and the portion, if any, to be borne by
the city as a whole.
§ 209-6. Report to City Council by City Manager; hearing;
confirmation.
§ 209-7. Financing of local improvements.
A. Upon the completion of any local improvement, the City Manager shall
certify to the City Council the part of the total cost of such
improvement, the amount to be assessed against the abutting property
or the property benefited, with the exception of the property which may
already have paid its proper share of such improvement, which such
property shall be briefly described by name or number, in accordance
with the resolution of the City Council authorizing and directing the
undertaking of said local improvement.
B. Upon receipt of such report, the City Council shall forthwith fix a time
of hearing thereon and shall cause notice thereof to be published at
least twice in the official newspaper of the city. The first notice shall be
published not less than 10 days and not more than 30 days prior to the
public hearing. The second notice shall be published at least five days
prior to the public hearing. The City Council shall, so far as practicable,
cause notice to be mailed to each person appearing on such report at
the time of first publication.
C. Upon such hearing, the City Council shall hear the objections of the
interested parties, and may adjourn from time to time to complete such
hearing. The City Council may alter and amend said report in its
discretion. When the City Council shall deem the report to be correct, it
shall confirm the same.
D. Upon the confirmation of the report, the amount assessed against each
parcel of real property shall become and be a first lien upon such parcel
or real property until fully paid. Every such assessment shall be
collected by the City Comptroller in the same manner as taxes are
collected, and as is hereinafter provided, and the amount thereof shall
be expended only for the purpose of paying for such improvement or of
repaying money borrowed on account of same. Any surplus, however,
remaining after paying for such improvement or repaying money
borrowed on account of same, shall be paid into the capital
improvement fund.
A. Following the confirmation by the City Council of any assessment for
local improvements, the owner or owners of any real estate against
which an assessment is thereby assessed, as hereinbefore provided,
may pay all or any part of such assessment to the City Comptroller at
any time within 30 days after such final assessment and confirmation.
All local improvement assessments remaining unpaid after such period
of 30 days shall be continued and shall remain a lien or liens on the
respective several pieces or parcels of real estate benefited by the
§ 209-5 GENEVA CODE § 209-7
209:178
§ 209-8. New apportionment or assessment.
In case any apportionment or assessment heretofore or hereafter made for
a local improvement shall have been or shall be set aside by any court of this
state having competent jurisdiction, or shall fail or shall have failed through
any irregularity in making or confirming such apportionment or assessment,
it shall be lawful for and be the duty of the City Council forthwith to cause
a new apportionment or assessment, including the interest and expenses of
the former apportionment or assessment, to be made and to be levied and
collected; and such new apportionment and assessment shall have the same
force and effect as though no former apportionment or assessment had been
made.
improvement until the same shall, with interest running from the date
of confirmation, be paid as hereinafter provided.
B. Upon expiration of said period of 30 days, the City Comptroller shall
certify to the City Council the whole amount unpaid upon said
assessments and thereupon the City Council shall determine the
number of semiannual installment payments in which such assessments
be made payable, which in no event shall exceed 20, except that for the
construction of a sewer or water laterals or mains, the number of
semiannual installments in which said assessment may be made
payable shall not exceed 60. If bonds are issued to finance all or part of
such improvement such assessments shall bear the same rate of
interest as such bonds. Otherwise the City Council shall at their
discretion fix the rate of interest on such installments to be computed
from the date of confirmation; which semiannual installment payments
with accrued interest thereon shall be collected in the same manner as
city taxes during the months of January and May in each year, and every
installment with accrued interest shall be a lien upon the real estate
and upon all the property against which the same was assessed as in
the case of other taxes and assessments.
C. Such assessments may be paid in full at any time prior to maturity with
accrued interest from the date of confirmation to the date of payment at
the rate of interest as fixed by the City Council. [Amended by Ord. No.
70-6, eff. 3-4-1970]
§ 209-7 IMPROVEMENTS, LOCAL § 209-8
209:179
Chapter 215
LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS
§ 209-8 GENEVA CODE § 209-8
215:180
ARTICLE I
Auctioneers and Auctions
§ 215-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTIONEER — Any person selling or offering for sale for himself or for
another person at public auction, any goods, wares or merchandise, real or
personal property of any description except as hereinafter provided.
§ 215-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or place before the public any
announcement that he conducts the business of auctioneer with the city,
or to sell or offer for sale or permit to be sold or disposed of at auction
within the corporate limits of the city any goods, wares or merchandise, real
or personal property of any description, without first having obtained and
paid for and having in full force and effect a license therefor as hereinafter
provided.
§ 215-3. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall apply to judicial sales or sales by executors
or administrators, by assignees or their attorneys under deeds of
assignment, by lienors or by public officers engaged in the discharge of
their official duties as such; and further provided that any person may sell at
auction his own property on premises owned or occupied by him without a
license, which property was not purchased originally for purposes of resale
only.
§ 215-4. Application for license.
Every person desiring to procure a license as herein provided, shall file with
the City Clerk of the city a written application upon a blank form prepared
and furnished by the city. Such application shall be signed by the applicant
and shall contain:
A. The name and business and residence address of the applicant.
B. His previous employment.
C. Whether he has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or a felony, and
if so what offense, when and in what court.
D. Whether he has either alone or with someone else ever engaged in the
business of auctioneer and if so when and where.
E. The length of time for which the license is desired.
§ 215-1 LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS § 215-5
215:181
§ 215-5. Investigation by Police Department.
When an application is filed, an investigation shall be made by the Police
Department to ascertain whether the applicant is of good character and
repute. The Chief of Police shall furnish any information derived from such
investigation accompanied by recommendation as to whether a license
should be granted or refused.
§ 215-6. Bond.
§ 215-7. Issuance of license.
Upon the filing of the application, bond and information as provided in
the previous sections, the City Manager may upon his approval of such
application and payment to the City Clerk of the license fee hereinafter
provided, issue to the applicant a license to engage in the business of
auctioneering. No license shall be refused except for a specific reason and
for the protection of the public safety, good order and morals. All licenses
shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state
clearly the dates of issuance and expiration of the license, the fee paid and
the name and address of the licensee. No applicant to whom a license has
been refused shall make further application until a period of at least three
months has elapsed since the last previous rejection, unless he can show
that the reason for such rejection no longer exists.
§ 215-8. License fee. [Amended by Ord. No. 82-9, eff. 4-7-1982]
The license fee for an auctioneer shall be as follows: $100 a year, or for
a short-term license $25 per day; provided, however, that to any person
who maintains within the city an auction house and has and conducts a
business for the sale of household goods at auction a license may be issued
for $20 a year. No license shall be used by any other person other than the
original licensee, and any holder of such license who permits it to be used
by another person and any person who uses such license granted to another
person shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
A. Such application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit or payment
bond with sufficient sureties in the sum of $2,500, which must be
approved by the City Attorney, and conditioned for the faithful
observation of the laws of the State of New York and this chapter and all
other applicable local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the
city.
B. Any person aggrieved by the action of the licensed auctioneer shall
have the right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or
damages, or both.
C. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 90 days
after the expiration of the license.
§ 215-5 GENEVA CODE § 215-9
215:182
§ 215-9. Revocation of license.
Any license issued under this article may be revoked by the City Manager,
after hearing at which the licensee is entitled to be heard and of which
hearing he has been given notice.
§ 215-10. Misrepresentation.
No auctioneer shall:
§ 215-11. When license shall be refused.
A license shall not be granted to any person who has been convicted of
violating the laws of the State of New York or any ordinance of the city
relating to auctions and auctioneers, or for fraud or deceit in the conduct of
auctions.
§ 215-12. Auctioneer not to delegate power.
No person having a license granted under this article shall delegate his
license to any clerk, partner or person; but the privilege given shall be
personal to the person named in the license and shall be exercised by him
alone.
A. Make any false representation as to the character, quality, condition,
previous history, value or ownership of any property offered for sale.
B. Substitute any other article for the article sold to the bidder.
C. Bid in any property offered for sale by himself, and no person shall act
as an accomplice or "capper" for the purpose of making mock bids at
any auction.
D. Employ a bellman, crier, musical instrument, public address system or
other audible means of attracting the attention of passersby, other than
a sign or flag.
E. Conduct any auction sale for a transient merchant or other person, firm
or corporation, who or which has not procured a license required by
law, or whose license has expired or been revoked.
F. Refuse to exhibit his license to any police officer upon demand at the
place where an auction is being conducted.
G. Receive for sale by auction or sell by auction any goods, wares or
merchandise from or to any minor, knowing him to be such.
H. Sell or exhibit for sale at public auction within the city any property
upon any sidewalk or in any public street without the written
permission of the City Manager.
I. Sell or expose for sale at auction any personal property, goods, wares or
merchandise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 215-9 LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS § 215-13
215:183
§ 215-13. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued under this article shall expire on the last day of
December next after their issuance, except all short-term licenses shall
expire on the day specified therein.
§ 215-13 GENEVA CODE § 215-13
215:184
ARTICLE II
Barbers
§ 215-14. Practice of barbering.
No person shall engage in the practice of barbering in the city unless
licensed by the Health Officer pursuant to this article.
§ 215-15. Definition.
§ 215-16. Licenses, application for.
A. For the purpose of this article, all persons who for compensation,
engage in any one or any combination of the following practices
performed upon the head or neck of the human body for cosmetic
purposes and not for treatment of disease or physical or mental
ailments, are engaged in the practice of barbering:
(1) Shaving, trimming the beard or cutting hair.
(2) Giving facial or scalp massage with oils, creams, lotions or other
preparations either by hand or mechanical appliances pertaining to
barbering.
(3) Singeing, shampooing or drying the hair or applying hair tonic.
(4) Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptic powders, oils, clays or
lotion to face, scalp or neck.
B. The above definition shall not be construed to include the following
classes of persons: licensed physicians, osteopaths, nurses, dentists,
optometrists and those engaged as licensed physiotherapists,
cosmetologists or hair dressers, and this article shall not be construed
to affect the practice of hairdressing or cosmetology as it is now
conducted in beauty shops within the commonly accepted meaning of
such terms or the operation of beauty shops or beauty culture schools.
A. Any person desiring a barber's license to engage in the practice of
barbering in the city shall apply in writing to the Health Officer and
shall submit therewith a certificate containing the following
information:
(1) Date of issuance, number and expiration date of New York State
barber's license of applicant.
(2) That the applicant is free of any infectious or communicable
disease.
(3) That the applicant's state license is in full force and effect and has
not been suspended or revoked.
B. Any person desiring a temporary barber's license to engage in the
practice of barbering in the city shall apply in writing to the Health
§ 215-14 LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS § 215-16
215:185
§ 215-17. Issuance of licenses.
§ 215-18. Regulations.
All persons licensed pursuant to this article shall conform to the following
regulations:
Officer and shall supply the same information as required in Subsection
A herein except that the license certified to shall be a temporary
license.
C. Any person desiring an apprentice barber's license to engage in the
practice of barbering in the city shall apply in writing to the Health
Officer and shall supply the same information as required in Subsection
A herein except that the license referred to therein shall be a certificate
of registration issued by the Secretary of State.
A. Upon the determination of the Health Officer that the facts certified in
the application are true and upon the payment of the fee prescribed by
this article, the Health Officer shall issue a license to practice barbering
to such person, which license shall expire on the next following 31st day
of December in the odd-numbered years.
B. Upon the determination of the Health Officer that the facts certified in
the application are true and upon payment of the fee prescribed by this
article, the Health Officer shall issue a barber's temporary license to
such person, which license shall expire 30 days after date of issue.
C. Upon the determination of the Health Officer that the facts certified in
the application are true and upon payment of the fee prescribed by this
article, the Health Officer shall issue a barber's apprentice license to
such person, which license shall expire on the next following 31st day of
December in the odd-numbered years, which apprentice license shall
be issued on the express condition that such person shall work at the
practice of barbering only as an employee under the personal direction
and supervision of a licensed barber.
D. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to revocation
as hereinafter provided, and a record of all licenses so issued shall be
kept in the office of the Public Health Department.
A. Shall not practice barbering while having a communicable disease.
B. Shall not habitually use a habit forming drug.
C. Shall not be an habitual drunkard.
D. Shall not be guilty of immoral or unprofessional conduct in the
prosecution of his business.
E. Shall not use fraud or bribery in securing a license.
F. Shall not be guilty of gross malpractice or gross incompetence.
§ 215-16 GENEVA CODE § 215-18
215:186
§ 215-19. Revocation and suspension of licenses.
§ 215-20. Unlicensed person not to be employed.
No person employing barbers or apprentices in the business of barbering
in the city shall employ a barber or an apprentice who is not licensed to
engage in said business in the city in accordance with this article.
§ 215-21. Prohibited use.
The use of any room for barbering and beauty culture which is also used
for residential or business purposes (except the sale of hair tonic, lotions,
G. Shall not use a room for the practice of barbering not permitted by law.
H. Shall post and keep posted in a conspicuous place in the room where he
practices barbering the license required by this chapter.
I. Shall obey all the rules and regulations of the Public Health Law and
Sanitary Code of the State of New York and of the Health Officer of the
city relating to barber shops and ordinances of the City Council relating
to the practice of barbering.
J. Shall not engage in the practice of barbering on the first day of the
week commonly called "Sunday."
K. The clear interior view of every room in which the practice of barbering
is carried on shall in no way be obstructed by a screen, nontransparent
glass, shade, blind, door, shutters, merchandise or other articles during
hours of business.
L. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a barber shop, barber
school or barber college within the city.
M. Every such establishment and each room used for barber purposes shall
be provided with hot and cold running water; a wash basin of
nonabsorbent material properly trapped and sewer connected shall be
provided for use only for barber purposes.
N. All shades shall be up after working hours in every establishment and
each room used for barber purposes.
A. The Health Officer may revoke any licenses issued or renewed by him
pursuant to this article summarily in his discretion upon satisfactory
proof being filed and without a hearing, that the holder of such license
has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article
or of the Sanitary Code of the State of New York relating to barber
shops.
B. The Health Officer may after written notice to the licensee and an
opportunity to be heard, revoke or suspend any license issued or
renewed by him pursuant to this article or of the Sanitary Code of the
State of New York.
§ 215-18 LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS § 215-21
215:187
creams, cutlery, toilet articles, cigars, tobacco, confectionery and such
commodities as are used and sold in barber shops) is prohibited unless
a substantial partition of ceiling height separates the portion used for
residential or business purposes.
§ 215-22. Fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 82-16, eff. 4-7-1981]
Fees for licenses which shall be paid to the Public Health Department are
as follows:
§ 215-23. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
A. Barber's license: $5.
B. Barber's apprentice license: $5.
C. Barber's temporary license: $5.
D. Renewal of barber's license and barber's apprentice license: $5.
§ 215-21 GENEVA CODE § 215-23
215:188
ARTICLE III
Hairdressing and Cosmetology
§ 215-24. License required.
No person shall operate or maintain a hairdressing or cosmetology shop or
establishment or engage in the practice of hairdressing or cosmetology in
the city without having obtained and having in full force and effect a license
from the Health Officer issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 215-25. Definitions.
§ 215-26. Application for license.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated in this section:
COSMETOLOGIST — Any person who with hands or mechanical or
electric apparatus or appliance or by the use of cosmetic preparations,
antiseptics, tonics, lotions or creams engages for compensation in any
one or any combination of the practice of massaging, cleansing,
stimulating, manipulating, exercising, beautifying or doing other
similar work on the scalp, face, neck, arms, bust or upper part of the
body of removing superfluous hair by the use of electricity or otherwise,
of any female, or manicuring the nails of a male or female, or massaging
the scalp, face or neck of a male or female.
HAIRDRESSER — Any person who, except while engaged in
demonstrating the use of any machine and/or process used, or designed
to be used in the practice of either or both of the professions of
cosmetology or hairdressing, engages for compensation in any one or
any combination of the practice of cutting, curling, trimming, singeing,
bleaching, coloring, waving or doing other similar work on the hair
of any female, or cleansing or treating the hair or scalp of a male or
female.
HAIRDRESSING OR COSMETOLOGY SHOP OR ESTABLISHMENT —
All premises upon which the business of hairdressing or cosmetology
is practiced or carried on, or the portion of such premises so used,
or wherein any person represents to the public that the occupation or
business of hairdressing or cosmetology is conducted or carried on.
B. The above definitions shall not be construed to include the following
classes: licensed physicians, osteopaths, nurses, dentists, optometrists
and those engaged as physiotherapists or barbers, and this article shall
not be construed to affect the practice of barbering as it is now
conducted in the barber shops within the city within the commonly
accepted meaning of such terms or in the operation of such barber
shops.
A. Any person desiring to engage in the practice of hairdressing or
cosmetology in the city shall make application therefor to the Health
§ 215-24 LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS § 215-26
215:189
§ 215-27. Issuance of licenses.
Officer and shall submit therewith a certificate containing the following
information:
(1) Date of issuance, number and expiration date of New York State
hairdresser's and/or cosmetologist's license of applicant.
(2) That the applicant is free of any infectious or communicable
disease.
(3) That the applicant's state license is in full force and effect and has
not been suspended or revoked.
B. Any person desiring a temporary hairdresser's or cosmetologist's
license to practice hairdressing or cosmetology in the city shall apply in
writing to the Health Officer and shall supply the same information as
required in Subsection A herein except that the license certified to shall
be a temporary license.
C. Any person desiring to operate or maintain a hairdressing or
cosmetology establishment in the city shall make application for a
license therefor to the Health Officer and shall submit therewith a
certificate containing the same information as contained in Subsection
A herein except that the license referred to shall be a state license to
operate and maintain a hairdressing or cosmetology establishment.
A. Upon the determination of the Health Officer that the facts certified in
the application are true and upon the payment of the fee prescribed by
this article, the Health Officer shall issue a license to practice
hairdressing or cosmetology to such person, which license shall expire
on the 31st day of December after date of issue.
B. Upon the determination of the Health Officer that the facts certified in
the application are true and upon payment of the fee prescribed by this
article, the Health Officer shall issue a temporary license for the
practice of hairdressing or cosmetology to such person, which license
shall expire 30 days after date of issue.
C. Upon the determination of the Health Officer that the facts certified in
the application are true and upon payment of the fee prescribed by this
article, the Health Officer shall issue to such person a license for the
maintenance and operation of a hairdressing or cosmetology
establishment or shop, for which a permit has been obtained pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 350 entitled "Zoning," which license shall
expire on the 31st day of December after date of issue.
D. Renewal of licenses shall be issued under the same terms and
conditions as hereinabove stated.
§ 215-26 GENEVA CODE § 215-28
215:190
§ 215-28. Regulations.
All persons licensed pursuant to this article shall conform to the following
regulations:
§ 215-29. Revocation of licenses.
The Health Officer may revoke any license issued pursuant to this article
summarily in his discretion, upon satisfactory proof being filed with him that
the holder of such license has been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this article or the Sanitary Code or Public Health Law of the
State of New York.
§ 215-30. Fees for licenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 82-14, eff.
4-7-1982; Ord. No. 82-20, eff. 5-5-1982]
A. Shall not practice hairdressing or cosmetology while having a
communicable disease.
B. Shall not habitually use a habit forming drug.
C. Shall not be an habitual drunkard.
D. Shall not be guilty of immoral or unprofessional conduct in the
prosecution of his or her business.
E. Shall not use fraud or bribery in securing license.
F. Shall not be guilty of gross malpractice or gross incompetence.
G. Shall post and keep posted in a conspicuous place in the room where he
or she practices hairdressing or cosmetology the licenses required by
this article.
H. Shall obey all of the rules and regulations of the Public Health Law and
Sanitary Code of the State of New York relating to the practice of
hairdressing or cosmetology and maintenance or operation of
hairdressing or cosmetology establishments or shops, and all
ordinances of the City Council relative thereto.
I. Shall not maintain or operate a hairdressing or cosmetology
establishment or shop in which any person practices hairdressing or
cosmetology without having procured a license pursuant to this article.
J. Shall not engage in the practice of hairdressing or cosmetology on
Sunday except on works of necessity or charity as provided in § 5 of the
General Business Law.
A. Hairdresser and/or cosmetologist license: $5.
B. Hairdresser and/or cosmetologist temporary license: $5.
§ 215-28 LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS § 215-30
215:191
§ 215-31. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
C. Hairdressing and/or cosmetology establishment or shop license: $5;
which fee shall cover the right to maintain such shop or establishment
and one proprietor, the fee for each additional proprietor to be $5.
§ 215-30 GENEVA CODE § 215-31
215:192
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Occupations
§ 215-32. Licenses required.
No person shall carry on or engage in any of the trades, occupations or
businesses hereinafter specified within the city without first procuring a
license from the City Manager.
§ 215-33. Exhibition of license.
Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall keep the
license issued to him and shall upon request or demand show or exhibit
same to any police office or other lawful authority.
§ 215-34. Trades, occupations and businesses specified.
The trades, occupations and businesses for which licenses are required
under this article and the fees required therefor are as follows:
A. Bill posting and advertising. The conducting of the business of bill
posting, bill distributing or sign advertising, including the act of going
upon any of the public streets or into residences or places of business
for the purpose of circulating pamphlets, circulars or advertisements of
any nature whatsoever, which are subject to regulation by law, except
notices required by law.
(1) Before a license shall be issued under this subsection, the licensee
shall file with the City Clerk a bond in the penal sum of $250 with
surety or sureties to be approved by the City Manager conditioned
for the faithful observance of all applicable ordinances of the city.
(2) The fee for the aforesaid license shall be $15 per year, except that
for any license issued after July 1 in any year, the fee shall be 1/2 of
the above amount.
(3) A short-term license may be granted by the City Manager under
this subsection, without bond, and for the fee of $1 per day.
B. Junk dealers. In considering any application for a license under this
subsection, the City Manager shall consider the general welfare of the
city and the proposed location within the city where the licensee
intends to carry on the business of junk dealer, and the City Manager
may refuse to grant such license in any case where he deems the
issuance of such license would be contrary to public interests and the
general welfare. The fee for the aforementioned license shall be $5 per
year.
§ 215-32 LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS § 215-35
215:193
§ 215-35. Expiration of licenses.
All licenses issued under this article shall expire December 31 after date of
issue, except that all short-term licenses shall expire on the date specified
therein.
§ 215-36. Revocation of license.
Any license granted under this article may be revoked by the City Manager
for proper cause, and the right of revocation is hereby expressly reserved.
§ 215-37. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
§ 215-35 GENEVA CODE § 215-37
215:194
ARTICLE V
Scrap Processors
[Added by Ord. No. 77-2, eff. 4-6-1977]
§ 215-38. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SCRAP METAL PROCESSING FACILITY — An establishment engaged
primarily in the purchase, processing and shipment of ferrous and/or
nonferrous scrap, the end product of which is the production of raw
material for remelting purposes for steel mills, foundries, smelters, refiners
and similar users.
SCRAP PROCESSOR — Any person, association, partnership or corporation
operating and maintaining a scrap metal processing facility.
§ 215-39. License required.
License. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or
corporation to engage in business as a scrap processor unless such scrap
processor shall have complied with the provisions of this article and
obtained a license to do so from the City Manager. Each license shall expire
on June 30 of the year next ensuing, except that a license issued between
January 1, 1977, to June 30, 1977, shall expire on June 30, 1977.
§ 215-40. License application.
Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the City
Manager, by the person to be licensed, on forms to be furnished by said City
Manager. The application shall contain such information as to name and
address of the applicant and such other information as said City Manager
may reasonably require.
§ 215-41. License fee.
The annual fee for a license under this article shall be $75, except the
license fee for a license issued between January 1, 1977, to June 30, 1977,
shall be $37.50.
§ 215-42. Records.
A. Such scrap processor shall record (i) each purchase of any pig or pigs of
metal, bronze or brass castings or parts thereof, sprues or gates or
parts thereof, utility wire or brass car journals, or of metal beer kegs,
and (ii) each purchase of iron, steel and/or nonferrous scrap for a price
of $50 or more, and preserve such record for a period of three years,
which record shall show the date of purchase, name of seller, his
residence address by street, number, city, village or town, or by such
description as will reasonably locate the seller, the type and quantity of
§ 215-38 LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS § 215-42
215:195
§ 215-43. Penalties for offenses.
either purchase (i) or (ii); and the scrap processor shall cause such
record to be signed by the seller or his agent. It shall be unlawful for
any seller to refuse to furnish such information or to furnish incorrect
or incomplete information.
B. Such records shall be available for inspection by the Police Department
of the state or city.
A. Each violation of this article by a scrap processor shall be a violation
subject to a fine of not more than $200, unless such violation shall be
willful, in which event it shall be a misdemeanor except, however, the
scrap processor shall not be liable for any violation of this article by a
seller, his agent, or a purported seller or agent.
B. Each violation of this article by a seller or his agent shall be a
misdemeanor.
§ 215-42 GENEVA CODE § 215-43
215:196
Chapter 218
LITTERING
§ 218-1. Littering prohibited; penalty. [Amended 7-16-1996 by Ord.
No. 5-96]
§ 218-2. Additional penalties. [Added by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of the provisions of this chapter at the Chamber of Commerce
Lake Site and the property immediately adjacent thereto on the east and
commonly known as the Gil Waltz Memorial property shall be punishable
by a mandatory, minimum fine of $50 and a maximum fine not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 227
MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS
§ 227-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Multichannel Service Provider
Regulatory Ordinance for the City of Geneva, New York."
§ 227-2. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be construed in accordance with applicable federal and
state laws and rules governing multichannel service practices which
specifically include the operation and provision of a cable television system.
A. No person shall throw, cast, drop, put or place, or having accidentally
dropped, failed to pick up any bag, bottle, bottle cap, box, container,
garbage, paper, piece of paper, wrapper, cigarette or cigarette
container or cigarette filter or any other trash or litter, in or upon any
public park, place, playground, cemetery, fountain, street or building,
except in receptacles provided for such purposes.
B. Visitors wishing to utilize any public park within the city to include the
Geneva Lakefront area shall be responsible for removing all trash
brought into the above designated areas. It is the intent of this section
that visitors shall adopt a carry-in/carry-out policy and that utilization of
trash receptacles located in the park areas are for the purpose of
collection of small objects and not for the purpose of collection of
garbage and refuse.
C. Violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $100 or more than $500 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or by both said fine and imprisonment.
§ 215-43 LITTERING § 227-2
218:197
Moreover, with respect to the operation and provision of a cable television
system, this chapter shall be construed in accordance with any applicable
rules and regulations of the New York State Public Service Commission or
any successor agency or authority.
§ 227-3. Scope.
This chapter shall apply within the geographical limit of the city, including
any areas subsequently annexed by the city, unless state law prescribes
otherwise, or unless state law in some fashion restricts or alters the effect
of this chapter to a subsequently annexed area of the city.
§ 227-4. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and where not otherwise inconsistent with
the context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this
section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense
include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory and not merely
directive.
ABANDONED CALLS — Those telephone calls that are connected to an
MCS provider's general information number, without being attended by a
representative of the MCS provider, or by a device capable of problem and/
or inquiry resolution (e.g., placing a service request, placing a work order,
directing calls to the appropriate personnel, or the like).
ABANDONMENT — The cessation of use by an MCS Provider or any
portion, component, facility or equipment of its multichannel system in the
city for a period of greater than 60 consecutive days.
ACCESS CHANNEL — A government, education or public channel which is
carried on a multichannel system, but which is not part of any institutional
network. "Access channel" also means a channel dedicated in whole or
in part for programming that is not originated, produced or controlled by
an MCS provider unless the MCS provider is delegated as the channel
administrator or operator, including but not limited to public, educational
or governmental access programming (i.e., PEG access) or leased access
programming.
ACCESS CORPORATION — The nonprofit corporation or other entity which
may be designated by the city and operated for the purpose of coordinating
the provision of public, educational and governmental access programming
and providing other services within a franchise area.
ACTIVATED CHANNEL — A channel engineered at the headend of the
multichannel system for the provision of services generally available to
residential subscribers of the multichannel system, regardless of whether
such services actually are provided, including any channel designated for
governmental, educational or public use.
§ 227-2 GENEVA CODE § 227-4
227:198
ADMINISTRATOR or MCS ADMINISTRATOR — The individual designated
by the city who will act as the technical and administrative liaison or
representative of the city and the subscribers and the public in the city
in matters dealing with customer or subscriber service, repair and
maintenance of the system, adequacy of signal quality, system reliability,
service areas, reception problems, compliance and performance reviews,
rate increase requests, if applicable, and all other matters affecting or
concerning the administration of a franchise agreement or other
agreement, license or permit granted pursuant to this chapter.
A. Pursuant to this chapter, the MCS administrator may be designated as
the point of contact for all matters relating to a franchise or other
agreement, license or permit, or a franchisee or other MCS provider, or
the signatory to such other agreement or the holder of such permit.
B. If designated, unless specifically directed otherwise by the City Council,
it shall at all times be presumed that the MCS administrator is acting as
the city's designee and under the city's direction.
AFFILIATE — Another person who owns or controls, is owned or
controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with such
person.
AGREEMENT or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT or OTHER AGREEMENT
or OPERATING PERMIT or PERMIT OR LICENSE — The means and
document of authorization granted by the city to construct, operate,
maintain, repair, replace, upgrade and provide service over a
multichannel system as is permissible under law, together with the
written proposals for a franchise, other agreement, license or permit or
other agreement, permit or license, and any appendices thereto, to the
extent expressly incorporated therein and all amendments or renewals
thereof, including proposals for renewals. All of these terms means
the authority by which the multichannel service provider is authorized
and permitted to construct, operate, maintain, repair, replace, upgrade
and provide service over a multichannel system. The particular type
and scope of franchise, other agreement, license or permit, and any
distinction between an agreement or permit or license, may be
dependent upon the scope of authority the city has over a given type of
operator or provider of multichannel service as permitted by law.
A LA CARTE or MENU-DRIVEN or MENU-DRIVEN CABLE or MENUDRIVEN
PROGRAM/SERVICE — The process whereby the MCS
provider offers multichannel services via the multichannel system in
a format that allows the subscriber to select and be charged for
multichannel services on either a per channel, per program, or per
event basis. Menu-driven cable allows the subscriber to create his or
her own service tier(s) or cluster(s), and the opportunity to change the
composition of his or her tier(s) or cluster(s) on a periodic basis.
ALTERNATIVE USER CHARGE — A charge used in place of a franchise
fee or its functional equivalent that is paid by an MCS provider. An
alternative user charge shall not be based on an MCS provider's gross
§ 227-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-4
227:199
annual revenues (as is the case in a franchise fee, or other agreement,
license or permit fee), but shall be based on the value of the city
property that an MCS provider uses to construct, maintain and operate
its multichannel system.
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application or proposal to the
city for a license or franchise, other agreement, license or permit
(where required) to operate a multichannel system under the terms and
conditions set forth in this chapter, and any state regulations.
APPLICATION or PROPOSAL — Synonymous for the purposes of this
chapter. An "application" or "proposal" means the process by which
the applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted
a license or franchise, other agreement, license or permit (where
required) for all, or a part, of the city. An application or proposal
includes all written documentation and verbal statements and
representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to
the City Council concerning the construction, rendering of services,
maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to the proposed
multichannel system.
ASSIGNMENT or TRANSFER — Any transfer of a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, in whole or in part, whether by sale,
assignment, lease or other form of alienation or change in operational
or managerial control.
AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT — Equipment supplied by the MCS provider
(such as a converter, remote control unit or device, digital tuner or
input selector switch), which is used to enhance or assist in the
reception or provision of multichannel service.
BASIC CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE — Any service tier which
includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and
any public, educational and government access channels. The term
"basic cable television service" necessarily includes any service tier
or programming service required under the provisions of the Cable
Television Consumer Protection Act of 1992.
CABLE ACT or CCPA — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984,
as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection Act of 1992
and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, all of which are amendments
to the Communications Act of 1934.
CABLE CHANNEL or CABLE TELEVISION CHANNEL — A portion of
the electromagnetic or light frequency spectrum used in a cable system
which is capable of delivering a television channel (as "television
channel" is defined by the FCC by regulation).
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who:
Provides cable television service over a cable system and directly
or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such
cable system; or
(1)
§ 227-4 GENEVA CODE § 227-4
227:200
CABLE SERVICE —
CABLE SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM — A facility
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide
cable service which includes video, voice or data programming, and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city. However, such
terms do not include the following:
CHANNEL —
Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
(2)
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service; and
(1)
Subscriber interaction, if any, or other programming which is
required for the selection of such video programming service.
(2)
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more broadcast stations;
(1)
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple
unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management
unless such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way;
(2)
II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility
shall be considered a cable system [other than for purposes of
Section 621(c) of the Cable Act — shall be considered a cable
system [other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act
— codified at 47 USC 541] to the extent such facility is used in
the transmission of video, voice or data programming or service
directly to subscribers; or
(3)
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility.
(4)
A band or group of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum,
or any other means of transmission (including, without limitation,
optical fibers or any other means now available or that may become
available), which has the technical ability to carry a video signal
in the National Television Systems Committee (NTSC) or similar
format, or in any format devised or approved in the future by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), or an audio, voice or
data signal. All video channels shall include their vertical blanking
intervals, all other video components, all aural components,
including subcarriers, and all closed-captioning intended for
reception by the hearing impaired and others. Such shall be
transmitted and provided to subscribers on the multichannel
system, unless the operator deletes them in accordance with FCC,
copyright and other applicable rules.
(1)
§ 227-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-4
227:201
CHARGE — A one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the
subscriber, and which is associated with the installation, maintenance,
service or repair of the multichannel service.
CITY — The City of Geneva, New York.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council for the City of Geneva, New York
which is the legislative body for the City of Geneva, New York. For
purposes of clarification, the "City Council" or "city" is the franchising
authority for the City of Geneva, New York.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Geneva, New York.
COLLECTION CHARGE — A charge or fee assessed on a customer or
subscriber by an MCS provider for efforts at collecting, or attempting
to collect, a past due and/or delinquent account.
COLLECTION CHARGE — A charge or fee imposed on a customer or
subscriber by an MCS provider for such provider's efforts at collecting,
or attempting to collect, a past due and/or delinquent account.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY
IMPRACTICABLE — The same meaning in this chapter and any
franchise agreement or other agreement, license or permit as is defined
and applied under the United States' Uniform Commercial Code (UCC).
COMPLAINT — Any verbal or written claim of dissatisfaction with
the multichannel service, other communications services or operations
of the franchisee or other MCS provider that are permitted to be
regulated under this chapter, including but not limited to matters of
signal quality and billing, that are made by a person to either the
franchisee or other MCS provider or the MCS administrator, and which
requests or requires corrective action by the franchisee or other MCS
provider to its multichannel services, other communications services
or operations over the multichannel system, or to any portion of the
system, or any necessary investigation subsequent to a service call,
research and/or additional service call or work activity, such as the
delivery or replacement of a remote control device, converter or other
equipment, as may be undertaken by a franchisee or other MCS
provider, its employees or agents.
Where appropriate and feasible, the MCS provider may employ
signal enhancing technologies, such as ghost-canceling or audioleveling.
The franchisee or other MCS provider may delete signal
enhancing technologies from the broadcast signal, if instead the
franchisee or other MCS provider employs such enhancements at
its system headend or hub. "Channel" shall also means discrete
segments of bandwidth reserved for the provision of multichannel
service, including but not limited to data transmissions and other
communications services, even if a different bandwidth is used than
that used to provide video programming.
(2)
§ 227-4 GENEVA CODE § 227-4
227:202
COMPLETE or COMPLETION —
With respect to any construction, reconstruction, rebuilding or
upgrading of the system means that in each instance:
Attachment strand has been put in place for aerially serviced
areas and all needed cable has been lashed to said strand; or
(a)
In areas serviced underground, that all cable has been placed
correctly in trenches, the trenches have been refilled, all road
disturbed surfaces have been restored and all landscaping
restoration has been completed as required.
(b)
"Complete" or "Completion" further means that all amplifier
housings and modules have been installed (including modules
for return path signals if bidirectional activation has been
proposed or committed to);
(c)
That primary and backup/standby power supplies have been
installed and operate properly;
(d)
That all bonding and grounding has been completed; that
construction or reconstruction of the headends or hubs has
been completed and all necessary processing equipment has
been installed therein; and
(e)
That any and all other construction or reconstruction
necessary for the multichannel system to deliver multichannel
service to subscribers has been completed, including the initial
installation, or in a rebuild or upgrade of the system, the
replacement of drops to each and every subscriber unit passed
if such is needed or proposed, pursuant to the plans,
specifications, representations and commitments submitted to
and approved or accepted by the city.
(f)
(1)
Before connecting new or technologically upgraded service to any
subscriber, the franchisee or other MCS provider shall conduct
and complete proof of performance tests on each new or
technologically upgraded portion of the multichannel system, and
shall demonstrate to the city's satisfaction compliance with the
FCC's technical standards. Multichannel services provided to
segments of less than the entire multichannel system will be
activated when the proof of performance is completed and never
before.
(2)
Any significant construction, reconstruction, upgrade or rebuild
of any portion of the multichannel system will not be considered
complete until proof of performance tests have been conducted on
such segment (or in the case of the entire multichannel system, on
all segments of the multichannel system), in compliance with the
signal quality requirements of the FCC's technical standards. Any
performance characteristics of any segment which are found not
(3)
§ 227-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-4
227:203
CONSUMER — See "subscriber."
CSR — Customer or subscriber service representative.
CUSTOMER — A subscriber or user of the services and/or facilities of
the multichannel system provided by an MCS provider.
DIMINUTION OF SIGNALS — Any partial loss, or visible degradation,
of multichannel service or other communications services (under
normal operating conditions), including the partial loss or degradation
or disruption of picture, sound, voice or data on one or more channels,
regardless of the duration of such degradation or disruption. With
respect to multichannel services, diminution of signal may be detected
by the presence of snow, lines, bars, ghosting or any other objectionable
and visually discernible disruption or interference, or other
manifestation not contained within the signal received by the MCS
provider, or prior to its introduction or entry into the system, which
leads to or causes the unusable, inconsistent, erratic or unreliable
provision of services. As diminution of signals can occur even when the
system is in compliance with FCC technical standards, the subscriber
shall be the determiner of whether a diminution of signals is being
experienced, so long as the manifestation is visually discernible without
magnification, other than eye glasses.
DISASTER EMERGENCY — An imminent, impending or actual natural
or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety or welfare
of the residents of the city is threatened. A disaster emergency (by
illustration) may include a severe climatic or meteorological storm of
any kind, dam failure, flood, tornado, hazardous waste infiltration, fire,
petroleum, explosion or aircraft crash.
DOWNGRADE — A change in the level of a subscriber's multichannel
service from a more comprehensive level of multichannel service (in
terms of services or channels provided), to a less comprehensive level
of multichannel service (in terms of services or channels provided).
to comply with said technical standards must have been corrected
before construction is deemed complete.
The term "completion," in relation to the construction or
reconstruction, upgrade or rebuild does not include marketing
and installation of subscriber service. Furthermore, construction,
reconstruction, upgrade or rebuild shall not be deemed complete
unless and until all customers or subscribers in any portion or
area being constructed, reconstructed, upgraded or rebuilt are
able to receive all multichannel services offered, whether or not
individual services or levels of service are subscribed to. Further,
construction, reconstruction, upgrade or rebuild shall not be
deemed complete until the wreck out or removal of the old
segments of the multichannel system has been completed to the
reasonable satisfaction of the city.
(4)
§ 227-4 GENEVA CODE § 227-4
227:204
EASEMENT — Any public easement or other compatible use created
by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes
or any other purpose whatsoever, including cable television, or any
multichannel service. Easement shall also include a private easement
used for the provision of cable service or any other multichannel
service.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and/or such other
federal regulatory agency as now or in the future may have jurisdiction
to oversee MCS providers.
FCC RULES — The rules and regulations adopted from time to time by
the FCC, pursuant to the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or
other applicable federal law.
FCC TECHNICAL STANDARDS — The technical standards of the
Federal Communications Commission (e.g., as set forth in Part 76,
Subpart K (Technical Standards) of the FCC's Rules, 76 CFR 76.601 et
seq., as amended from time to time.)
FIBER CABLE or FIBER OPTIC CABLE OR FIBER — Very thin and
pliable cylinders, or strands of glass or plastic, or any future functional
equivalent, used to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies.
FRANCHISE — The initial authorization or subsequent renewal granted
by the city in order for a person to construct, operate and/or maintain a
franchised MCS system in all, or part, of the city.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The separate contract by which the city
grants an MCS provider the right to operate a franchised multichannel
system within all, or a part, of the city, in accordance with the city's
franchising authority. A franchise, other agreement, license or permit
may be, and can be expected to be, different in scope and content from
other permissible grants of authority, according to applicable law.
FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDER — A person that is awarded a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit by the city to construct or operate
a franchised multichannel system, within all, or part, of the city. The
term "franchised MCS provider" specifically includes the term "cable
operator," but is not limited to such.
FRANCHISE EXPIRATION or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT EXPIRATION
— The date of expiration, or the end of the term of a franchised MCS
provider's franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
FRANCHISEE OR OTHER MCS PROVIDER — Any multichannel service
provider that has been granted a valid franchise agreement, or other
agreement, license or permit by the city, and that is subject to local
regulatory authority as set forth in this chapter, in whole or in part, as
represented by any section or combination of sections of this chapter.
FRANCHISE FEE — The amount charged a multichannel system
provider by the city for the cost of administering and enforcing the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, and for the maintenance
of the public property and rights-of-way occupied by the multichannel
§ 227-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-4
227:205
system, on a reasonably pro-rata basis with respect to the percentage
of space used by all other coextensive occupants or providers of utility
or utility-like services that occupy the public property and rights-of-way.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — City Council for the City of Geneva,
New York.
FUNCTIONAL EQUIVALENT or FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT —
GROSS REVENUE —
With respect to a specifically-named piece of multichannel system
equipment, means another piece of multichannel system
equipment that:
Has either the same or substantially similar characteristics,
qualities, operational capabilities, design functions as the
original, specifically-named or referenced piece of
multichannel system equipment;
(a)
Operates in substantially the same form and fashion as the
original, specifically-named or referenced piece of
multichannel equipment; or
(b)
Operates in a technologically superior manner to the original,
specifically-named or referenced piece of multichannel
equipment.
(c)
(1)
With respect to matters not involving equipment, the term also
means something that equates to or is intended to effect the same
or a substantially similar outcome or function in effectively the
same manner or for the same purpose.
(2)
For any period of time, any and all revenues or other valuable
consideration of any kind whatsoever, which are derived directly or
indirectly from the operation of the multichannel system within the
city, and that are attributable to, or are occasioned by, the grant of
the franchise, other agreement, license or permit, regardless of the
familial or organizational relationship with the franchisee, licensee
or permittee. There shall be permitted to be deducted from gross
revenues:
Bad debts actually written off by franchisee or other MCS
provider in the normal course of its business; provided,
however, that subsequent recovery of bad debts previously
deducted shall be included in gross revenue; and
(a)
(b) Refunds made to subscribers or other third parties.
(1)
Gross revenues shall not include:
Any revenue specifically exempted by the Federal Cable Act,
state law, or by federal or state judicial ruling, or by specific
FCC ruling. For any revenue the MCS provider seeks to
(a)
(2)
§ 227-4 GENEVA CODE § 227-4
227:206
exempt, the MCS provider shall have the burden of proving
to the city that any such excluded revenue is specifically
exempted by the Cable Act, state law, federal or state judicial
ruling, or by specific FCC ruling. Including, but not limited to
the above, gross revenues shall not include the following:
Any tax of general applicability imposed upon a franchisee or
other MCS provider or upon the franchisee's or other MCS
provider's subscribers by state, federal or any other
governmental entity and required to be collected by the
franchisee or other MCS provider and passed through to the
taxing entity (including, but not limited to, user taxes, service
taxes and communications taxes), provided that such taxes are
identified as a separate line item on subscriber statements;
(b)
Any revenue received by the franchisee or other MCS provider
from any person for services not attributable in whole or in
part to the operation of its multichannel system or to other
communications services serving the city, including but not
limited to revenue derived from electronics retailing, mail
marketing or telephone answering services which do not rely
upon the use of the franchisee's or other MCS provider's
multichannel system or other communications services,
delivery services and video production services for
programming or other communications services which are not
transmitted over or used in conjunction with the system; and
(c)
Any revenue which franchisee or other MCS provider chooses
not to receive in exchange for its provision of free or reducedcost
multichannel services or other communications services
to any person. However, such revenue which is not included
due to franchisee's or other MCS provider's decision not to
receive in exchange for trades, barters, services or other items
of value shall be included in gross revenues.
(d)
In computing gross revenues from sources other than subscriber
revenue of a franchisee or other MCS provider, and that is
attributable to the grant of a franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, or the operation of franchisee's or other MCS provider's
multichannel system both inside the city and outside the city, the
total or aggregate revenue received by a franchisee or other MCS
provider from such sources shall be computed as follows: said
revenues shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
shall be the number of franchisee's or other MCS provider's
subscribers in the city as of the last day of the required payment
period and the denominator of which shall be the number of
subscribers within all areas served by a franchisee's or other MCS
provider's system as of the last day of the required payment period.
The result shall then be multiplied by the percentage used to
compute franchise, other agreement, license or permit fees. For
(3)
§ 227-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-4
227:207
HEADEND — The electronics control center, where incoming signals,
including those of television broadcast stations are amplified,
modulated, filtered, converted or in any way processed or converted for
redistribution to subscribers.
IMPRACTICABLE — Which used in a noneconomic or nonfinancial or
noncommercial context, shall have the meaning ascribed in the most
current edition of Webster's Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the
English Language.
INITIAL ACTIVATION or INITIALLY PROVIDING MULTICHANNEL
SERVICE, THE INITIAL PROVISION OF MULTICHANNEL SERVICE
— With respect to a particular portion, part or segment of the
multichannel system, or group of segments or the entire multichannel
system, that all proposed multichannel services and multichannel
system capabilities, as stated in a franchise agreement or other
agreement, license or permit, or in any proposal that is by reference
included in any a franchise agreement or other agreement, license
or permit, are available, and that the construction, reconstruction or
upgrade has been completed (see definition of "complete") and the
completed segment or segments in question, or the entire system, is
capable of actually delivering multichannel services to each and every
subscriber in every segment, pursuant to the plans and specifications
as may have been approved by the city.
INSTALLATION CHARGE or CONNECTION FEE — That charge or fee
imposed on a subscriber for the initial installation or reconnection
of service, or relocation of equipment necessary to obtain or use
multichannel services or other communication services.
INTERNET — That interconnected combination of networks that
evolved from the original ARPANET experiment and the National
Science Foundation subsidized Internet.
INTERNET — An interconnection of networks that provides user-touser
or address-to-address communications or data transmissions.
purposes of example only, the following are types and sources of
nonsubscriber revenue intended to be included in gross revenue.
(a) Subscriber lists;
(b) The sale of advertising;
(c) Home shopping services;
Commissions or bonuses of any kind from vendors or
programmers;
(d)
(e) Rebates from programmers and vendors of any kind;
(f) Viewing guide sales; and
(g) The lease of channel capacity.
§ 227-4 GENEVA CODE § 227-4
227:208
INTERNET ACCESS — The availability of access to a subscriber of the
Internet.
LATE CHARGE — A charge which is added to a customer or
subscriber's account or bill for nonpayment of a previously due and
currently delinquent account.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL — The channel capacity a franchisee or
other MCS provider is required by federal law to designate for use
by commercial endeavors or purposes and that are not affiliated with
the franchisee or other MCS provider, pursuant to Section 612 of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
LINE EXTENSION — An extension of the multichannel system beyond
the original primary service area of the system requiring additional
trunk or feeder cable, or both, or additional fiber optic distribution
cable, or additional active electronic devices to amplify the signal, or
an additional fiber node, but does not include individual service drops
beyond 200 feet that may require additional feeder cable.
LOCAL ORIGINATION PROGRAMMING — Programming produced
locally by or for a franchisee or other MCS provider.
LOSS OF SERVICE or OUTAGE — The complete loss of picture and
sound on either the lower tier of service, or on all tiers or levels of
service, that is attributable to or occasioned by problems with the
operation of the system or any components of the system. Further, more
than one instance of a loss of service from the same portion of the
system, or affecting the same address or addresses, within the city that
occurs within a twenty-four-consecutive-hour period shall be deemed
a single, continuous loss of service. The time used to measure the
duration of the loss of service shall be from the time of the first reported
loss of service to the restoration of the last reported loss of service.
MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Geneva, New York.
MCS — Multichannel service.
MCS PROVIDER OR MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER —
Any person or group of persons who:
Provides multichannel service or other communications over
a multichannel system, regardless of the technology employed
and, subject to federal and state preemption or limitation,
directly or indirectly owns a significant interest in such
multichannel system; or
(a)
Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a
multichannel system.
(b)
(1)
The term "MCS provider" or "multichannel service provider"
specifically includes the terms "cable operator" and "SMATV
(2)
§ 227-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-4
227:209
MULTICHANNEL PROGRAMMING SERVICE OR MULTICHANNEL
SERVICE —
MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER or MCS PROVIDER — Any
person who provides multichannel services or other communication
services using a multichannel system.
MULTICHANNEL SERVICES — The transmission of video
programming and other programming or data transmission services,
interactive services and other broadband information services to and/
or from subscribers and that is generally made available to subscribers,
together with subscriber interaction functions which may be necessary
for the selection of programming or transmission of information.
However, multichannel services shall not include "other
communications services" as defined in this section.
MULTICHANNEL SYSTEM —
operator" and any other provider of a similar multichannel service
that under federal law is subject to this chapter in whole or in part.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming,
or other programming service, irrespective of the technology
employed and subject to federal and state preemption or limitation;
and
(1)
Subscriber interaction, if any, used in or for the selection of such
video programming or other programming service.
(2)
A facility consisting of closed, bidirectionally capable transmission
paths and associated signal reception, generation, distribution and
control equipment that is designed and intended to provide
multichannel services and other communications services to
subscribers within the city;
(1)
A facility consisting of infrared transmission or point-to-point
transmission (as permitted by law); or
(2)
Any functional equivalent system, along with all equipment,
facilities and components used in the reception, generation or
distribution of service, that is designed to provide multichannel
service which includes video, voice or data programming to
multiple subscribers within the city.
(3)
However, such term does not include the following:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more broadcast stations;
(a)
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiunit
dwellings under common ownership, control or management
unless such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way;
(b)
(4)
§ 227-4 GENEVA CODE § 227-4
227:210
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS —
ORDINANCE — The Multichannel Service Provider Regulatory
Ordinance for the City of Geneva, New York.
OTHER COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those services provided by
the franchisee or other MCS provider, but that do not involve the
transmission to subscribers of video programming pr other
II of the Communication Act of 1934, except that such facility
shall be considered a multichannel system [other than for
purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act — considered a
multichannel system [other than for purposes of Section 621(c)
of the Cable Act — codified at 47 USC 541] to the extent
such facility is used in the transmission of video, voice or data
programming or service directly to subscribers; or
(c)
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility.
(d)
However, such facility shall be deemed a multichannel system to
the extent that it:
Is used in the transmission or distribution of video
programming directly to subscribers; or
(a)
Any facility of an electric utility used to distribute video
programming directly to subscribers within the city.
(b)
(5)
Those conditions which are reasonably within the control of the
MCS provider with respect to the operation and maintenance of
the system and the provision of service using the system. Those
conditions which are not within the control of the MCS provider
include, but are not limited to, strikes, labor strikes, sabotage, riots
or civil disturbances of a disastrous nature and effect, explosions,
acts of public enemies, unusually severe or catastrophic weather
conditions, natural disasters as declared by appropriate
government officials, fires and widespread commercial power
failures that exceed the capabilities of the backup power supplies
of the system, or communication facilities failures used in the
receipt of programming.
(1)
Those conditions which are deemed within the control of the MCS
provider include, but are not limited to, financial situations other
than the declaration of bankruptcy or insolvency, marketing
promotions, loss of standby power up to the period of time for
which the manufacturer has rated the standby power unit to
operate, rate increases, regular or periodic periods of high demand
with respect to labor intensive functions, the regular inspection
and maintenance of the system, required testing of the system,
the timely remedy of safety and other code violations, and the
timeliness and technological design with respect to any upgrade of
the system.
(2)
§ 227-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-4
227:211
multichannel services. Other communications services include, but are
not limited to, telephony and voice services.
OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Information that an MCS
provider (specifically including a cable operator) makes available to all
subscribers generally.
PAY-PER-VIEW or PREMIUM CHANNEL or PREMIUM SERVICE — The
delivery over the multichannel system of audio and/or video signals for
a rate or amount (over and above the rate for basic service) on a perevent
or per-program or per-channel basis.
PEG — Public, educational and governmental.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership,
association of two or more persons having a joint common interest,
joint-stock company or governmental entity.
PROPERTY — All the tangible or intangible property owned, installed,
rented, leased or used by a franchisee or other MCS provider in the
conduct of providing multichannel service and utilized in the operation
of the system in the city.
PROPOSAL or APPLICATION — A written proposal or request by an
MCS provider to provide multichannel services to residents,
businesses, industries and institutions within the city. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, nonwritten or verbal representations or commitments
made to the City Council or its designee in relation to or in support of
a written proposal shall be deemed a part of the proposal and may be
relied upon as though they were written.
PSC — The Public Service Commission of the State of New York.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS FACILITIES —
RATE — The periodic price paid by a subscriber for the receipt of any
multichannel service provided for by an MCS provider.
RENT — The compensation paid by a multichannel service provider to
the city for the occupation and use of the public property and rights-ofway
used to provide service within the city.
REVOCATION, TERMINATION or NONRENEWAL — An official act by
the City Council that removes, repeals or rescinds previously approved
authorization for a licensed, permitted or franchised MCS provider to
operate a multichannel system within the city.
SCHEDULED OUTAGE — Any planned service interruption or
diminution of signals, regardless of the number of channels affected or
the duration of the outage, for which both the city and subscribers have
Channel capacity designated for public, educational or
governmental use; and
(1)
(2) Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
§ 227-4 GENEVA CODE § 227-4
227:212
been notified at least 48 hours in advance and that do not exceed four
hours duration for any given address.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of any tier or incremental billing
level of multichannel service, or separately priced service, such as
those offered on a per-channel basis, or any other multichannel or other
communications service that is delivered or provided by, or attributable
to or occasioned by the operation of the multichannel system or any
components of the system. Further, more than one service interruption
that occurs within a twenty-four-consecutive-hour period shall be
deemed a single, continuous loss of multichannel service or other
communications service. Failure to meet FCC technical standards at
any location within the city shall be deemed a service interruption
during the period of time when the multichannel service or any other
communications service does not comply with FCC's technical
standards. A scheduled outage is not a service interruption, provided
that it does not exceed four hours duration. Two or more occurrences of
a diminution of signals within any twenty-four-consecutive-hour period
shall constitute a single, continuous service interruption. A scheduled
diminution, provided there is forty-eight-hour advance notification to
the city and subscribers, is not a service interruption.
SERVICE OUTAGE — The loss of audio and video on the basic or lowest
level, tier or increment of service on the multichannel system. For
purposes of credits or refunds as may be required under this chapter
or any franchise, other agreement, license or permit, a "service outage"
means the loss of picture or sound or other service provided by an MCS
provider for which there is an individual or separate rate or charge,
so as to make that level, tier or cluster of service effectively unusable
in the normal and usual sense of being able to enjoy or otherwise
use the service or services, and which is not caused by the failure or
malfunction of a subscriber's television receiver or monitor or by the
misfeasance or malfeasance of the subscriber.
SERVICE TIER — A category of multichannel service or other
programming service provided by an MCS provider, and for which a
separate rate is charged by an MCS provider.
SMATV — Satellite master antenna television.
SMATV OPERATOR or SATELLITE MASTER ANTENNA TELEVISION
OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who:
SMATV SYSTEM — A private multichannel system not crossing any
public rights-of-way and which is located on private property and
serving private dwellings.
STATE — The State of New York.
(1) Provides multichannel service over an SMATV system; or
Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management of an SMATV system.
(2)
§ 227-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-4
227:213
§ 227-5. Administration; delegation of powers and authority.
STREET — The surface of, and the space above and below, a public
street (or any path or thoroughfare designated for vehicular and/or
pedestrian traffic), or other easement now or hereafter held by the city
(including any street, as defined by eminent domain) for the purpose of
public travel.
SUBSCRIBER — A person lawfully receiving multichannel service or
other communications service delivered by an MCS provider on a
multichannel service system.
USC — United States Code.
USER — A person or organization utilizing a multichannel system
and/or its equipment or capabilities for purposes of production and/
or transmission of material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in the
capacity of a subscriber. For purposes of an example, one type of "user"
would be an advertiser or marketer.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television
broadcast station.
WRECK OUT — In the context of and with respect to any construction,
rebuild, upgrade, modification or maintenance activity of a
multichannel system, the removal of the old cable, wires, parts and
components of any portion of the system not currently and actively used
in the provision of service.
A. The City Council (or Council) is hereby designated the entity of the city
that is responsible for the continuing administration of this chapter and
matters related to multichannel service, including cable service, cable
systems and cable operators.
B. Unless prohibited by federal, state (including any applicable provision
of the PSC) or local law, the City Council may further delegate its
powers and authority to a duly authorized representative with respect
to administering this chapter or an applicable franchise, other
agreement, license or permit authorizing the construction, operation
and maintenance of a multichannel system, as is permissible under
applicable state and federal law.
C. Moreover, unless prohibited by federal, state or local law, the City
Council may create an appointed or elected advisory council,
commission or committee which is designed to handle issues
concerning multichannel service and multichannel service providers. If
such a board, commission or committee is created, then a separate
resolution, ordinance or document shall be adopted wherein the precise
powers and authorities of the board, commission or committee shall be
outlined.
§ 227-4 GENEVA CODE § 227-5
227:214
§ 227-6. Applicability of chapter to an MCS provider.
Multichannel service (MCS) provider franchise agreements or other MCS
agreements, licenses or permits are subject to and shall be governed by
the terms, conditions and provisions of this chapter (ordinance) and any
amendments thereto. Also subject to all terms, conditions and provisions
of this chapter and any amendments thereto are providers of multichannel
service not otherwise subject to local franchising authority, but who are not
exempted from compliance with applicable local regulatory ordinances or
laws by federal or state law, rule or regulation. In the event of any conflict
or ambiguity between the chapter, and any amendments thereto, and any
franchise agreement or other agreement, license or permit subject to this
chapter in whole or in part, or any amendments thereto, the chapter and
any amendments thereto shall control, unless preempted by federal or state
law, rule or regulation.
D. However, the City Council may never delegate its initial or renewal
franchising, licensing or permitting power, or power of revocation of
such, to another person or representative (including any advisory
council, commission or committee). Moreover, while the City Council
may use an outside consultant to review any rates that are subject to
the city's review under the Cable Act, the City Council nonetheless may
not delegate its ultimate rate-making power to another person or
representative (including an advisory council, commission or
committee).
A. With respect to provisions classified as "consumer protection" and
"customer service," and specifically those sections that are contained
within this chapter, and that follow this section, that are denoted by an
asterisk (*) in front of the section heading, such sections and provisions
shall specifically be applicable to any and all MCS providers operating
in the city, unless:
(1) The MCS provider is exempted from the chapter, or any applicable
provision thereof;
(2) The MCS provider requests and is granted relief from any
applicable provision of the chapter so designated; or
(3) The applicability of the provision is preempted by the force of a
superseding state or federal law, rule or regulation.
B. Moreover, such MCS provider that is providing service as of the
effective date of this chapter shall be expected to comply with, and
abide by, applicable consumer protection and customer or subscriber
service provisions no later than the expiration of the current franchise
or the grant of a new or renewed franchise.
C. All other provisions contained within this chapter shall be applicable to
and of full force and effect 30 days after the date of adoption of this
§ 227-5 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-6
227:215
§ 227-7. Exemption from this chapter for certain MCS providers.
chapter with respect to any MCS provider that is not providing service
as of the effective date of this chapter, unless:
(1) The MCS provider is exempted from the chapter (or any applicable
provision);
(2) The MCS provider requests and is granted relief from any
applicable provision of the chapter; or
(3) The applicability of the provision is preempted by the force of a
superseding federal or state law, rule or regulation in place at the
time.
D. Subsections A and B of this section are not intended to repeal, and do
not have the effect of repealing or modifying any current franchise,
other agreement, license or permit that presently exists between the
city and a franchised MCS provider.
E. As a result of Subsection C of this section, the provisions of this chapter
shall have no effect on an existing franchise, other agreement, license
or until the expiration of such existing franchise, other agreement,
license or permit, or until one of the following occurs:
(1) Prior to the expiration date of a franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, the City Council and the affected franchised MCS
provider either execute an amended franchise, other agreement,
license or permit;
(2) Both parties agree to a specific date for the expiration of said
existing franchise, other agreement, license or permit, which in
fact is prior to the present franchise, other agreement, license or
permit expiration date; or
(3) A court of competent jurisdiction orders that an existing MCS
provider become subject to all, or any part or provision, of this
chapter.
F. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, to assure the
protection of the health and safety of the public, any and all MCS
providers shall be subject to, and shall be required to comply with, all
safety and safety-related codes of the city and this chapter, at all times,
regardless of the status of any current franchise, agreement, license or
permit. This shall specifically include:
(1) The National Electrical Code;
(2) The National Electrical Safety Code; and
(3) Any other applicable safety and safety-related codes of the city or
the state.
§ 227-6 GENEVA CODE § 227-7
227:216
§ 227-8. Multichannel service providers seeking relief from this
chapter.
A. Multichannel service providers who are exempted from complying with
the provisions of this chapter are as follows:
(1) An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of
federal or state law, including a specific rule or regulation of the
FCC or the PSC;
(2) An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of
an applicable FCC ruling; or
(3) An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of
an applicable judicial ruling, from which all subsequent permissible
appeals have been exhausted or concluded.
B. It is expressly understood that an exempted MCS provider remains
exempted only as long as it meets one or more of the criteria of this
particular section.
C. If exempted in accordance with any of the preceding, a qualified MCS
provider is exempt only from this chapter and not any other locally
enforceable ordinance, law, code or regulation. Consequently, such an
exempted MCS provider shall abide by, and comply with, any other
applicable city, state or federal laws, rules and regulations, including
any applicable federal or state consumer protection or customer or
subscriber service laws, rules and regulations.
A. Any MCS provider affected by this chapter may file a written petition, at
any time, with the City Council seeking relief from one or more
provisions of this chapter. An MCS provider may specifically request
exemption or relief from, or delay in implementation (but as to the
petitioning MCS provider only), of one or more provisions of this
chapter. Also, the MCS provider may request that a specific provision of
the chapter apply to such MCS provider for a specified or limited length
of time or duration. The petition shall set forth the relief requested and
the basis thereof with such supporting information and material as may
be applicable and deemed necessary by the City Council.
B. Any request submitted in accordance with this section that does not
contain a clearly articulated explanation or rationale for each item or
matter being requested, individually, shall be deemed incomplete and
returned to the petitioner without action.
C. In order to receive relief from one or more of the provisions of this
chapter, an MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to the City
Council that at least one of the following facts exist:
(1) The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by federal
law, the FCC, or state law, rule or regulation, including any specific
rule or regulation of the PSC;
§ 227-7 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-8
227:217
(2) Where applicable, that the provision in question materially affects,
and is in substantial conflict with an expressed right that is
specifically noted in an existing franchise, other agreement, license
or permit (but only for the term of the existing franchise, other
agreement, license or permit). This provision covers situations
where an MCS provider classified as a cable operator seeks, and is
granted, modification of an existing franchise, other agreement,
license or permit under Section 625 of the Cable Act (codified at 47
USC 545);
(3) That compliance with a particular provision and/or requirement
will be commercially impracticable for an MCS provider;
(4) That one or more time frames listed in this chapter are either
impossible to meet, or are impracticable to meet;
(5) That the MCS provider has its own policy which the City Council
deems comparable to, or in excess of, any provision and/or
requirement from which the MCS provider seeks relief; or
(6) That the health, safety and welfare interests of the city and the
public otherwise warrant the granting of such relief.
D. The City Council shall be the sole determiner of whether an MCS policy
is comparable to, or exceeds, a similar provision in this chapter.
E. As an alternative to seeking an exemption or requesting relief, an MCS
provider may petition for clarification concerning the precise intent and
effect that one or more provisions or sections of this chapter have on
the petitioning MCS provider.
F. In those instances where the City Council grants an exemption or relief
to a franchised MCS provider, or deems a franchised MCS provider's
operational policy to be comparable to a chapter provision, then the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit (initial, existing or
renewal) shall be amended within 60 days to reflect the exact extent of
such exemption and/or relief.
G. It should be specifically noted that the benefit of such exemption, relief,
clarification or comparable policy extends only to the MCS provider
granted such exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy.
Consequently, in the case of a transfer, assignment or sale of the
system, the proposed transferee, assignee or buyer may, if required by
the City Council, be required to petition separately for such relief,
clarification, exemption or comparable policy substitution. For
purposes of clarification, this shall mean that unlike certain other
amendments to the franchise, other agreement, license or permit as
may be required by law, there shall be no automatic transfer of any
exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy to a transferee of a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or a new owner of a
multichannel system.
§ 227-8 GENEVA CODE § 227-8
227:218
§ 227-9. Failure of City Council to enforce this chapter.
An MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the
requirements of this chapter, or any subsequently adopted amendments to
this chapter, by any failure of the City Council on any one or more occasions
to seek, or insist upon, prompt compliance with such requirements or
provisions.
§ 227-10. Multichannel service providers subject to present and
future regulations.
§ 227-11. Repeal of prior inconsistent resolutions, ordinances and
local laws.
H. Any MCS provider who requests relief or exemption from any portion of
this chapter may be required to reimburse the city for the actual,
verifiable cost of processing and analyzing such request, including but
not limited to a request for a comparable policy substitution.
A. Any MCS provider, its assignee or transferee shall be subject to, and
expected to comply with, all applicable ordinances and/or resolutions
now or hereafter adopted and in effect within the city, including this
chapter, to the extent that said MCS provider has not received an
exemption or relief from said ordinance(s) and/or resolution(s).
B. Any MCS provider, and its assignee or transferee, shall be subject to,
and expected to comply with, all federal and state laws and with all
rules and regulations issued by all applicable regulatory agencies
(including, where applicable, the FCC and the PSC) now or hereafter in
existence. However, if the city amends this chapter, and the amendment
of the chapter would have the effect of either unilaterally requiring the
investment of substantial new capital for equipment by the MCS
provider, or unilaterally changing the process for default and/or
revocation of an MCS provider's franchise, other agreement, license or
permit, then such amendment of this chapter shall have no effect on the
affected MCS provider until the expiration of the franchise agreement,
other agreement, license or permit.
C. Any MCS provider, its assignee or transferee shall be subject to all
lawful exercise of the city's police power, without limitation of any kind,
other than as may be limited by applicable state or federal law.
D. With respect to future ordinances and/or resolutions noted in this
section, nothing contained herein shall prevent an MCS provider from
exercising any and all of its administrative and legal rights in order to
challenge the constitutionality, applicability and enforceability of said
future ordinances and/or resolutions.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, any prior resolution,
ordinance or local law, which in part, or in whole, is directly
§ 227-8 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-11
227:219
§ 227-12. Resolution of inconsistencies with federal or state rules,
regulations or laws.
§ 227-13. Resolution of conflicts between this chapter and a
subsequent franchise agreement.
inconsistent with this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency.
B. Subsection A of this section is not intended to repeal, and does not have
the effect of repealing, any current franchising ordinance or franchise,
other agreement, license or permit that presently exists between the
city and an MCS provider.
A. In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or section
of this chapter, and any provision or section of a federal or state rule,
regulation or law, then the federal or state rule, regulation or law
(including any specific and applicable rule or regulation of the PSC)
shall not only supersede the effect of the chapter, but also control in any
local application, unless such federal or state rule, regulation or law
(including any specific and applicable rule or regulation of the PSC)
does not preempt, supersede or make invalid the inconsistency.
B. Subsection A of this section specifically includes any situation wherein
an applicable federal or state judicial decision creates an actual
inconsistency with any provision or section of this chapter. In such a
situation, the federal or state judicial decision shall not only supersede
the effect of the chapter, but also control in any local application, unless
such federal or state judicial decision does not preempt, supersede or
make invalid the inconsistency.
A. Where there is a conflict (actual or apparent) between this chapter and
a subsequent franchise, other agreement, license or permit, the chapter
shall control and prevail, unless judicially determined invalid,
unenforceable or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
or unless the provisions of Subsection B of this section apply to the MCS
provider and its franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
B. Where a franchised MCS provider receives an exemption, relief or
clarification from one or more provisions or sections of this chapter, or
has one or more of its policies deemed comparable to a provision
contained in this chapter, the franchise, other agreement, license or
permit shall specifically note such exemption, relief, clarification or
comparable policy. As a result, to the extent that such an exemption,
relief, clarification or comparable policy is both contained in a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, and is inconsistent with a
provision contained in this chapter, then the specifically noted
exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy language contained
in the franchise, other agreement, license or permit shall control, but
only to the extent noted in the franchise, other agreement, license or
permit.
§ 227-11 GENEVA CODE § 227-13
227:220
§ 227-14. Penalties for offenses; assessed charges or fines.
§ 227-15. Effect of technical violation of chapter or franchise
agreement.
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in § 227-14 of this chapter, an
MCS provider shall not be subject to penalties, fines, forfeitures or (where
applicable) revocation of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit
for a so-called "technical" violation of this chapter or (where applicable)
a technical breach of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
For purposes of this chapter, technical violations or breaches include the
following:
C. Notwithstanding Subsection B of this section, any grant of exemption,
relief, clarification or comparable policy shall be for the sole benefit of
the owner and operator of the multichannel system as of the date of the
grant of exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy.
Specifically, such grant shall not be automatically transferred along
with any approved transfer or change in ownership or change in control
of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit. Any transfer of
exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy shall always
require a separate act of approval by City Council.
A. To the extent permitted by state and local law, including applicable
provisions of the PSC regulations, the City Council reserves the
authority to institute a penalties schedule for violations of this chapter.
Where appropriate and/or applicable, violations of this chapter shall be
handled in the manner prescribed by either local or state law, including
any applicable provision of the PSC.
B. In instances where fines are applicable for a breach or violation of this
chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, as set forth
in the section of this chapter entitled "Fines," then such assessed fines
shall operate as a separate and independent remedy for the city.
C. Notwithstanding the other provisions in this section, an MCS provider
shall not be subject to such provisions in instances of force majeure (as
outlined elsewhere in this chapter), and/or for a technical violation of
the chapter, or where applicable, a technical breach of a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit (as outlined in this chapter).
D. Notwithstanding the other provisions in this section, a franchised MCS
provider shall be subject to possible default and/or revocation for cause
as set forth in this chapter.
A. Instances, or in matters, where a violation of this chapter or, where
applicable, a franchise, other agreement, license or permit by an MCS
provider was a good faith error that resulted in no or diminimus
negative impact on the residents or subscribers within the city or on the
city itself; or
§ 227-13 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-15
227:221
§ 227-16. Force majeure.
§ 227-17. Notices.
§ 227-18. Indemnity.
B. Instances or circumstances that existed and were reasonably beyond
the control of an MCS provider, including force majeure situations, and
prevented an MCS provider from complying with this chapter, or where
applicable the franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
A. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, an MCS provider
shall not be held in violation, integral or material breach, default or
noncompliance of this chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto,
including, where applicable, termination, cancellation or revocation of
a franchise, other agreement, license or permit and/or license, where
such violation, breach, default or noncompliance occurred and/or was
caused by a natural disaster such as an earthquake, flood, tidal wave,
hurricane or similar devastating act of nature, or any other event that is
reasonably beyond an MCS provider's ability to anticipate and control
that is of a devastating nature or effect. Force majeure also covers
strikes, riots, wars and armed insurrections, as well as work delays
caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their own
utility poles on which an MCS provider's cable and/or equipment is
attached.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section and even in the case of a
force majeure situation, a customer or subscriber may be entitled to a
refund or credit if the customer or subscriber sustains a multichannel
service outage for a period of time that is in excess of those permitted
under the provisions of this chapter.
A. Both the City Council and each MCS provider shall provide the other
party with the name and address of the contact designated to receive
notices, filings, reports, records, documents and other correspondence.
All notices shall be delivered to each party's contact by certified mail,
return receipt requested, personal service with a signed receipt of
delivery or overnight with receipt verification. All other filings, reports,
records, documents and other correspondence may be delivered by any
permissible means, including, but not limited to, facsimile transmission
("faxing"), personal service, overnight mail or package delivery, so long
as proof of delivery is obtained. The delivery of all notices, reports,
records and other correspondence shall be deemed to have occurred at
the time of receipt, unless otherwise designated by state law.
B. If the MCS provider is required to maintain a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, then the designation of such contact
person for notice and notification purposes may be contained within a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
§ 227-15 GENEVA CODE § 227-18
227:222
§ 227-19. Liability insurance.
A. To the extent permitted by federal and/or state law, including any
applicable provisions of the PSC, an MCS provider shall at all times
defend, indemnify, protect, save harmless and exempt the city, the City
Council, the Manager, their officers, agents, servants and employees
from any and all penalty, damage or charges arising out of claims, suits,
demands, causes of action or award of damages, whether compensatory
or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity,
which might be claimed now or in the future, which may arise out of, or
be caused by, the construction, erection, location, products
performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement,
removal or restoration of the multichannel system within the city by a
negligent act or omission of an MCS provider, its agents or employees,
contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors or implied or
authorized representatives. With respect to the penalties, fines or
charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees
and expert witness fees are included as those costs which may be
recovered by the city.
B. The city, the City Council and the Manager specifically reserve the right
to retain counsel of their own choice, at their own expense.
C. If an MCS provider obtains counsel for the city, the City Council and/or
the Manager, then any one of them shall have the right to approve
counsel. However, neither the city, the City Council nor the Manager
shall unreasonably withhold its approval of counsel.
D. With respect to an MCS provider's own defense of such actions noted in
this section, it is understood that such MCS provider reserves the right
to select and retain, without the city, the City Council or Manager's
approval, counsel of the MCS provider's choice, at such MCS provider's
expense.
A. An MCS provider shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides
multichannel service to subscribers, public liability, property damage
insurance and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts:
(1) Public liability: $1,000,000 per person/per occurrence.
(2) Property damage: $1,000,000 per any one claim.
(3) Umbrella liability: $3,000,000.
B. An MCS provider's public and personal liability and property damage
insurance policy shall specifically include the city, the City Council and
the Manager as additional named insureds.
C. The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy
shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state, and which has one of the three
highest or best ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company.
§ 227-18 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-19
227:223
§ 227-20. Performance and construction/completion bonds.
D. The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall contain
an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the City
Council with at least 30 days' written notice in advance of the
cancellation of the insurance.
E. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
City Council at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance
which such policies are to renew or replace.
F. Before an MCS provider provides multichannel service to subscribers,
the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates representing
the insurance to the City Council, and each policy or certificate
delivered shall be accompanied by evidence of payment of the full
premium thereon.
G. If the state permits an MCS provider to self-insure, then the MCS
provider may exercise its right to self-insure, so as long as the minimum
amounts of insurance coverage outlined in this section are met and
maintained for the entire period that the affected MCS provider is selfinsured
and the MCS provider can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the City Council that it has the reasonable financial ability to pay up to
the maximum amount per category.
A. An MCS provider shall furnish to the City Clerk a performance bond or
security bond executed by a surety licensed to do business in this state
in an amount totaling at least $25,000. The purpose of the performance
bond is to ensure performance of any requirements required by and
under this chapter on an MCS provider, or imposed on an MCS provider
by virtue of its franchise, other agreement, license or permit. Further,
the purpose is to guarantee that should the MCS provider not fulfill any
obligations imposed by this chapter, or where applicable, a franchise
other agreement, license or permit, then the surety will make whole any
monetary losses or damages incurred by the city, up to the monetary
limits of the bond or other security. If the city draws on a performance
bond or cash deposit as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely
discharge its obligations, then the MCS provider shall be required to
replenish the performance bond or security to the minimal level
required by the City Council within 30 days.
B. In addition to the performance bond referenced in Subsection A of this
section, an MCS provider shall furnish to the city a construction/
completion bond prior to the time it commences any construction,
upgrade, rebuild or repair/maintenance project that has a capital
construction cost or outlay exceeding $100,000 in value. The amount of
the bond shall equal at least 75% of the projected capital construction
cost or outlay.
C. The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically
guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by its construction,
§ 227-19 GENEVA CODE § 227-20
227:224
§ 227-21. Maintaining other types of insurance and bonds.
§ 227-22. Maintaining a public inspection file.
upgrade, rebuild or repair/maintenance schedule for the multichannel
system and/or any timetable for technical and service improvements or
additions to the multichannel system as may be committed to, or agreed
upon, from time to time, by the City Council and MCS provider.
D. If the City Council draws on a performance or completion bond or cash
deposit as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely discharge its
obligations, or failure to construct and activate the multichannel
system, or failure to complete a multichannel system upgrade or rebuild
or repair or maintain the system as required, then the MCS provider
shall be required to replenish the completion and performance bond or
security bond to the minimum level required by the City Council within
30 days.
E. The performance bond or security bond shall be in force at all times,
unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in a separate
agreement, executed between the MCS provider and the City Council.
F. In lieu of a performance bond and/or a construction/completion bond,
the City Council may accept a written guarantee of an MCS provider
pledging the full faith and credit of the affected MCS provider should
there be a breach in a material franchise, other agreement, license or
permit term, or failure to meet any construction schedule.
A. Notwithstanding the insurance and bonding requirement contained
elsewhere in this chapter, an MCS provider shall obtain and maintain
any other types of insurance and bonds, including but not limited to
workers' compensation insurance and automobile liability insurance,
that are mandated by either federal or state law, including any
applicable provision of the PSC.
B. Where applicable and required such MCS providers shall maintain such
insurance and/or bonds in at least the minimal amounts, and according
to the minimal terms and provisions mandated by either the federal or
state law, including any applicable provision of the PSC.
A. To the extent required by federal and/or state law, including any
applicable rule or regulation of the PSC, an MCS provider must
maintain open records and reports that are subject to public inspection
by:
(1) Persons who are not customers or subscribers of the multichannel
system.
(2) Customers or subscribers of the multichannel system.
(3) The City Council or other city officials, or the designee of such.
§ 227-20 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-22
227:225
§ 227-23. Retention and submission of reports and records.
B. Though not exhaustive, an MCS provider shall maintain a public
inspection file which includes, among other records:
(1) Ownership records.
(2) (Where applicable) a list of broadcast stations that are carried on
the multichannel system as a result of federally imposed must carry
requirements.
(3) Commercial records for children's programming.
(4) Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) data.
(5) Testing data and records, pursuant to the FCC's rules.
(6) Any records or information required by the PSC.
C. Moreover, though not required by federal law, and if not prohibited by
state law, including any applicable rule or regulation of the PSC, the
City Council nevertheless requires as a matter of public policy that the
MCS provider maintain the following additional records in its public
inspection file:
(1) A current rate card detailing both rates for cable services and
charges for installation, remotes, converters and the like, plus any
administrative or charges or fees.
(2) A copy of the current complaint resolution policy.
(3) A copy of the current disconnection policy, including both voluntary
and involuntary disconnections.
(4) A copy of the current policy regarding the issuance of credits or
rebates for loss of service.
(5) A copy of the current policy regarding the handling, and return, of
subscriber deposits.
A. Notwithstanding any requirements contained elsewhere in this chapter,
an MCS provider shall maintain and retain such records and reports as
are necessary for the city to determine compliance with the obligations
imposed on it by this chapter, and to determine the MCS provider's
legal, technical, financial and character qualifications.
B. On or before January 1 of each year after the effective date of this
chapter, an MCS provider shall submit to the City Council a list of files,
reports, records, data or other information that the MCS provider
periodically, customarily and/or regularly files with the FCC, or another
federal or state agency. For any other report that an MCS provider files
with any other federal or state agency, and that has a direct impact on
the operation of the MCS provider's multichannel system, then the MCS
§ 227-22 GENEVA CODE § 227-23
227:226
provider shall notify the City Council of such filing within 15 days of
said filing.
C. Said notice shall inform the City Council of the nature and scope of the
filing, as well as the recipient of the filing (i.e., the name, address,
department, division and phone number of the recipient).
D. As part of any performance or compliance evaluation, or for any
legitimate matter related to the administration and enforcement of an
MCS provider franchise, agreement, license or permit, the City Council
may specifically request and require that it be provided with any or all
listed reports, records, data or other information that were originally
filed with the FCC, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or
any other federal or state agency. However, unless specifically
authorized by the state, an MCS provider shall not be required to
provide the City Council with any state or federal tax returns, or any
documents (inclusive of all above-referenced categories) that are
exempted under state or federal privacy laws, including any applicable
provision of the PSC, and Section 631 of the Cable Act (codified at 47
USC 551).
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the preceding Subsection
D, the city reserves the right to require, as deemed necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, that a franchisee or other MCS provider
provide the city with copies of all applications, reports, documents,
correspondence, pleadings and petitions of any kind whatsoever that
relate to or have an effect on the system, the franchisee or the
franchising authority that are submitted by or on behalf of the
franchisee or other MCS provider, to the FCC or any other federal or
state regulatory agencies or courts having jurisdiction with respect to
any matters that affect the construction, operation or regulation of a
cable television system or other multichannel service system, or that
affect the services provided by such a system, where such addresses
issues which affect the operation of the franchisee's or other MCS
provider's system within the city. Said information shall be provided in a
timely and expeditious manner, as may be required by this chapter or a
franchise agreement or other agreement, license or permit, or lawful
operating authority.
F. Copies of such responses, decisions or any other communications from
the regulatory agencies or courts to a franchisee or other MCS provider
or its agent, including franchisee's or other MCS provider's corporate
parent, attorney or consultants, relative to its multichannel system in
the city, or the operation of the system within the city, shall likewise be
filed with the city immediately on the filing or receipt of such, but in no
case later than 30 days after the filing or receipt.
G. In addition to the requirements noted in the preceding subsections of
this section, an MCS provider shall timely submit those reports,
§ 227-23 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-23
227:227
§ 227-24. Inspection and review of books, records and other data.
statements and logs required by this chapter, including, but not limited
to, the following:
(1) A periodic gross revenue statement in the manner set forth in this
chapter.
(2) A periodic certification and evidence that the MCS provider is
answering phones in accordance with the minimum requirements
listed in this chapter.
(3) Evidence of the satisfactory resolution of problems and complaints
in the manner set forth in this chapter.
(4) A copy of the outage log applicable to the system in the city,
showing all service outages of any kind and duration, in accordance
with the requirements in this chapter pertaining to such logs.
(5) Preventive maintenance reports in the manner set forth in this
chapter.
(6) Where applicable, FCC Form 393 or 1200 (or equivalent) rate
worksheets.
(7) Where applicable, FCC Form 394 (or equivalent) concerning
assignment or transfer of a franchised multichannel system
classified as a franchised cable system.
(8) FCC Form 395-A (or equivalent) concerning equal employment
opportunity (EEO) and fair contracting policies.
A. An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts
and records of the business and operations under, and in connection
with, the operation of system.
B. The City Council, or its designee, shall have the right to require the
provision of and delivery to the city offices, or the offices of its designee,
true and complete copies of any records needed for the diligent
administration and enforcement of this chapter and/or the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit on three days' written notice and
request, unless the retention of such records is specifically exempted by
the City Council, or the time for review of such records is extended by
the city.
C. The city shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an independent
certified public accountant, or other business or financial expert, to
review the books and records of an MCS provider. If, after a financial
audit, it is determined that the MCS provider has underpaid amounts
owed to the city by any amount, then the city may require the MCS
provider to reimburse the city for the actual cost of the audit. Absent
fraud, any such audit by an independent certified public accountant
shall be binding on all parties concerned.
§ 227-23 GENEVA CODE § 227-24
227:228
§ 227-25. Applicability of state consumer sales practices laws.17
In addition to any and all requirements of this chapter, each and every MCS
provider shall comply with, and abide by, all applicable provisions of any
state law concerning consumer sales practices.
§ 227-26. Billing practices.18
D. A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider, made by
an MCS provider or any employee or contractor of the MCS provider, of
a material fact or amount, shall constitute a material violation of this
chapter and, at the discretion of City Council, subject the MCS provider
to termination and revocation of its franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, and any and all damages and penalties, both civil and
criminal, as permitted under law. However, an erroneous entry, made in
good faith, shall not constitute a material violation of this chapter, nor
subject an MCS provider to any fines or penalties of any kind.
E. An MCS provider shall keep at the local office complete and accurate
books and records of the key aspects of the multichannel system's
operation for at least the preceding three years in such a manner that
all matters pertaining to the city can be easily produced and/or verified
at the request of the city. Also, the MCS provider shall keep at its local
office, and shall make available and provide upon request by the city,
any other applicable records and information that may be required by
any other federal or state agency, including the PSC, that has
jurisdiction over one or more classes of MCS providers as relate to the
operation of the system, including financial matters. Notwithstanding
the preceding, no MCS provider shall be required to provide
information that is by law specifically deemed confidential or
proprietary.
F. To the extent permitted by applicable state and federal law, the city
shall not use any information provided by an MCS provider in a manner
that would reasonably be deemed to provide a competitive advantage to
another MCS provider, or that would reasonably be deemed place the
provider at a competitive disadvantage.
A. At least annually, an MCS provider shall inform all subscribers of at
least the following billing practices, which must be in accordance with
this chapter:
(1) Billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid
discontinuance of service).
(2) Payment due and delinquent dates.
17.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
18.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-24 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-26
227:229
§ 227-27. Billing credit or refunds.19
(3) Amount or percentage of any administrative fees and/or late
charges, if any.
(4) Disconnection/reconnection policy.
(5) Advance billing options.
(6) Resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints and
inquiries.
(7) Refund/credit policy for service interruptions or unsolicited
service.
(8) Current service rates in a detailed and understandable format.
(9) Amount of charges for installation or relocation of an MCS
provider's facilities and/or equipment.
(10) Current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other
nonregularly occurring fees invoiced to subscribers (including
service call charges or trip charges).
B. Whenever there is a change in an MCS provider's billing practices or
payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing at
least 30 days prior to such billing practices or payment requirements
becoming effective.
C. In any case where a subscriber requests a cancellation or reduction of
service within 30 days after the notification of a scheduled rate or
charge adjustment, then the subscriber's liability for service received
after the effective date of such changes, until the cancellation or
reduction of service, shall be determined in accordance with the rates
or charges, if any, in effect prior to such change.
D. The annual ratification required in this section may be delivered to a
subscriber by any means that reasonably assures that the subscriber
actually receives the notification and wherein the notice is plainly
discernible, of at least 10 point type and clearly indicates that it is a
notice of importance that affects rates.
A. An MCS provider, specifically including, but not necessarily limited to,
any classified as a cable operator, shall, unless exempted by federal law,
adhere to, and comply with the requirements of this chapter and all
applicable state laws, rules and regulations, including those of the PSC,
concerning billing credits or refunds due to service outages. For other
MCS providers, a subscriber shall receive, on the next available
monthly bill or periodic invoice for service, a pro-rata credit (or where
applicable a refund) for any service outage exceeding 24 hours in
duration.
19.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-26 GENEVA CODE § 227-27
227:230
§ 227-28. Subscriber deposits.
B. Unless preempted by PSC rules, force majeure situations do not relieve
an MCS provider from providing credits or refunds for service outages
that exceed the standards set forth in this chapter.
C. In the case of a charge for unsolicited service to the extent permitted by
PSC rules, an MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with an
adjustment or billing credit on the next available monthly bill or
periodic invoice for service. Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider
shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay for any
unsolicited service.
A. A franchisee or other MCS provider may require refundable deposits in
circumstances consistent with reasonable business practices and
applicable state law, including where such deposits are necessary to
protect equipment or to ensure payment where there is reasonable
evidence of a risk of nonpayment.
B. Upon termination of service for any reason, subscribers will be entitled
to receive a refund of any deposit within 30 days of the termination or
cancellation of service, subject to:
(1) An offset or credit for all outstanding obligations of the subscriber
to the franchisee or other MCS provider, including outstanding
service charges.
(2) Return of all equipment provided by the franchisee or other MCS
provider in connection with the services received by the subscriber
in suitable condition, normal wear and tear excepted.
C. A franchisee or other MCS provider that collects deposits shall place all
deposits in a separate account and shall account for the collective
amounts of deposits separately. At no time shall there be a comingling
or mixing of deposit money with any other money received.
D. If the account for deposits is an interest-bearing account, all interest
earned shall be paid to the subscriber either annually or upon
termination of service, whichever occurs earlier.
E. In no circumstances shall an MCS provider be permitted to use any
deposits for working capital, or allow any deposits to be used for
working capital, or for any purpose whatsoever other than for the
intended purpose of serving as security against loss of amounts owed or
loss or unreasonable damage to equipment belonging to the franchisee
or other MCS provider.
F. All deposits for equipment shall be returned, with interest if applicable
under this chapter, within 30 days of the cancellation or termination of
service, provided the equipment is returned in good working order,
normal wear and tear excepted.
§ 227-27 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-28
227:231
§ 227-29. Policy with respect to billing disputes and/or contested
charges.20
G. All deposits intended to secure payment for service shall be returned
within 30 days of the cancellation or termination of service, provided
there is no outstanding amount owed to the MCS provider.
H. Failure to meet the requirements of this section may result in the
imposition of fines in an amount set forth in the section titled "Fines."
A. In those instances in which a subscriber contests the actual amount of a
bill for service or other charges, or a periodic invoice for such, or the
imposition of charge for a particular multichannel service or technical
service request, such as installation or upgrade of service, or the
amount of an administrative fee and/or late charge, such subscriber
shall make the MCS provider aware (either in writing, or by verified
verbal communication) of such contested amount prior to the
multichannel service being disconnected.
B. No subscriber shall have service disconnected, and no MCS provider
shall disconnect such service, during the period in which the contest of
a rate or charge is unresolved. However, if the matter is resolved in
favor of the MCS provider, the MCS provider may immediately
disconnect the service if the subscriber has not paid the amount owed.
C. An MCS provider shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure
to pay a charge for unsolicited service during the period the amount or
charge is contested.
D. In light of the provisions contained in this section, an MCS provider
shall make available an escrow account for subscribers with billing
disputes and shall place all contested amounts in said escrow account.
E. In those instances where a subscriber has notified an MCS provider of a
particular billing dispute, the subscriber may deposit, or request that
MCS provider deposit or place the full amount contested into the
escrow account set forth in the preceding subsection until the matter is
either administratively or judicially resolved. In cases of multiple billing
disputes, then the subscriber must deposit the full amount of each
contested charge into an MCS provider escrow account, or request that
the MCS provider do so.
F. Where, prior to disconnection, a subscriber deposits the full amount of
the contested charge into an MCS provider escrow account, the MCS
provider may not then disconnect the subscriber during the pendency
of the billing dispute. Moreover, after the subscriber deposits the full
amount of the contested charge into the escrow account, the subscriber
shall not be liable for any further administrative fees and/or late
charges that could be connected with the particular contested charge in
20.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-28 GENEVA CODE § 227-29
227:232
§ 227-30. Customer service; capabilities of office; staffing and
equipment.21
question until the matter is resolved and then only if the matter is
resolved in favor of the MCS provider.
G. Where the subscriber preserves his or her right to continued service by
placing the full amount of the contested charge in an escrow account,
the subscriber may thereafter subscribe to additional multichannel
services, such as premium or pay-per-view events, so long as the
subscriber adheres to any and all MCS provider-imposed rules, so long
as such rules are applicable to subscribers in general.
H. Upon formal resolution of the billing dispute, the money in the escrow
account, together with interest, if applicable, shall promptly be
distributed to the individual parties in the amount noted by any
settlement agreement, or administrative or judicial order or finding.
I. These above-described provisions shall be in addition and supplemental
to any provisions contained in the MCS provider's complaint/inquiry
resolution policy.
A. In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers or subscribers, an
MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall maintain a
customer or subscriber service office which is:
(1) Located within the corporate boundaries of the city, or no further
than two miles outside the city limits.
(2) Accessible to the physically and ambulatory-impaired.
(3) Adequately staffed during business hours to handle both the walkin
and telephonic traffic of customers or subscribers.
B. The local service office shall be open at least 40 hours per week,
exclusive of holidays.
C. Within the 40 hours per week that the local service office must be open,
an MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall be
required to provide staffed office hours either two evenings a week until
7:00 p.m., or four hours on Saturday, if not prohibited by rule or
regulation of the PSC. No MCS provider shall be required to keep the
office open and staffed both on evenings and on Saturday.
D. The local service office shall have an adequate staff that is trained and
knowledgeable in order to handle the vast majority of customer or
subscriber inquiries, specifically including, but not limited to: billing
inquiries, refunds, credit, service outages, equipment service and
repair, payment of bills and other charges, and inquiries from disabled
or physically-impaired customer or subscribers.
21.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-29 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-30
227:233
E. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section may install, at
the local service office, an after hours depository in order to collect
invoice payments, and receive written requests for service
appointments, including installations, connections, disconnections and
complaints after scheduled office hours.
F. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section may install an
automated (audio or video) customer or subscriber assistance device
which can handle various types of customer or subscriber inquiries, so
long as the caller has the option and ability to speak with a live
representative of the MCS provider at all times during which the office
is, or is required to be open and staffed.
G. Where not prohibited by the PSC, an MCS provider subject to the
provisions of this section may install an interactive customer or
subscriber assistance device or contract service which is capable of
handling various types of customer or subscriber inquiries.
H. If permitted by the PSC, an MCS provider subject to the provisions of
this section may contract with another business or commercial
establishment for the sole or primary purpose of collecting subscriber
payments and distributing MCS provider permissible, and where
applicable authorized, promotional, billing and/or subscriber
information and literature.
I. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall maintain
at least one tollfree and/or local telephone number to accommodate
both normal business inquiries, including requests for installation of
service and changes in levels or categories or types of service, to
facilitate calls concerning the repair of equipment, service outages and
the extended interruption of service. During any hours that the
customer or subscriber service office is open, the MCS provider must
have, or make available, in-house personnel to address a customer or
subscriber's inquiries. During other hours, a telephone may be manned
by an automatic answering device, provided that the use of an
answering device or answering service results in an initial phone
response by the MCS provider within 90 minutes of the receipt of the
call, in order to at least determine the extent of the outage, interruption
or other customer or subscriber-related concern.
J. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall have
adequate staff and/or extension lines (except during special marketing
promotion periods, peak billing cycles, and service outages) in order to
handle all calls and inquiries directed to the general information
number, in accordance with this chapter.
K. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall at all
times have sufficient technical and repair staff to operate and maintain
the system in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including
the provisions regarding the repair and restoration of service, as well as
all applicable state and federal rules and regulations.
§ 227-30 GENEVA CODE § 227-30
227:234
§ 227-31. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.22
§ 227-32. Restoration of a subscriber's property.23
L. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall at all
times have sufficient repair equipment and replacement parts to repair
and restore service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. An MCS provider shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, charges,
provision of service or use of an MCS provider's facilities and
equipment, make, allow or grant any undue preference or advantage to
any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage, on the
basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap, religious
affiliation or location of residence.
B. Consistent with Section 621(a)(3) of the Cable Act [codified at 47 USC
541(a)(3)], MCS providers classified as cable operators shall not deny
cable service, or the extension of cable service, to any group of
potential residential cable subscribers based on the income of the
residents of the local area in which such group resides.
C. Subsection A of this section does not prohibit an MCS provider from
denying service based on the location of residence, if that residence is
outside the parameters for line extension as may be detailed in a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit (if applicable).
D. Subsection A of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from denying service to a subscriber who is delinquent in the payment
of any periodic service, or special service bill, so long as the
requirements for billing disputes and disconnection have been satisfied
in accordance with this chapter.
E. Subsection A of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from making agreements or entering into multichannel service
agreements with multiple dwelling unit owners (including hotel, motel
and mobile park owners) to provide multichannel service under a bulk
billing or other type of arrangement, subject to applicable federal and
state law and rule.
A. If at any time an MCS provider, in furtherance of its right to construct,
operate and maintain a multichannel system, shall disturb the yard,
residence or other real or personal property of a subscriber, such MCS
provider shall ensure that the subscriber's yard, residence or other
personal property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition
comparable to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
work.
22.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
23.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-30 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-32
227:235
§ 227-33. Service inquiries, requests, complaints and response
times.24
B. The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return,
replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider.
This subsection also requires the MCS provider to reimburse a
subscriber or private property owner for any actual physical damage
caused by an MCS provider, its subcontractor or its independent
contractor, in connection with the disturbance of a subscriber or private
property owner's property.
A. Except in cases of force majeure, or an appointment scheduled with the
mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider classified as a cable
operator, and any MCS provider not exempted from compliance with
this section by federal law or rule, shall respond to the service inquiries,
requests and complaints of subscribers within such MCS provider's
normal business or service hours, and within the time schedules
detailed in Subsections D through G of this section. The MCS provider
shall be considered in compliance with this section if the standards of
service outlined in Subsections D through G are met or exceeded at
least 98% of the time as measured over any three consecutive calendar
months. Conversely, the MCS provider shall be considered in
noncompliance, except for force majeure situations or mutually agreed
upon scheduled appointments, if the standards of service outlined in
Subsections D through G of this section are not met or exceeded at least
98% of the time over any three consecutive calendar months.
B. For extenuating circumstances in which an MCS provider cannot meet
the response and service restoration requirements noted in Subsections
D through G of this section, such MCS provider shall comply with and
submit all documentation of progress towards restoration, as required
by the provisions of this chapter, and any applicable rules of the PSC.
C. Moreover, except in emergency situations, an MCS provider shall
inform the subscriber that there is a choice as to whether the service
call is scheduled for the morning (8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon), afternoon
(12:00 noon to 4:00 p.m.), or evening (4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. or later)
hours. If the service call has to be canceled or rescheduled by the MCS
provider, then the MCS provider shall make every effort to notify the
customer or subscriber as soon as possible prior to the date and time of
the appointment, and shall reschedule the service call for a time
convenient to the customer or subscriber, within the MCS provider's
normal working hours, and if desired by the subscriber, within 24 hours
of the canceled appointment, so long as the appointment is for a normal
workday.
D. In the case of a report or complaint of a loss of service, such being
defined as a "blank" or "no picture" situation on either the lowest level
of service or all levels of service, the MCS provider shall treat such
24.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-32 GENEVA CODE § 227-33
227:236
§ 227-34. Payment delinquency; late charges; termination of
service.25
report as a top priority and respond before starting any other job or
function, except for a critical job that would jeopardize the functioning
of the remaining portion of the system. In no case shall the response be
later than six hours after the time the report or complaint is received,
so long as it is received during a normal workday and four hours prior
to the end of the workday. The MCS provider shall make its best effort
to restore service as quickly as is possible, but in no event later than
the soonest possible time, including when such a report or complaint
is received after normal working hours. In the event of an after hours
report or complaint of a loss of service from two or more subscribers
from within the same portion of the system within the city, the MCS
provider shall respond to and make its best effort to restore service
within two hours of the time the report or complaint was received, or
in extenuating circumstances, as quickly as is possible. At no time shall
an MCS provider's staff that responds to a report or complaint of a loss
of service leave the problem until service is restored, where it is found
that a loss of service has occurred.
E. In the case of a loss of service or a blank or no-picture situation of any
given level of subscription or billing or service (except for pay-per-view
events), an MCS provider shall respond to, and make repairs as are
necessary to return and restore the multichannel service within 24
hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the
service interruption blank or no-picture situation.
F. In the case of a signal or service interruption or a diminution of service
as defined in § 227-4 of this chapter, an MCS provider shall make its
best efforts to respond and remedy the problem the same day, but in no
case later than one working day from the time the MCS provider first
received notification of the signal or service interruption or diminution
of service.
G. In the case of a defective, improperly or nonoperating piece of
equipment, an MCS provider shall make its best efforts to respond and
remedy the problem the same day, but in no case shall the response be
later than one working day from the time the MCS provider first
received notification. Moreover, the MCS provider shall complete
repairs as are necessary to correct the problem within 36 hours from
the time the MCS provider first received notification of the defective,
improperly or nonoperating piece of equipment.
H. In the case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS
provider received notification, or the precise circumstances
surrounding the MCS provider receiving notification, or whether
notification was received at all, the City Council reserves the right and
authority to dispositively settle such a dispute.
25.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-33 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-34
227:237
A. To the extent permitted by state law, including any applicable rule of
the PSC, a subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment
until at least the following have occurred:
(1) Thirty-five days have elapsed from the postmarked date of the bill
to the subscriber.
(2) Service for the first thirty-day period billed for has been delivered.
(3) Payment for said thirty-day period has not been received by an
MCS provider.
B. Before disconnection of a subscriber's multichannel service takes place,
either physically or electronically, the following must occur:
(1) The subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment for
multichannel service as defined by this chapter; and
(2) At least 24 hours have elapsed after a separate written notice of
impending disconnection has been delivered upon the subscriber
or deposited at his or her residence; or
(3) At least 72 hours have elapsed after the mailing a separate written
notice of impending disconnection to the subscriber as determined
by the postmark; or
(4) At least 24 hours have elapsed after the subscriber has either
signed for or refused to accept a separate written notice of
impending disconnection.
C. The written notice of disconnection must expressly and clearly state:
(1) The amount that is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider.
(2) The minimum amount required to be paid to avoid disconnection.
(3) The date and place where such payment must be made.
D. Disconnection of service must occur both on a normal service day and
within normal business hours of an MCS provider, unless the subscriber
is given the opportunity to pay the full amount of the past due account
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. An MCS provider who physically retrieves its equipment from a
subscriber, including but not limited to converters, remote control units
and digital audio tuners, must do so within both a normal service day
and normal service hours of an MCS provider, unless otherwise agreed
to by the subscriber.
F. Where an MCS provider imposes an administrative fee for a payment
delinquency it shall nevertheless be treated as a late charge, and may
not be any more than the state or PSC allows for late charges, if the
state or PSC has a provision covering the maximum permitted late
charges. If the state or PSC is silent on such a late charge, then the
§ 227-34 GENEVA CODE § 227-34
227:238
§ 227-35. Voluntary disconnections, including requests for
downgrades.26
maximum permitted late charge and/or administrative fee shall be a
simple 12% of the payment delinquency.
G. To the extent permitted by state law, including any applicable PSC rule
or regulation, a subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in such
case where he or she has notified the MCS provider of a billing dispute
and/or contested charge prior to disconnection, and the subscriber has
allowed the full amount of the contested charge to be placed in an MCS
provider's escrow account by the MCS provider, or made the
appropriate deposit into the MCS provider's escrow account. Moreover,
if a late charge and/or administrative charge is assessed prior to
notification of the contested charge, or is in fact the contested charge,
then such late charge and/or administrative fee may not be greater than
the state permitted maximum, or a simple 12% if there is no stateimposed
or PSC-imposed maximum.
H. Receipt of a bad check or other negotiable instrument from a
subscriber, in response to a written notice of disconnection, does not
constitute payment, and the affected MCS provider need not give the
subscriber further notice prior to disconnecting multichannel service.
I. An MCS provider may add a reasonable connection charge to the
subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this chapter, and any
applicable PSC regulation, are followed.
J. Any refund due a subscriber after a disconnection pursuant to this
section shall be made within 60 days of the disconnection for
nonpayment.
A. At any time, a subscriber may request that a particular service, level of
service, service tier, menu-driven program or service, premium
channel, informational service, or the entire multichannel service be
disconnected with no penalty of any kind whatsoever.
B. Unless prohibited by the Cable Act or state law, including any
applicable rule or regulations of the PSC, a subscriber may request a
downgrade from a particular level of service to a lower or less
comprehensive or expensive level of service. To the extent that a
subscriber requests a downgrade from an MCS provider classified as a
cable operator, then such MCS provider shall follow the rules and
regulations of the PSC, so long as such are not inconsistent with
applicable federal law. In the event there are no PSC rules governing
such, there shall be no charge for downgrading disconnecting service,
unless the city's authority to enforce this subsection is preempted or
prohibited by federal law or rule.
26.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-34 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-35
227:239
§ 227-36. Nonprohibitive access policy.27
C. A subscriber's obligation to pay for any service for which he or she has
requested disconnection or a downgrade shall cease within 72 hours
from the date of the request.
D. For a service, level of service, service tier, a la carte or menu-driven
service, premium channel, informational service or other
communications service which is voluntarily disconnected, a subscriber
shall pay only a pro-rata share of the monthly rate for such service, level
of service, service tier, a la carte or menu-driven service, premium
channel, informational service or other communications service, for the
month in which the request was made, based upon the number of days
of that month prior to the request. In other words, the subscriber shall
not be required to pay for, nor shall he or she be billed for service, that
was delivered more than 72 hours after the date of the request.
E. If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is, or has been damaged by a
subscriber prior to such disconnection, then the MCS provider may
charge the subscriber the entire actual cost of such damage, but no
more than the actual replacement cost to the MCS provider, provided
that the MCS provider notifies the subscriber of the damage at the time
of the disconnection or downgrade. A subscriber shall not be required
to pay for equipment failure if the circumstances fall within the normal
wear and tear or acts of nature guidelines established in this chapter, or
if the procedures in this subsection are not followed.
F. Once a one-time airing of a program or event starts, such as a pay-perview
event, which was affirmatively ordered by the subscriber, but only
if it was affirmatively ordered, should the customer or subscriber then
request a cancellation, the MCS provider may collect the full advertised
or quoted rate.
G. Any refund due a subscriber after a voluntary disconnection and/or
downgrade shall be made within 60 days after such disconnection or
downgrade.
H. In no event will this section be viewed as abridging the rights and
remedies afforded the subscriber by the complaint/inquiry resolution
process outlined in this chapter.
A. Except for normal sales and sales retention efforts, no MCS provider
shall engage in any activity or practice which is designed to prohibit or
inhibit, or has the effect of inhibiting or prohibiting, a subscriber from:
(1) Switching from one MCS provider to another MCS provider;
(2) Disconnecting from one MCS provider in order to connect and
receive multichannel service from another MCS provider; or
27.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-35 GENEVA CODE § 227-36
227:240
§ 227-37. Specific state-imposed rules for MCS providers classified
as cable operators.
(3) Simultaneously receiving multichannel service from more than one
MCS provider.
B. No MCS provider shall engage in any activity or practice which has the
effect of acting as a penalty or disincentive for a subscriber:
(1) Switching from one MCS provider to another MCS provider;
(2) Disconnecting from one MCS provider in order to connect and
receive multichannel service from another MCS provider; or
(3) Simultaneously receiving multichannel service from more than one
MCS provider.
C. With respect to Subsection B of this section, the following practices are
prohibited, unless the MCS provider can justify the need, cost and/or
rationale to the city to the city's satisfaction:
(1) Consistent with the Cable Act and any PSC rules, disconnection
and/or downgrade charges that are in excess of the actual,
verifiable costs incurred by the affected MCS provider in
connection with the disconnection and/or downgrade;
(2) The imposition of a disconnection and/or downgrade charge or
premium that is unrelated to the actual, verifiable costs incurred by
the affected MCS provider in connection with the disconnection
and/or downgrade;
(3) The imposition on the subscriber by the affected MCS provider of a
discriminatory or punitive return charge for the return of
equipment beyond the actual replacement cost to that MCS
provider; or
(4) The requirement that a subscriber enter into a service contract
which imposes penalties or cost-prohibitive charges, if the contract
is canceled in order to receive service from another MCS provider.
A. Multichannel service providers shall be expected to comply with, and
abide by, any and all applicable state-imposed rules and regulations, as
well as any applicable rules and regulations of the PSC.
B. Though not exhaustive, MCS providers subject to this section shall
comply with, and abide by, the following:
(1) Provision of the drop and basic or the lowest level of service at no
cost to all city-owned and/or occupied buildings or offices as
requested by the city, any school or educational institution within
the MCS provider's service area in the city, provided that service is
available within a reasonable distance from the school or
institution requesting service, such being defined as not requiring
§ 227-36 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-37
227:241
§ 227-38. Protection of subscriber privacy.28
An MCS provider shall abide by any and all subscriber privacy rules or
regulations of the federal or state government, including any applicable rule
or regulation of the PSC.
§ 227-39. Resolution of complaints/inquiries.29
the placement any active electronic or amplification equipment to
provide adequate signal strength to the point-of-entry to the school
or educational institution;
(2) Submission of a schedule of all terms and conditions of service in
the form and format prescribed by the city;
(3) Annual submission of the required annual notice that informs
subscribers of:
(a) Procedures needed to file or make a complaint and request
rebates, credits or refunds;
(b) Federally required subscriber privacy notification; and
(c) The address and phone number of the appropriate division or
department of the PSC; and
(4) Keeping a log or record, for two years, of all complaints received
regarding, but not limited to, the quality of service, rates,
programming, equipment malfunctions, billing procedures and
other matters of subscriber dissatisfaction, including treatment by
subscribers.
A. The city is hereby granted the authority to do all things necessary and
permissible to supervise, inspect and regulate the construction,
operation and maintenance of multichannel systems, franchised or
otherwise, that are subject to this chapter in whole or in part, and to
implement procedures for the filing and resolution of complaints, unless
otherwise prohibited by federal or state law.
B. The responsibility for such supervision, inspection and regulation is
retained by the City Council, which is empowered, among other things,
to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the
operations of any franchisee or other MCS provider, either on behalf of
the city or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interests of the
public and the city; provided, however, that any person aggrieved by a
decision of the city may appeal the matter for hearing and a
determination, in accordance with this chapter.
28.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
29.See § 227-6A for purpose of asterisk.
§ 227-37 GENEVA CODE § 227-39
227:242
§ 227-40. Policy with respect to continuity of multichannel service
provisions.
§ 227-41. Continued use of individual antennas protected.
C. The City Council reserves the right, at all times, on behalf of the city or
a subscriber, to accept, reject or change any decision of the City
Council, and may adjust, settle or impose a compromise regarding any
controversy arising from the operation of a franchisee or other MCS
provider, or from any provision of this chapter.
D. If an advisory committee is established by the city, a franchisee or other
MCS provider is encouraged to participate in advisory committee
meetings relating to MCS provider operations.
E. An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/
inquiry resolution policy which adheres to requirements of this chapter,
and any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder, as well as any
applicable rules of the PSC.
F. Said policy shall be submitted to the city for the city's approval of the
content at the time of the initial development or composition of the
policy, and thereafter 30 days prior to any planned or proposed change
in policy and required notification of such change to subscribers.
G. An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced
to writing, and such policy shall be available upon request, to any
person. In any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy,
and any change in said policy, in the manner that is prescribed by this
chapter and any PSC rules.
A. To the extent permitted by state law, including any applicable rule or
regulation of the PSC, all MCS providers may not abandon, withdraw or
cease to provide multichannel service to any subscribers or service area
within the city, other than as permitted under this chapter, without the
prior written consent of the City Council.
B. Moreover, an MCS provider may not use the threat to abandon,
withdraw or cease to provide multichannel service to any subscribers or
service area within the city to avoid compliance with this chapter or the
terms and conditions of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
C. Failure to meet the requirements of this section may result in the
imposition of fines in an amount set forth in the section titled "Fines."
D. Further, and in addition to and not limited by the preceding subsection,
violation of this section shall subject the MCS provider to termination
and revocation of its franchise, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
A. The City Council does not intend to prohibit the erection or continual
use of individual television antennas within the city, so long as the
§ 227-39 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-41
227:243
§ 227-42. Construction schedule and construction-related
requirements.
In order to establish minimum uniform standards, any MCS provider shall
adhere to the following minimum construction schedule and constructionrelated
requirements:
§ 227-43. Construction to be of good quality.
During any phase of construction, and with respect to any installation,
maintenance and repair of the multichannel system, the MCS provider
shall use materials of good and durable quality and all such work shall
be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner, and at all times
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city, the county and the
state, including those of the PSC.
§ 227-44. Conditions on use of streets and public ways.
individual television antennas conform to any and all applicable zoning
and/or land use regulations. Consequently, no person shall be required
to receive multichannel service, or to physically connect to a
multichannel system.
B. No person shall be penalized or fined (either through a home sales
contract, a deed containing restrictive covenants, or any other type or
instrument of agreement or restriction) for failing or refusing to
subscribe to or receive multichannel service, or for failing or refusing to
physically connect to a multichannel system.
A. Construct, install, maintain and repair the multichannel system in
accordance with this chapter, and any additional requirements of the
state, county and/or city.
B. Use streets and public rights-of-way as set forth in this chapter, and any
other applicable requirements of the state, county, and/or city.
C. Where applicable, and when ordered in accordance with this chapter,
remove the MCS provider's equipment, facilities and property from
public streets or right-of-way, in accordance with this chapter and
applicable state law.
D. Adopt the construction standards as set forth in this chapter.
E. Abide by and act in strict accordance with all current technical codes
that are standard and customary to the cable television and
multichannel service industry, including construction, fire, safety,
health and zoning codes that are adopted by the city, or the county, or
the state, or the United States, and as set forth in this chapter as relate
to the system and its operation.
F. Maintain all permits and licenses as required by this chapter.
§ 227-41 GENEVA CODE § 227-44
227:244
A. To the extent permitted by law, including any applicable rule or
regulation of the PSC, all wires, conduits, cable (whether coaxial, fiber
or a functional equivalent) and other property and facilities of an MCS
provider shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained so as
not to endanger, or unnecessarily interfere with, the usual and
customary use, traffic and travel upon the streets, rights-of-way,
easements and public ways of the city or any private property adjacent
to such.
B. In the event an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous or unsafe
condition, such being defined as situations not in compliance with any
safety or safety-related code, or an unreasonable interference with
public or private property, the MCS provider shall voluntarily, or upon
the request of the City Council, in a prompt and timely manner remove
or modify that part of the system so as to eliminate such condition from
the subject property in a prompt and expeditious manner and time
frame.
C. An MCS provider shall at no time and under no circumstances place
equipment where it will unduly or impermissibly interfere with the
rights of property owners, or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures,
water hydrants or mains, wastewater lift stations, any traffic control
system, or any other service or facility that benefits or protects the
health, safety or welfare of the city or its residents.
D. An MCS provider, either at its own expense or that of a private
contractor, shall protect public property, rights-of-way and easements,
and shall support or temporarily disconnect or relocate any property of
such MCS provider when necessitated by reason of:
(1) Traffic conditions;
(2) Public safety;
(3) Temporary or permanent street closing;
(4) Street construction or resurfacing;
(5) A change in, or establishment of, street grade;
(6) Installation, repair or modification of sewers, drains, water pipes,
storm drains, lift stations, force mains, power or signal lines, and
any traffic control system; or
(7) Any improvement, construction, repair or public works project
related to the city's or its residents' health safety or welfare.
E. It shall be the responsibility of an MCS provider, acting alone or in
conjunction with another person, to locate and mark or otherwise
visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground wires
or cable (coaxial, fiber or a functional equivalent) before employees,
agents or independent contractors of any entity perform work in the
intended area.
§ 227-44 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-44
227:245
§ 227-45. Franchised MCS provider's duty to remove franchised
properties from public streets.
This section is applicable to any MCS provider whose system occupies
public property or rights-of-way.
F. An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the wires and
facilities of the multichannel system to allow the moving of the building.
The expense of temporary removal shall be paid by the person
requesting it, and the MCS provider may require payment in advance.
The affected MCS provider shall be given not less than 14 days' notice
of a contemplated move to arrange for temporary wire changes.
A. Unless the city, or another MCS provider, indicates its lawful intent to
use the multichannel system (such as in the event of the sale and
purchase of the system) under the continuity provisions outlined in this
chapter, the affected MCS provider shall promptly remove its
multichannel system, including any facilities, equipment and property,
or any abandoned portion of the system, from the street, public ways
and private property located within the city, at its sole expense, within
90 days of the date of expiration, or the date of revocation and
termination, of its operating authority, or a lawful order or directive
from the city, whenever any of the following occurs:
(1) The MCS provider ceases to operate all, or part, of the
multichannel system for a continuous period of 90 days;
(2) The MCS provider fails to construct the multichannel system as
outlined in an initial application, a proposal for renewal, a renewal
of the franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or an
amended franchise, other agreement, license or permit;
(3) The City Council elects not to, and affirmatively acts not to, renew
the franchise, other agreement, license or permit pursuant to the
provisions set forth in this chapter; or
(4) The MCS provider's franchise, other agreement, license or permit
is revoked pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter.
B. The MCS provider shall remove its property, facilities, equipment, cable
and wires located in the city's streets and rights-of-way in the manner
and time frame prescribed in Subsections C through F of this section.
C. If not removed voluntarily by the MCS provider, then the city may notify
the MCS provider that if removal of the property is not accomplished
within 90 days, or substantial progress towards removal is not made
within 75 days, then the city may direct its officials or representatives
to remove the MCS provider's property, facilities, equipment, cable and
wires at the MCS provider's expense.
§ 227-44 GENEVA CODE § 227-45
227:246
§ 227-46. Construction standards.
D. If officials or representatives of the city remove, or cause to have
removed, an MCS provider's property, facilities, equipment, cable and
wires, and such MCS provider does not claim the property within 90
days of its removal, then the city may take whatever steps are
permissible under state law to declare the property surplus, and sell it,
with the proceeds of such sale going to the city, if permitted by state
law.
E. When such MCS provider removes its multichannel system and
property, facilities, equipment, cable and wires from the streets and
public rights-of-way within the city, the MCS provider shall, at its own
expense, and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore
such public or private property to a condition comparable to that which
existed before the work causing the disturbance was done.
A. Methods of construction, installation, maintenance and repair of any
multichannel system shall comply with the most current editions of the
National Electrical Safety Code (NESC) and the National Electrical
Code (NEC) as regards the construction, installation and maintenance
of electrical supply and communication lines and attachments and
supports, including but not limited to cable television systems. To the
extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit, or state or local law, state law shall
apply unless the state permits the local law or ordinance to control, in
which case the local law and this chapter shall control.
B. Any MCS provider, when engaged in any construction, installation,
maintenance and repair activities, shall treat the aesthetics of property
as a priority, shall not substantially change or affect the appearance or
the integrity of the structure and the property on which it is situated in
a negative manner, which specifically includes prohibiting the
installation of a drop and associated components on the bias across the
side of a residence or other structure without the property owner's
permission. This specifically means that, unless impracticable, all drop
material attached to a dwelling or business must follow the perimeter
lines or roof lines of the dwelling or business to the extent possible, and
result in the minimum visual effect reasonably possible, taking into
account the reasonable desires of the subscriber.
C. To the extent not physically or commercially impracticable, all
underground drops shall follow property lines, and shall cross property
only at right angles, unless otherwise permitted by the property owner,
or unless required due to the physical characteristics of the subsurface
or surface obstructions.
D. Underground installations shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications and requirements of the city and the National Electrical
Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, including but not limited
to depth of burial. In the event that the National Electrical Code does
§ 227-45 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-46
227:247
§ 227-47. System expansion.
For MCS providers subject to this section, the franchise, other agreement,
license or permit between the city and/or City Council and the franchised
MCS provider shall contain either a system expansion schedule for any area
not provided multichannel service as of the date of the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, or an explanation acceptable to the city as to
why a particular area will not be served.
§ 227-48. Permits and licenses.
An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses
required by local law or ordinance, or state rule or regulation, and shall
maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the
city or other appropriate governmental entity or agency.
§ 227-49. Technical performance standards.
It shall be the responsibility of any MCS provider to comply with the most
current FCC technical standards.
§ 227-50. Reservation of right to inspect system and review
documents.
not at any time address depth of burial for individual service drops,
the required minimum depth shall be such that a ten-inch long spade
traditionally used in normal landscaping and yard maintenance would
not damage the drop.
E. For existing multichannel systems, the provisions of Subsection C of
this section shall apply only at the time a scheduled upgrade or rebuild
of the MCS provider's multichannel system is actually commenced and
in progress. For newly served areas, the provisions of Subsection C of
this section shall apply at the time of initial construction and/or
installation.
F. For an MCS provider operating a multichannel system in the city at the
date of adoption of this chapter, the MCS provider shall be required to
bring all service drops into compliance with the requirements of this
section within 24 months from the date of adoption of this chapter.
G. In instances where either electrical or telephone utilities install wire or
cable aerially, the MCS provider may construct its multichannel system
aerially, unless otherwise required by state law; provided, however, that
all minimum separations between facilities as required by applicable
code, rule or regulation must at all times be complied with, and there
shall at no time be a conflict with or any contact between the MCS
provider's wires and cable or other equipment and facilities and those
of a utility.
§ 227-46 GENEVA CODE § 227-50
227:248
§ 227-51. Policy with respect to safety requirements.
A. In order to verify that an MCS provider constructs and maintains the
multichannel system in the manner required by this chapter, and
applicable state and federal rules and regulations, including all state
and federally required testing and inspection of the system, as well as
the required preventive maintenance program and safety-related
inspections required by this chapter, including any tests and
inspections required by the PSC, the city reserves the right to inspect
all facets of an MCS provider's construction, placement, operation and
maintenance of the system.
B. The city also reserves the right to require the delivery to the city, or its
designee, of any or all records and documents related to such tests and
inspections for purposes of review, as may be deemed necessary to
administer and enforce compliance with this chapter and any franchise,
other agreement, license or permit.
C. The city shall pay for all of its costs associated with such inspections or
reviews, except for those circumstances occasioned by an MCS
provider's refusal to provide the requested information necessary for
the administration and enforcement of this chapter and any franchise,
other agreement, license or permit, or that is occasioned by the failure
to construct, install, maintain, repair, rebuild or upgrade in the manner
specified and required by this chapter, or where applicable, a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit. In such instances, the MCS
provider shall pay for such costs incurred by the city that are caused by
the MCS provider's refusal or failure to supply necessary information,
or the failure to abide by the rules subsequent to city notices or
directives.
A. The city requires that any MCS provider's construction, operation and
maintenance of the multichannel system meet certain threshold safety
levels which are designed to protect the public and lessen the likelihood
of interruption of multichannel service.
B. Consequently, at a minimum, an MCS provider shall, at all times and
without exception, except for situations involving matters of force
majeure, comply with the following safety and safety-related
requirements:
(1) Emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this
chapter.
(2) Minimum standby power as noted in this chapter.
(3) The diligent conduct of a preventative maintenance program, as set
forth in this chapter.
(4) Comply with, and abide by, all FCC rules concerning signal quality
and signal strength, including the FCC's cumulative leakage index
(CLI) rules.
§ 227-50 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-51
227:249
§ 227-52. Provisions to alert subscribers in the event of a disaster
emergency; standby power.
(5) Comply with, and abide by, any and all construction, safety,
electrical, health and fire codes, as specified in this chapter or
other applicable city codes or ordinances.
A. In order that subscribers may be alerted in the event of an impending,
imminent or actual natural or other disaster or emergency, all MCS
providers shall ensure that the multichannel system providing
multichannel service to all, or any part, of the city is designed,
constructed and installed with the equipment that will permit an
authorized official or designee of the city to override the audio portion
of all channels, by touch-tone phone (or functional equivalent) from any
location.
B. In addition to any other requirements listed in this section, an MCS
provider shall:
(1) Designate a channel which will be used for disaster/emergency
broadcasts of both audio and video, though this channel need not
be solely used for emergency broadcasts, and may in fact be used
for any lawful purpose.
(2) Inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel on a
periodic basis, not less than once a day.
(3) Maintain all-channel video blanking capability to facilitate the
needs of hearing and sight-impaired customer or subscribers.
(4) Test the disaster emergency override system not less than once a
month, and remedy any problems or operational deficiencies
immediately.
(5) Cooperate with the city on the use and operation of the emergency
alert override system.
(6) Develop a plan, with the city's concurrence, to provide continuity of
multichannel service, and response to service calls, in the event of
an emergency.
C. As one method of providing continuity of multichannel services in the
event of a failure of commercial electrical power, for any reason
whatsoever, including but not limited to a natural or other disaster or
emergency, an MCS provider shall, unless exempted by the city, install
and diligently maintain automatically activated standby or backup
power to power all active line electronics (e.g., amplifiers) for at least
two hours and all trunk and feeder cable, and additionally install and
diligently maintain an automatically activated standby generator at all
headends, hubs and receive sites associated with the distribution of
cable service to, and throughout, the city that are owned or under the
control of the MCS provider or any affiliate or parent organization.
§ 227-51 GENEVA CODE § 227-53
227:250
§ 227-53. Implementation of a preventative maintenance program.
A. It shall be the duty of an MCS provider to devise and implement a
preventative maintenance program for the multichannel system in
order to ensure that there is no material degradation of the operation or
performance of the multichannel system that would affect the citizens'
health, safety and welfare, or negatively affect the quality or reliability
of multichannel services provided throughout the city.
B. Before the MCS provider implements such a preventive maintenance
program, it shall provide a copy of such program to the city for its
review and approval. The city shall specifically have the right and
authority to establish the minimum acceptable standards for the
preventive maintenance program.
C. Although not exhaustive, the following areas and standards shall at a
minimum be included in a preventive maintenance program, and the
results included in any subsequent report:
(1) Daily inspection, and adjustment if necessary, of the signal quality
of each channel, including both the audio and video levels at the
master headend.
(2) Daily scan, and adjustment if necessary, of carrier levels with a
spectrum analyzer or functional equivalent at the master headend.
(3) Daily logging of any and all adjustments made to the headend
electronic or signal processing equipment, any antennas or other
reception equipment or the distribution system.
(4) Daily monitoring and logging, and repair, if necessary, of signal
leakage, to ensure that the multichannel system is within FCC
allowed levels.
(5) Inspection of drops as an integral part of every service call, and
schedule for relocation or replacement, if necessary.
(6) Inspection and recordation of appropriate signal levels during each
service call.
(7) Weekly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend audio
and video carrier levels at the master headend.
(8) Weekly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend
descrambling levels to meet operational standards of the
equipment manufacturer.
(9) A minimum of twice annually realign the satellite equipment as the
target satellite passes through the center of the box.30
30.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(10), which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 5-6-1998 by Ord. No. 98-8.
§ 227-53 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-53
227:251
(10) A minimum of twice annually conduct performance measurements,
done no more frequently than seven and no less frequently than
five months apart, and adjustment if necessary, at all extremities of
the distribution system, and to include:
(a) Video and audio signal levels.
(b) Overall difference in signal level or response flatness.
(c) Hum modulation.
(d) Carrier-to-noise.
(e) Signal egress.31
(11) Monthly testing, and repair if necessary, of the emergency alert
override system.
(12) Monthly testing and inspection, and repair if necessary, of 1/3 of all
standby power supplies.
(13) Semiannual monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend
radio frequency (RF) input levels to off-air processors coincident
with the twice annual FCC required proof-of-performance tests.
(14) Semiannual inspections, and repair if necessary, of:
(a) Any antenna tower.
(b) Any and all earth stations.
(c) Any and all buildings and fences associated with the
multichannel system.
(15) Semiannual inspections, and repair and/or recalibration if
necessary, of all in-house, and field test or measuring equipment no
less often than the manufacturer's recommended calibration
schedule, with such calibration evidenced by a certificate issued by
a NIST-traceable calibration lab, which may include the operator is
so qualified and traceable to the NIST.
(16) As required by the FCC semiannual extremity tests (and
adjustment if necessary) of the distribution system to include:
(a) Cross modulation distortion.
(b) Composite second and third order products.
(c) RF sweep response.
(17) As required by the FCC, testing to determine compliance with the
FCC's cumulative leakage index (CLI) rules.
31.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(12), which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 5-6-1998 by Ord. No. 98-8.
§ 227-53 GENEVA CODE § 227-53
227:252
§ 227-54. Construction, fire and safety codes.
(18) Extremity tests as required by the FCC (and adjustment if
necessary) of the distribution system, to include:
(a) Twenty-four-hour signal level stability test.
(b) Channel response flatness.
(19) Where required by local or state law, annual inspection and repair
(if necessary) of all MCS provider owned or leased vehicles.32
(20) Regular, diligent inspection of the system to identify any violations
of safety-related codes or other requirements, and the expeditious
elimination or correction of any situations in noncompliance with
the safety-related codes and requirements set forth in this chapter
or in other city codes or ordinances.
D. Thirty days after each calendar quarter, an MCS provider subject to this
section shall notify the city of the preventive maintenance information
available for that calendar quarter, and that such information is
available for inspection, examination and review by the city.
A. The franchisee or other MCS provider shall at all times and without
exception conduct all of its construction, installation, repair and
maintenance activities in accordance with the fire and safety
regulations of the city, and all local, state and federal safety regulations,
and shall at all times, without limitation or exception, adhere to
regulations governing the security of facilities as promulgated by the
city.
B. The codes referred in the preceding subsection are standard and
customary to the multichannel service industry and include, but are not
limited to, electrical, construction, fire, safety, health, building and
zoning codes.
C. To provide for the maximum protection of the health and safety of
persons and property in the city, the intent of this section is to require
100% compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC) and
the National Electrical Code and other applicable electrical building
and fire codes, rules and regulations at all times, subject only to force
majeure exceptions. For clarifications, this is intended to mean that the
city adopts a policy of zero tolerance of safety-related violations
associated with any multichannel system in the city.
D. It shall be the responsibility and obligation of any franchisee or other
MCS provider to immediately by phone, and the next day in writing for
purposes of the city's records, report to the city any violation of safety
codes that are identified and are not able to be remedied, or are not
32.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(22), which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 5-6-1998 by Ord. No. 98-8.
§ 227-53 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-54
227:253
§ 227-55. Alternative user charge.
remedied, within 24 hours of their identification, so as enable the city
to take any needed precautions to alert or otherwise protect persons
and property in the city.
E. It shall further be the immediate and primary responsibility of the
affected or transgressing MCS provider to place appropriate and
effective warning signs and protective devices or barriers at the site of
any such safety violations that create an imminent danger or threat, as
in the reasonable determination of the city may be needed and directed
by the city.
F. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the section in this chapter
entitled "Fines," there shall be no fines or other penalty applied or
assessed against a franchisee or other MCS provider for safety-related
violations that are voluntarily and of its own accord and volition
reported to the city in accordance with the previous Subsection D,
provided that the first report of a situation not in compliance with this
section that the city receives is that of the franchisee or other service
provider whose facilities are not in compliance with the required safety
codes and this chapter.
A. This section is applicable to any lawfully operating, but unfranchised,
MCS provider that does not remit a franchise fee payment to the city. It
is also applicable to any MCS provider whose franchise has been ruled
unconstitutional, unenforceable or otherwise invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction. Further, this section also is applicable to a
franchised MCS provider who has had its franchise fees ruled
unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. Where not specifically prohibited by federal or state law, and as an
alternative to and in lieu of the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth
in this chapter, the city may impose an alternative user charge and
require remittance of such by an affected MCS provider to help in
recouping the cost of administering, monitoring and enforcing
compliance with a franchise agreement, other agreement, license or
permit, and applicable law and regulation, and for the cost of the
maintenance of the public property and rights-of-way occupied by the
multichannel system.
C. The alternative user charge shall be based on the estimated cost of the
time of city staff required to administer, monitor and enforce
compliance by the MCS provider, and the cost of maintaining the public
property and rights-of-way occupied by the multichannel system.
However, in no event shall the alternative user charge exceed the
maximum amount that would have been permitted to be imposed as a
franchise fee for the payment and reporting period.
§ 227-54 GENEVA CODE § 227-55
227:254
§ 227-56. Franchise required; exception.
D. An alternative user charge is adopted in order to recover the cost
incurred by the city in administering, monitoring and enforcing the
MCS provider's compliance with the franchise or other agreement or
permit, and applicable law, rule, regulation and code, and the cost of
maintaining the public property and rights-of-way occupied by the
multichannel system. However, an affected MCS provider and the city
may agree to an alternative charge that is based on either a flat
percentage of gross revenue or a given dollar amount, so long as that
charge does not exceed the maximum amount that would have been
permitted to be imposed as a franchise fee for the payment and
reporting period at the time of the exercise of this option.
E. It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative user
charge will not be imposed on the same MCS provider at the same time,
for the same period, unless otherwise mutually agreed to.
F. Should the alternative user charge ever exceed the maximum amount
that would have been permitted to be imposed as a franchise fee, then
the alternative user charge shall be reduced to an amount not greater
than the maximum amount that would have been permitted to be
imposed as a franchise fee, and any overpayment shall promptly be
returned to the MCS provider upon request.
G. The alternative user charge assessed shall be payable to the city
quarterly on a calendar year basis.
H. In the event that the alternative user charge is based on a percentage of
revenue, to assist the city in determining the accuracy and
completeness of the alternative user charge payments, the MCS
provider shall file with the city a complete, detailed, accurate statement
of all realized revenues attributable to and occasioned by the operation
of the system and the grant of the franchise, or other agreement,
license or permit within the city, for the period for which the payment is
required, whether received by the franchisee or other MCS provider
directly, or any parent, affiliate or subsidiary. The statement shall be
certified by a certified public accountant or a qualified officer of the
MCS provider or its parent with respect to the statement's accuracy
and completeness.
I. The alternative user charge payment shall be made to the city not later
than 60 days after the end of each calendar year quarter.
J. The MCS provider shall also provide annually, within 90 days after the
end of the MCS provider's fiscal year, a report certified by a certified
public accountant or an officer of the MCS provider or its parent,
verifying all earned gross revenues.
A. No person or MCS provider shall be permitted to construct, operate or
maintain a multichannel system which requires the laying or
§ 227-55 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-56
227:255
§ 227-57. Authority to grant nonexclusive franchises; required
permitting.
§ 227-58. Franchise agreement; minimum requirements.
positioning or use of cable (whether coaxial, fiber or a functional
equivalent) in, along or across the streets or rights-of-way of the city,
without having first obtained an MCS franchise, other agreement,
license or permit, unless such person or MCS provider is exempted
under state law (including any applicable rule or regulation of the PSC),
or not required to do so under the Cable Act.
B. Consistent with the Cable Act, no franchise, other agreement, license or
permit shall be required for either the city, or any local or municipal
authority affiliated with the city, to own a multichannel system or
operate as an MCS provider in the city.
A. Consistent with Section 621(a)(1) of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC
541), the City Council may award one or more nonexclusive
multichannel service franchises or other agreements, licenses or
permits within its geographical limits.
B. No franchise or other agreement, license or permit granting authority
to construct and operate a multichannel system shall be exclusive.
C. An MCS provider's application shall be evaluated and approved or
disapproved as part of a public proceeding and hearing which affords
due process to the city, the applicant and the public, and which is in
accordance with applicable federal or state laws, including any
applicable rules of the PSC.
D. Within 90 days after the effective date of a franchise or other
agreement, license or permit a franchisee or other MCS provider shall
proceed with due diligence and its best efforts to obtain, at its own
costs, all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations which are
required for the conduct of its business in the city, including, but not
limited to, any private easement agreements, any business licenses,
utility joint-use or attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses,
and any other permits, licenses and authorizations needed to lawfully
operate a multichannel system within the city.
E. A franchisee or other MCS provider shall have in its possession such
permits, easements, agreements and licenses prior to the
commencement of its multichannel system operations.
A. An MCS provider subject to the city's franchising, licensing or
permitting authority may not lay or use any cable (whether coaxial,
fiber or a functional equivalent) until the franchise or other agreement,
license or permit is fully executed and is in effect, including approval by
the PSC as may be applicable.
§ 227-56 GENEVA CODE § 227-58
227:256
B. A franchise, other agreement, license or permit shall be sufficiently
detailed so to clearly delineate the rights, duties and obligations of the
parties concerned.
C. As permitted, and as may be applicable to a particular class or type of
MCS provider, a franchise, other agreement, license or permit shall, at
a minimum, contain and address the following matters, as well as any
requirements in accordance with Part 591 of the PSC's Rules, or other
rules of the PSC as may be applicable at any time:
(1) A detailed definition of "gross revenue" in order to determine what
revenues are subject to any franchise, other agreement, license or
permit fee or alternative user charge.
(2) The term or duration of the franchise, other agreement, license or
permit.
(3) Indemnity and hold harmless.
(4) Insurance.
(5) Performance and completion bonds or security deposits.
(6) Service area.
(7) Construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule.
(8) Compensation, including franchise, other agreement, license or
permit fees.
(9) Continuity of service.
(10) Assignment of an existing franchise, other agreement, license or
permit.
(11) Repeal of prior inconsistent franchise, other agreement, license or
permits.
(12) Severability.
(13) Force majeure.
(14) Reference to the law and rules that govern the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit.
(15) Any exemptions or relief from this chapter as may be granted, or
any ordinance clarifications noted with respect to the MCS
provider's operation of a multichannel system.
(16) An effective date.
D. The city reserves the right to require, without limitation, additional
matters, issues and subjects to be contained in a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, as may be reasonably deemed necessary
§ 227-58 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-58
227:257
§ 227-59. Extent of grant of franchise.
§ 227-60. Term of franchise.
§ 227-61. Service area.
or in the interest of the city and its residents, subject to applicable state
and federal law and rule.
A. Upon an award of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, in
accordance with the terms of such franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, an MCS provider required to obtain a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit may construct, erect, install, maintain,
operate, maintain, repair, replace, remove or restore a multichannel
system within the geographical limits set forth in the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit.
B. The multichannel system may be located in, upon, along, across, over
and under the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public ways of the
city.
C. Any MCS provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required
easements for private property (including privately owned utility or
street light poles).
D. An MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement
agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multichannel system
on, or within, the property of such utility company. This provision
specifically includes, but is not limited to, MCS providers classified as
cable operators.
A. The term of an initial MCS franchise, other agreement, license or
permit shall be no more than 10 years from the date that a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit is approved by the City Council, and
is executed by an authorized individual of the city and the affected MCS
provider and is approved by the PSC, absent the demonstration of the
need for a longer term for financial reasons.
B. The term of a renewal franchise, other agreement, license or permit
shall be for a period not less than 3 1/2 years, nor more than as
permitted by the PSC, from the date that a franchise, other agreement,
license or permit renewal agreement is both approved by the City
Council, and executed by both the Manager and the affected MCS
provider, and is approved by the PSC. In the event the PSC does not
establish a maximum term for a renewal, such maximum term shall be
no more than 10 years, absent the demonstration of the need for a
longer term for financial reasons.
A. Any franchisee, or other MCS provider, shall make service available to
all residences, dwellings, businesses or establishments on all public
streets and roads throughout the city. There shall not at any time, after
§ 227-58 GENEVA CODE § 227-61
227:258
§ 227-62. Initial and renewal application for franchise; application
fee.
completion of the initial construction of the system, be any residence,
dwelling, business or establishment situated on or adjacent to any
public street or road that is not capable of receiving multichannel
service without the need for a line extension, as the term "line
extension" is defined in § 227-4 of this chapter. The primary test for
exception to the requirements of this section shall be a test of
commercial impracticability, as defined under the federal Uniform
Commercial Code.
B. If the city increases the required service area by adding or
incorporating additional land areas, through annexation or any other
lawful means, the franchisee or other MCS provider shall extend
multichannel service to the new locations within 180 days of a written
request from city, at no cost to the city.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, the cost for any line
extensions, if permitted to be passed through to subscribers
incrementally, shall not be apportioned only to those subscribers served
by the instant line extension, but shall be apportioned among all
subscribers in the city.
D. Any applicant for an initial franchise, other agreement, license or
permit, or the renewal of such, shall submit to the city a plan to provide
service to all domiciles and businesses in the city as a part of the
application, request or proposal. Such plan shall be subject to the
approval of the city.
E. Further, while such approval may not unreasonably be withheld, any
plan for community-wide or universal service requiring more than one
year from the start of construction, rebuild or upgrade, or the request
for renewal of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, must be
accompanied by a detailed explanation of the reasons for the needed
additional time, as well as a date specific by which service is proposed
to be available throughout the community.
A. For MCS providers classified as cable operators, the City Council shall
follow all applicable rules of the PSC with respect to the submission and
processing of initial and renewal applications for a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit.
B. For other MCS providers, the City Council may develop rules with
respect to the submission and processing of initial applications for a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit. Such rules and
regulations shall primarily be aimed at determining the legal, financial,
technical and character qualifications of the applicant for a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit, as well as other matters deemed of
importance that are not prohibited by applicable federal law.
§ 227-61 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-62
227:259
§ 227-63. Franchise fees.
C. Unless prohibited by the state or the PSC, an applicant for an initial
franchise, other agreement, license or permit shall pay an initial
application fee which shall be no greater than the administrative and
consulting costs associated with analyzing, evaluating and processing
an initial application for a franchise, other agreement, license or
permit. The total application fee must be paid, unless waived by the City
Council.
D. The applicant shall submit to the city, simultaneously with the
application or request, a check in the amount of $15,000. If the cost of
analyzing, evaluating and processing the application is less than the
application fee the city shall return the unexpended amount. However,
if the cost of analyzing, evaluating and processing the application is
greater than the amount of the application fee, due to the actions, lack
of action or lack of cooperation of the applicant, the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit shall not be issued or granted until
reimbursement of all costs incurred by the city as a result of the
application are received.
E. In the event that the total actual cost of processing the application, in
accordance with Subsection C of this section, is less that $15,000, the
city shall promptly return any unused portion to the applicant upon
conclusion of the process.
A. Any MCS provider, specifically including but not necessarily limited to
any MCS provider classified as a cable operator, that is granted a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or a franchise renewal,
or renewal of an other agreement, license or permit, after the date this
chapter becomes effective shall, if permitted by federal law or rule, pay
to the city a sum equal to 5% of the annual gross revenue of such MCS
provider. Such amount is intended in part to compensate the city for the
MCS provider's private, profit-making use and occupancy of the public
property and rights-of-way and to recompense the city for the cost of
maintaining the public property and rights-of-way occupied by the
multichannel system.
B. The City Council recognizes that, with respect to MCS providers
classified as cable operators, those MCS providers may have to remit an
annual fee to the PSC. Therefore, to the extent that the remittance of
the PSC annual fee, when computed together with any franchise fee
paid by the MCS provider, or collected from other and remitted by the
MCS provider, or that is owed, is greater than 5% of the cable
operator's annual gross revenues, the payment of the PSC annual fee
shall be deducted from and credited as an offset against any franchise
fee actually paid to the city by the MCS provider, provided that the MCS
provider has not elected merely to collect the fee from others, including
subscribers, and remit the amount collected to the PSC.
§ 227-62 GENEVA CODE § 227-63
227:260
C. If the FCC, Congress or any other governmental entity with authority to
establish the maximum allowable franchise fee ever allows franchising
authorities to increase the franchise fee beyond 5% of gross revenue,
then the city shall have the authority to increase the franchise fee to the
maximum percentage and/or amount allowable.
D. An MCS provider subject to the collection and remittance of a franchise
fee, or its functional equivalent under an other agreement, a permit or a
license, shall, automatically and without further notification, pass
through to subscribers the amount of any decrease in the franchise fee
that is attributable to or calculated on subscriber revenues, in the next
monthly bill or periodic invoice, so that the bill or invoice reflects the
decrease in the franchise fee on subscriber revenues.
E. An MCS provider that is subject to the remittance of a franchise fee, or
its functional equivalent, shall file with the city, within 45 days after the
expiration of each of the MCS providers' fiscal quarters, a detailed
financial and revenue report and statement clearly showing the
franchise fee or functional equivalent due for the preceding quarter,
together with the basis of the calculations thereof. Such statement shall
be certified by a certified public accountant or officer of the MCS
provider attesting to the accuracy, completeness and veracity of the
revenue figures. Such report and statement shall be in the form and
format determined necessary by the City Council, or its designee, to
reasonably ascertain the accuracy and completeness of the total
remittance, as well as the accuracy and completeness of all types,
categories and sources of revenue, individually. Further, said report and
statement shall show all revenue from whatever source, that is directly
or indirectly derived from, or caused to be derived from, or that is
attributable to the operation of the multichannel system or the
provision of any service by or using the multichannel system. The
revenue shall, at least, be reported by service category, type and level,
individually, showing appropriate computations and individual and
incremental rates for all sources, levels, tiers, clusters and types of
service, and other revenue sources by kind and type.
F. Remittance of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee, or its
functional equivalent, shall be rendered to the city at the time the
financial and revenue statement is filed.
G. In the event that remittance is not made by the due date, then such
franchised MCS provider may be declared in default of the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit, and should the amount owed
remain unremitted for an additional 60 days after the date of
notification of nonremittance or late remittance, then the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit may be revoked, terminated or
canceled as noted elsewhere in this chapter.
H. The city reserves the right to audit a franchised MCS provider's books,
if the City Council deems it necessary. If such audit discovers an underremittance
of the franchise fee or its functional equivalent of greater
§ 227-63 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-63
227:261
than 2% of the actual amount owed, then the MCS provider shall
reimburse the city for the cost of such audit, unless such cost is waived
by the City Council. It is specifically understood that the right of audit
and recomputation of any, and all, amounts remitted under a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit fee shall always be accorded to the
City Council.
I. If an audit, or other research, discovers that the franchise fee or its
functional equivalent has been either under-remitted or not remitted
for a period exceeding six months from the original due date
notwithstanding Subsection G of this section, then the City Council may
seek full recovery of the under-remitted or not remitted fees, plus
interest not to exceed 15% per year, or if greater than 15% the
maximum allowable under state law.
J. All annual reports due and pertaining to the remittance of the franchise
fee, or its functional equivalent, will be certified by an officer of the
MCS provider or its parent, and will be provided in the form, format and
detail applicable to quarterly reports under Subsection E of this
section. Such MCS provider shall maintain records used in the
preparation of said reports, to be produced in their totality upon
request or demand by the City Council.
K. No acceptance of any remittance shall be construed as a release of, or
an accord, or satisfaction of, any claim that the city might have for
further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter or a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or for any other
performance or obligation of a franchised MCS provider hereunder.
L. Payments of compensation made by a franchised MCS provider to the
city, or remittances of amounts collected, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, shall be considered in addition to, and exclusive of, any
and all authorized taxes, business license fees, other fees, other levies
or assessments presently in effect or subsequently adopted.
M. A franchise fee or its functional equivalent shall not include any items
excluded by Section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act [codified at 47 USC
542(g)(2)(D)].
N. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the
city to require the payment, or the collection and remittance, of a fee or
other assessment of any kind, on any person (other than a franchised
MCS provider, or an MCS provider operating under another form of
agreement or a license or permit) with respect to multichannel service
or other programming or communications service provided by such
person over a multichannel system, for which charges are assessed to
subscribers, but not received by a franchised MCS provider. For
purposes of illustration only, this subsection shall include the
situation(s) where a provider of a particular service directly bills a
subscriber, or the MCS provider acts as collection agent for a provider
of a particular service who directly bills a subscriber(s), or where a
§ 227-63 GENEVA CODE § 227-63
227:262
person leases a channel for commercial use and sells advertising or
goods on that channel, and receives the money directly or through a
third party.
O. For any twelve-month period, the fees paid by or remitted by any person
who provides any such multichannel service pursuant to Subsection N
of this section shall not exceed 5% of such person's gross revenue
derived in such period from the operation of the multichannel system in
the city, including the provision of service over the system, or such
higher percentage as may be authorized by the FCC, Congress or other
governmental entity with authority to increase the percentage or
amount of such fees.
P. If, at any time, the highest court of the nation or the highest court of the
state invalidates, voids or rules as unconstitutional or unenforceable
the concept of franchise fees, then the City Council may impose an
alternative user charge on the franchised MCS provider, as provided in
this chapter.
Q. In light of Subsection P of this section, in the event the applicable
provision of the franchise, other agreement, license or permit were to
be ruled unconstitutional or unenforceable, so that the city's source of
recompense for the cost of administering this chapter and any franchise
agreement, other agreement, license or permit, and the cost of
maintaining the public property and rights-of-way, and the right to
require fair and reasonable compensation for the private, profit-making
use and occupancy of the public property and rights-of-way may be
protected, the MCS operator providing service under a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit may be required to pay to the city a fee
using a different method and manner for the computation and collection
of the fee as provided for in this chapter.
R. Subject to federal law, and notwithstanding anything preceding in this
section, nothing shall limit the authority of the city to assess and impose
a franchise fee, or its functional equivalent, on any portion, category or
type of revenue, or to exempt any portion, category or type of revenue
from inclusion in the computational base used to calculate the franchise
fee or its functional equivalent, so long as such is done in a
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner with respect to
competitive MCS providers in the city.
S. Notwithstanding anything in this section, in the event an MCS provider
does not pay the franchise fee itself, but instead, if permitted by federal
law or rule, chooses to pass the franchise fee through to subscribers,
incrementally and in addition to the amount owed for service, so that
the effect is that the franchise fee is paid by the subscribers and not the
MCS provider, and is merely collected and remitted by the MCS
provider, then in such an instance the MCS provider shall not be
permitted to deduct the franchise fee from what is owed for property
taxes, or any other taxes or money, due the city.
§ 227-63 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-63
227:263
§ 227-64. Rent.
§ 227-65. Assignment, transfer or sale of franchise.
T. Pursuant to Section 253(c) of the 1996 Telecommunications Act, the
city deems it appropriate to reserve the right to assess, impose and
collect rent from an MCS provider occupying and using the publicly
owned and/or maintained rights-of-way and other city-owned and/or
maintained property, and to assess, impose and collect rent from a
franchisee or other MCS provider for the private, profit-making use of
the public property and rights-of-way in the city.
A. In the event franchise fees as historically assessed and calculated are at
any time deemed unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable, and
unless specifically prohibited by federal or state law, the city reserves
the right to require payment of rent by an MCS provider for the private,
profit-making use of the public property and rights-of-way, subject to
any statutory limitations or requirements set by state or federal law.
B. As regards service providers of like or similar kinds or nature, the city
shall at all times assure that the imposition of rent is on a
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner.
C. The amount of the rent shall be based upon and shall not exceed the fair
market value of the town's property and public rights-of-way, or that
portion of the town's property and public rights-of-way used and
occupied by the MCS provider, as determined by the town's Assessor, or
another qualified individual as may be designated by the city.
D. The assessment shall be based upon either the fair market value of like
or similar property adjacent to the town's property or public rights-ofway
that are used and occupied by that portion of the MCS provider's
system serving that portion of the city, or the average fair market value
of commercially zoned property within the city as determined by
ascertaining the average or mean value for the preceding three years,
whichever is less.
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, the city may
negotiate with an MCS provider for the in-kind provision of services or
other valuable consideration in lieu of all or a portion of the amount that
would otherwise be required to be paid as cash. However, the city is not
obligated to grant this option to any MCS provider, so long as it applies
this authority in a manner among like or similar service providers that
is nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral with respect to the value
received by the city.
A. There shall be no assignment of an MCS provider's franchise, other
agreement, license or permit in whole, or in part, without the prior
express written approval and consent of the City Council.
§ 227-63 GENEVA CODE § 227-65
227:264
§ 227-66. Default of franchise or other agreement; revocation,
termination or cancellation.
B. Any assignment without such prior written consent shall constitute a
default of such franchise, other agreement, license or permit, which
may, at the discretion and in the judgment of City Council, subject a
franchised MCS provider's franchise, other agreement, license or
permit to revocation.
C. An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall have its franchise,
other agreement, license or permit assigned, transferred or sold only in
accordance with the Cable Act, FCC rules, state law and PSC rules and
regulations, as applicable.
D. For all MCS providers subject to this section, including those classified
as cable operators, the franchise, other agreement, license or permit
shall be assigned, transferred or sold only after the City Council
determines that the proposed transferee can meet all obligations
imposed by the existing franchise agreement, other agreement, license
or permit, and that there are no outstanding uncured violations of the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or of this chapter, and
that all money that is owed the city has been paid in full.
A. With respect to franchised MCS providers classified as cable operators,
or other MCS providers operating under another form of agreement, a
license or a permit, the City Council shall follow the rules and
procedures adopted by the state, including those of the PSC,
concerning the default, termination, revocation, alteration or
suspension of a cable franchise, or other agreement, license or permit,
in addition to the payment of fines and the imposition of penalties, if not
impermissible under applicable law. In the absence of such rules and
procedures by the state, including the PSC, MCS providers classified as
cable operators, or other MCS providers operating under another form
of agreement, a license or a permit, shall be subject to the rules and
procedures noted in Subsections C through L of this section.
B. For other franchised MCS providers, to the extent permitted by state
law, the City Council adopts the rules and procedures (noted in
Subsections C through L of this section) concerning the default,
revocation, termination or cancellation of an MCS franchise, other
agreement, license or permit.
C. When any event, act or omission on the part of an MCS provider occurs
which represents a violation of a provision of this chapter or its
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or compromises the
corporate character, or legal, financial or technical ability, integrity
and/or stability of the multichannel system or the MCS provider to such
a degree that the interests of the customer or subscribers are
substantively affected in a negative manner, then such violation,
breach, event, act or omission shall be considered a material breach of
this chapter, or any franchise, other agreement, license or permit as
§ 227-65 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-66
227:265
may be applicable. Under such circumstances, the city shall notify the
affected MCS provider, in writing, of the specific breach or violation,
and direct such MCS provider to remedy the breach or violation in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1) For illustrative purposes only, the violations, breaches, events, acts
and omissions include, but are not limited to: bankruptcy,
insolvency, failure to pay taxes or pay or remit franchise fees or the
functional equivalent (including an alternative user charge in lieu
of the franchise fee or its functional equivalent, if applicable),
failure to receive written City Council approval for an assignment
or transfer of the franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or
failure to abide by the terms and conditions of the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, or the provisions of this chapter,
including those involving matters of customer service, consumer
protection and safety and safety-related requirements.
D. Where an MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the enumerated
conditions to the satisfaction of the city within 60 days, then the
procedure intended under this section shall cease, and in no event shall
the enumerated condition be weighed against such MCS provider in
any subsequent performance review under the terms of the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit. However, to protect the health and
safety of the public, at the discretion of City Council, violations of
safety-related requirements may be required to be corrected,
eliminated or otherwise cured in less than 60 days.
E. A copy of the notice of material breach shall be mailed to the surety on
the performance bond, unless otherwise directed by state law.
F. Within 75 days after such written notice is mailed to an MCS provider,
the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the matter, unless
state law requires a different procedure, in which event the state
procedure shall control.
G. The City Council shall provide written notice to the affected MCS
provider, and to the surety, of the time and place of said public hearing
in a manner consistent with either state law or approved by the City
Council.
H. At the time of the hearing, the affected MCS provider may present
information on the current status of the alleged breach of the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit. If the situation has been resolved,
or steps are being taken to resolve the situation, then the franchised
MCS provider shall present the information at the hearing.
I. If the affected MCS provider fails to attend the hearing, and has not
requested a continuance of the hearing, then such MCS provider shall
be deemed to have waived its right to a further continuation of the
matter, and may be declared in default of the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit.
§ 227-66 GENEVA CODE § 227-66
227:266
§ 227-67. Performance evaluations.
J. After the public hearing, the City Council may determine the MCS
provider to be in compliance and dismiss the matter, or may determine
that the MCS provider has cured any noncompliance and thereby
dismiss the matter. However, the City Council may determine that a
chapter violation exists and remains uncured, or that a violation of the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit has been committed and
remains uncured. Consequently, upon a finding that the MCS provider
violated a material chapter provision, or failed to cure an outstanding
violation of this chapter or of the franchise, other agreement, license or
permit, the City Council may direct the affected franchised MCS
provider to take corrective action within a specified period of time, or
may declare such franchised MCS provider in default of the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit, and thereafter may revoke,
terminate or cancel the franchise, other agreement, license or permit,
unless the franchised MCS provider presents sufficient mitigating
circumstances.
K. If the City Council directs corrective action to take place within a
specified period of time or declares such franchised MCS provider in
default of the franchise, other agreement, license or permit, then that
declaration shall be reduced to writing, and the notice of corrective
action or default shall be mailed to such franchised MCS provider, and
surety, within 21 days of the City Council's action.
L. If within 60 days, the affected franchised MCS provider, or surety, does
not take significant action to rectify the breach, or submit a plan
detailing how the affected MCS provider will eliminate the breach,
including the proposed time frame for such cure, then the City Council
may revoke such MCS provider's franchise, other agreement, license or
permit, and shall notify the affected franchised MCS provider and
surety forthwith, unless there are mitigating circumstances.
A. The City Council reserves the right to design a performance evaluation
procedure which periodically monitors compliance of MCS providers
with the terms and conditions of both this chapter and any applicable
franchise, other agreement, license or permit. Moreover, the City
Council may periodically review and determine whether an MCS
provider's financial, technical, legal and character qualifications, and
its record of meeting community and subscriber needs, as particularly
relate, but are not limited, to matters of customer service practices,
continue to meet the needs of the community, and to determine if the
operational, maintenance and performance levels needed to ensure the
uninterrupted and acceptable provision of multichannel services are
adequate to meet the needs and reasonable desires of the community.
Such performance evaluations may be conducted at least every three
years during the term of any franchise, other agreement, license or
permit, or more frequently if deemed necessary and appropriate due to
§ 227-66 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-67
227:267
§ 227-68. Rates and charges.
§ 227-69. Interconnection.
complaints or repeated or multiple violations of this chapter or the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
B. If, as a result of the evaluation, the City Council determines that the
franchised MCS provider has not complied with a provision of this
chapter, or its franchise, other agreement, license or permit, then the
City Council shall give the franchised MCS provider an opportunity
either to correct or remedy the area of noncompliance, or submit
documentation or supporting data that resolves or explains the area of
noncompliance to the satisfaction of the city.
C. If the franchised MCS provider fails to correct or resolve an area of
noncompliance in a timely manner, or provide an acceptable
explanation in a timely manner, then such failure may be treated as a
material violation of this chapter or the franchise, other agreement,
license or permit, as is appropriate.
A. To the extent permitted by federal law, including applicable FCC rules
and regulations, and state law, including applicable PSC rules and
regulations, the City Council is authorized to, and may choose to,
regulate the rates for basic multichannel service, which includes basic
cable service and those charges (such as converter rental outlet fees)
associated with the provision of multichannel service. In the event that
the City Council chooses to regulate rates for basic service, the City
Council shall follow any, and all, applicable FCC and PSC rules,
regulations and procedures concerning rate regulation.
B. Consistent with federal law, before the City Council exercises its right
to impose, approve or deny the rates and charges for multichannel
service, the City Council must conduct a public hearing in which to
allow an affected MCS provider, or any other interested party, an
opportunity to express its views concerning said proposed rate
regulation.
C. Consistent with federal law, if the City Council requires a refund with
respect to a particular subscriber rate or charge, then if the MCS
provider actually paid the franchise fee and did not merely collect and
remit the franchise fee to the city, the MCS provider is eligible for a
corresponding reduction in and/or rebate of a portion of the franchise
fee, or functional equivalent, that was paid by the MCS provider for the
period applicable to the refund.
A. Each and every MCS provider required to provide PEG access channels
in the city shall be required to interconnect its multichannel system
(through any permissible means) to any other MCS provider's system
operating within the city, for the purpose of allowing public, educational
or governmental access programming to be provided to all subscribers
§ 227-67 GENEVA CODE § 227-69
227:268
§ 227-70. Periodic regulatory review by City Council.
§ 227-71. Miscellaneous provisions; tampering and unauthorized
reception of certain services.
throughout the city, regardless of which MCS provider provides
multichannel service to a particular subscriber.
B. To the extent that another MCS provider provides public, educational or
governmental access programming to the other MCS provider's system,
then the other MCS provider shall, in whatever way practicable,
promptly notify its subscribers that another MCS provider is providing
the particular educational or governmental access programming.
A. Between 210 and 30 days prior to the fourth and eighth anniversary
dates of the effective date of this chapter, the City Council shall conduct
a review and examination of this entire MCS provider chapter.
B. In conducting such a review and examination of the MCS provider
chapter, the City Council shall consider, among other things, the
following:
(1) Whether one or more provisions have been superseded, clarified or
modified by federal or state law (including PSC rule or regulation).
(2) Whether one or more provisions have been superseded, clarified or
modified by a subsequent binding judicial decision.
(3) Whether one or more provisions are unnecessary or ineffective in
light of emerging and evolving technologies.
(4) Whether new or different trends relating to MCS providers warrant
or necessitate additional safeguards for customer or subscribers
and/or subscribers.
(5) Whether the economic and customer or subscriber forces
associated with competition have lessened the need for one or
more provisions.
C. If after such a periodic review and examination of the MCS provider
chapter the City Council determines that one or more provisions of the
MCS provider chapter should be amended, repealed, revised, clarified
or deleted, then the City Council may take whatever measures
necessary (to the extent permitted by law) in order to accomplish same.
It is noted that where warranted and the best interests of the city, the
City Council may repeal the entire MCS provider chapter.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A and C of this section,
the City Council may at any time, and in any manner (to the extent
permitted by federal, state or local law), amend, add, repeal and/or
delete one or more provisions of this chapter.
§ 227-69 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-71
227:269
§ 227-72. Fines.
A. Consistent with the Cable Act, no person shall intercept or receive, or
assist in intercepting or receiving, any communications service offered
over a multichannel system, unless specifically authorized to do so by
an MCS provider, or as may be specifically authorized by law.
B. For the purpose of this section, the term "assist in intercepting or
receiving" shall include the manufacture or distribution of equipment
intended by the manufacturer or distributor (as the case may be) for the
unauthorized reception of multichannel service as referenced in
Subsection A of this section.
C. Without securing permission from an MCS provider, or making payment
to an MCS provider, then no person shall be authorized to make any
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise, with any part of an authorized or franchised multichannel
system for the purpose of receiving or intercepting or assisting others
to receive or intercept any cable service provided lawfully by the MCS
provider.
D. Any and all MCS providers are encouraged to work with the City
Council in developing and implementing a plan designed to control and
eliminate the unauthorized reception of certain multichannel services
within the city.
A. In addition to all other rights and powers vested in and possessed by the
city, the city specifically reserves the right to impose fines for violations
of this chapter or any franchise, other agreement, license or permit
granted under and pursuant to the chapter, or for the violation or
breach of any federal, state or local law, rule or regulation, in the event
such failure has not been remedied pursuant to procedures set forth in
this chapter.
B. Upon acceptance of a franchise agreement or other agreement, license
or permit, or the renewal of any franchise agreement or other
agreement, license or permit, a franchisee or other MCS provider shall
indicate that it clearly understands that a failure to comply with any
time and performance-related requirements, or any breach of a term or
condition of such franchise, other agreement, license or permit or of
this chapter, or of any federal, state or local law, rule, regulation or code
as set forth any agreement or this chapter, may result in the imposition
of fines as set forth in this section.
C. Absent good and just cause and the provision of evidence of good faith
efforts to comply, the failure to comply with any time and performancerelated
requirement stipulated in the franchise agreement or other
agreement, license or permit, or this chapter, may result in the
imposition of fines as set forth in this section. Fines shall continue to
accrue, including during any appeals process, until such time as the
payment of fines is received by the city, or is otherwise waived by the
§ 227-71 GENEVA CODE § 227-72
227:270
city. Failure to pay fines within the time provided shall be a material
violation of this chapter, and the franchise agreement or other
agreement, license or permit, and shall be cause to proceed against
either a letter of credit or bond or other surety or guaranty as provided
by the franchisee or other MCS provider. It shall also constitute cause
to pursue revocation of the franchise or other agreement, license or
permit. The franchisee or other MCS provider shall be charged, and
shall pay to the city, the following amounts in fines for the violations
listed:
(1) For failure to complete any system construction, reconstruction or
upgrade, pursuant to the franchise agreement or other agreement
or permit: $500 for each day, or part thereof, that the violation or
breach continues.
(2) For failure to provide any data, documents, reports or information
required by the franchise or other agreement, license or permit
needed to monitor compliance and administer said franchise or
other agreement, license or permit, or for failure to cooperate with
the city during an application process or system review: $100 for
each day, or part thereof, that the violation occurs or continues.
(3) For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the
system following a written request pursuant to this chapter or a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit: $200 for each day, or
part thereof, that such noncompliance continues.
(4) For failure to meet the customer service requirements of this
chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit: up to
$100 for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance
continues.
(5) For failure to comply with any consumer protection requirements
of this chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit:
$100 for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance
continues.
(6) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding deposits and
the return of deposits as set forth in this chapter or a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per incident for
each day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
(7) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding the
improper or impermissible discontinuance or disconnection of a
subscriber's service as set forth in this chapter or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per incident for each
day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
(8) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding connections
and disconnections as set forth in this chapter or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per incident for each
day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
§ 227-72 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-72
227:271
(9) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding
disconnection and downgrade fees as set forth in this chapter or a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per
incident for each day or part thereof that such noncompliance
continues.
(10) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding charges for
repair of equipment or service disconnection as set forth in this
chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit: $100
per day per incident for each day or part thereof that such
noncompliance continues.
(11) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding the threeday
right of rescission as set forth in state law, or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit: $500 per day per incident for each
day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
(12) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding the use and
display or identification passes and badges as set forth in this
chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit: $50 per
day per incident for each day or part thereof that such
noncompliance continues.
(13) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding cleanup and
proper installation as set forth in this chapter or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per incident for each
day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
(14) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding subscribers
being advised in writing of specific services and procedures as set
forth in this chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or
permit: $50 per day per incident for each day or part thereof that
such noncompliance continues.
(15) For failure to meet any safety-related requirements of this chapter
or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, including fire
and electrical codes: up to $500 per failure, for each day or part
thereof that such noncompliance continues.
(16) For failure to pay the full and complete amount of any money owed
the city: up to $100 per day, for each day or part thereof that such
underpayment continues as measured from the date the original
payment was due.
(17) For failure to comply with any other section, subsection or
provision of this chapter, or a franchise agreement or other
agreement, license or permit: $50 for each instance of
noncompliance or violation, for each day or part thereof that such
noncompliance continues.
D. Notwithstanding anything in the preceding, or any other section of this
chapter, after the initial 48 hours following notification by the city to the
§ 227-72 GENEVA CODE § 227-72
227:272
§ 227-73. Notice of failure to comply.
franchisee or other MCS provider that a violation exists, each day that a
violation continues shall constitute and be deemed a separate violation
and may be treated as a separate violation.
E. In the event of an appeal arising out of the enforcement of this section,
or in the event of litigation arising out of a dispute regarding the
enforceability of any action taken by the city under this section, during
the course of such proceeding the franchisee or other MCS provider
shall not be excused from the prompt and timely payment of fines as set
forth in this section. The amount of the fines in such an instance shall be
placed in an escrow account by the city, pending the resolution and
decision of the adjudicating entity.
F. Notwithstanding anything in this section, or any other section of this
chapter, a franchisee or other MCS provider may not use the payment
of fines or penalties as may be permitted and assessed to evade or avoid
compliance with this chapter or any section of this chapter. An attempt
to do so shall subject the franchisee or other MCS provider to
termination and loss of the franchise or other agreement, license or
permit or other operating authority.
A. The city shall provide notice and opportunity to cure for the failure to
comply with a time or performance-related requirement, or breach of a
term or condition of an MCS franchise or other agreement, license or
permit, or of this chapter, or of any federal, state or local law, rule,
regulation or code which the city deems sufficient to warrant the
assessment and imposition of fines.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the preceding subsection,
or any other subsection of this section, for situations involving
violations of safety and safety-related codes and requirements where
such are deemed to create an imminent threat or danger to lives or
property within the city, and for which the MCS provider has previously
been notified of a situation(s) involving noncompliance with the same or
similar situations, or aspects of safety and safety-related codes and
requirements, the MCS provider shall be notified, but may not be
granted an opportunity to remedy or cure prior to the imposition of
fines. Rather fines may be assessed and imposed immediately, on a peroccurrence,
per-day basis, until the violation(s) is eliminated.
C. Notice and the opportunity to cure shall be provided to the affected
MCS provider in writing, and shall be sent by certified U.S. Mail, return
receipt requested, to the franchisee's or other MCS provider's local
place of business. The amount of time given the franchisee or other
MCS provider to cure any time or performance requirement, or breach
of a term or condition of a MCS provider franchise or other agreement
or permit, violation of this chapter, or violation of any federal, state or
local law, rule or regulation shall be at the discretion of the city, but in
no event less than 48 hours, unless otherwise agreed to between the
§ 227-72 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-73
227:273
city and the franchisee or other MCS provider, or as set forth in
Subsection B of this section. Notwithstanding the preceding, or
anything else in this section or this chapter, in the event of a situation
in violation of the safety-related requirements of this chapter that
endangers or has the reasonable possibility of endangering the health
or safety of individuals or property, the forty-eight-hour cure period
may be lessened and, in fact, a cure may be required the same day,
depending on the seriousness of the matter as a factor of the threat
created to the public.
D. The city may, in its reasonable discretion, grant extensions of time to a
franchisee or other MCS provider to cure or remedy, where
extraordinary circumstances not precipitated by the franchisee or other
MCS provider warrant an extension.
E. Notwithstanding any notice an opportunity cure requirements of the
applicable federal or state law, the issuance of two or more notices to
cure for the same or similar time or performance-related requirement,
or breach of a term or condition of a franchise or other agreement or
permit, or violation of this chapter, or violation of any federal, state or
local law, rule, regulation or code within any 12 consecutive month
period, shall relieve the city of any obligation to provide further notice
and opportunity to cure for subsequent failures to meet any time or
performance-related requirements, or breaches of terms or conditions
of such franchise or other agreement, license or permit, violations of
this chapter, or violations of any federal, state or local law, rule,
regulation or code. Evidence of subsequent failures as set forth in this
subsection shall be admissible as evidence in a hearing before the City
Council on the assessment of fines, provided that the city has provided
such evidence to the franchisee or other MCS provider at least 10 days
prior to the hearing and the MCS provider has an opportunity to be
heard at the hearing.
F. A notice of intent to assess fines. Fines may be issued concurrently with
a notice to cure. If a notice of intent to assess fines is issued
concurrently with a notice to cure, fines, if assessed, will accrue
commencing with the expiration of the time allowed for an opportunity
to cure as set forth in the notice. The notice of intent to assess fines
shall state the reason for the assessment and imposition, and shall
inform the franchisee or other MCS provider that fines will be assessed
from the date of the notice, or the end of the time allowed for an
opportunity to cure, whichever is later.
G. If the franchisee or other MCS provider desires to appeal the city's
assessment of fines, it must file a written notice of appeal with the City
Clerk, delivered by certified U.S. Mail, within 10 days of the receipt of
the notice of intent to assess fines. The City Clerk shall then place the
issue of the assessment of fines before the City Council.
H. The city shall then have served upon the affected MCS provider a
written notice of the date, time and place of the meeting, at least 30
§ 227-73 GENEVA CODE § 227-73
227:274
days prior to the day of the meeting of the City Council at which the
matter will be heard.
I. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue that is to be
considered by the City Council. If the franchisee or other MCS provider
fails to appeal the city's assessment of fines within the time required by
this section, the city's decision to assess fines shall be final.
J. The City Council shall, at the date, time and place designated for the
hearing, hear and consider issues from the city and the MCS provider
and make a determination regarding the alleged violation of this
chapter or any franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
(1) The City Council shall hear and consider the matter, including
hearing any person interested in the matter wishing to be heard,
and review and consider any relevant evidence. After affording the
MCS provider required rights of due process to be heard, to
present relevant evidence and witnesses and to question any
witnesses, the City Council shall determine whether or not there
was committed a breach or violation of a time or performancerelated
requirement, or a breach of a term or condition of the MCS
provider's franchise or other agreement, license or permit, or of
this chapter, or of any federal, state or local law, rule, regulation or
code.
(2) The franchisee or other MCS provider may, at its own expense,
make a transcript of any such hearing, or share the costs of
obtaining a transcript of such hearing equally with the city if the
city has a transcript made.
(3) Within 30 days following the completion and close of the hearing,
the City Council shall issue a written decision as regards to
whether any failure to comply with any time or performancerelated
requirement, or breach of a term or condition of the
franchise or other agreement, license or permit, or of this chapter,
or of any federal, state or local law, rule, regulation or code
occurred, based upon the record of the proceeding, stating with
particularity the reasons for such decision. A copy of the Council's
decision shall be provided to the franchisee or other MCS provider.
(4) Should the City Council find that no breach, violation or failure to
comply or perform occurred or, except for situations addressed in
Subsection B of this section, that the franchisee or other MCS
provider remedied the failure prior to the end of the period allowed
for cure, or that the franchisee or other MCS provider instituted
substantial actions to remedy the failure to comply or perform after
having been provided written notice, and actively and expeditiously
started and undertook substantial efforts to complete such remedy,
or that fines are not warranted or applicable in the instant
situation, all of which shall be determined at the sole discretion of
§ 227-73 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-73
227:275
§ 227-74. Complaint procedures.
the City Council, the proceedings shall be terminated and no
penalty shall be imposed.
(5) The City Council shall be required to base its decision on a
preponderance of the evidence from the record established during
the City Council's hearing. If the City Council determines that any
time or performance-related requirement or breach of a term or
condition of the franchise or other agreement, license or permit, or
of this chapter, or of any federal, state or local law, rule, regulation
or code was the fault of the MCS provider, and was within its
control, subsequent to the required notice and opportunity to cure
and due process requirements of this chapter, the City Council may
affirm the assessment and imposition of fines. The City Council's
decision to affirm the city's assessment of fines shall be final and no
other remedies, administrative or otherwise, nor any procedures
for such, are provided under this chapter.
(6) Prior to imposing any penalty or sanction against the MCS provider
for failure to perform any of its obligations under this chapter or its
franchise agreement or other agreement or permit, other than fines
or termination, the city shall provide the franchisee or other MCS
provider notice and opportunity to cure such failure in accordance
with the following procedures in Subsection J(7) and (8) of this
section.
(7) The city shall provide the franchisee or other MCS provider with
written notice specifying the nature of the failure, breach or
violation. The franchisee or other MCS provider shall have a period
of 48 hours following the receipt of such notice to cure or satisfy
the alleged failure, breach or violation, with the exception of
situations addressed in Subsection B of this section.
(8) In the event the city concludes that the franchisee or other MCS
provider has failed to comply with any of its obligations under this
chapter or the franchise agreement or other agreement, license or
permit, and further, that the MCS provider has not remedied such
failure, breach or violation within the period allowed after
receiving written notice of such, the city may impose whatever
penalties or other sanctions are provided for under this chapter or
the franchisee's or other MCS provider's franchise agreement or
other agreement or permit.
A. The city is hereby granted the authority to do all things necessary and
permissible to supervise, inspect and regulate the construction,
operation, repair and maintenance of multichannel systems operating
within the city, whether franchised or otherwise, that are permitted to
and do operate under this chapter in whole or in part, and to implement
procedures for the filing and resolution of complaints.
§ 227-73 GENEVA CODE § 227-74
227:276
Chapter 230
NEW YORK UNIFORM AND ENERGY CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 111.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 147.
Abandoned excavation and
construction — See Ch. 151.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 177.
Hospitals and similar facilities — See Ch. 199.
Noise — See Ch. 232.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 277.
Satellite dishes — See Ch. 282.
Signs and fire escapes — See Ch. 288.
Solid waste — See Ch. 300.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 306.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 310
Underground tanks — See Ch. 314
Waters and sewers — See Ch. 341
Wires and poles — See Ch. 346
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
B. The responsibility for such supervision, inspection and regulation is
retained by the City Council which is empowered, among other things,
to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the
operations of any franchisee or other MCS provider, either on behalf of
the city or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interests of the
public and the city; provided, however, that any person aggrieved by a
decision of the city may appeal the matter for a hearing and
determination in accordance with this chapter.
C. The City Council reserves the right, at all times, on behalf of the city or
a subscriber, to accept, reject or change any decision of the City
Council, and may adjust, settle or impose a compromise regarding any
controversy arising from the operation of a franchisee or other MCS
provider that is subject to this chapter in whole or in part, or from any
provision of this chapter.
D. If an advisory committee is established by the city, a franchisee or other
MCS provider is encouraged to participate in advisory committee
meetings relating to MCS provider operations.
§ 227-74 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 227-74
227:277

Part 1
General Provisions
ARTICLE I
Administration and enforcement of New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and State Energy Conservation
Construction Code
§ 230-1. Purpose and applicability.
§ 230-2. Severability.
If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for
any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this code.
§ 230-3. Definitions.
A. Purpose. This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the
Uniform Code) and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code
(the Energy Code) in the City of Geneva, New York.
B. Municipal Home Rule Law. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of
the Municipal Home Rule Law.
C. Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other
state law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and
premises, regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
A. Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for
the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
B. Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular.
C. Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
chapter and are defined in the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
D. Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.
E. Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises,"
"building," "rooming house," "rooming unit," "housekeeping unit" or
"story" are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
§ 230-1 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-3
227:279
F. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A building permit issued pursuant to § 230-4 of
this chapter. This term shall also include any building permit which
is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this
chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued pursuant to
§ 230-7 of this chapter.
CITY — The City of Geneva, New York.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 230-12 of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Shall include the Code
Enforcement Officer and all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer pursuant to § 230-19 of this chapter.
DWELLING — A building that contains dwelling units used, intended or
designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for
living purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EMERGENCY — Any event that is an immediate threat to health, life,
property and/or safety.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code,
as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 230-12 of this
chapter.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — This term is defined by the New York State
Multiple Residence Law that is currently in effect and as hereafter
amended from time to time.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to section § 230-6 of
this chapter. This term shall also include any operating permit which
is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this
chapter.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property as recorded in the official
records of Ontario County, New York, as holding title to the property.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT — Any dwelling unit that is occupied by one
or more persons, none of whom is the owner.
§ 230-3 GENEVA CODE § 230-3
227:280
SHALL — The term is construed as mandatory.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 230-16 of this
chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 230-7
of this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from
time to time.
§ 230-3 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-3
227:281

ARTICLE II
Building and Operating Permits
§ 230-4. Building permits.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, no person or entity shall commence any work which
must comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code without having
applied for and obtained a building permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area
does not exceed 144 square feet (13.38 square meters);
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above the ground;
(4) Construction of retaining walls unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(5) Construction of temporary motion picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(6) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(7) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(8) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(9) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(10) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(11) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
§ 230-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-4
227:283
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code or the City of Geneva's Municipal Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code and City of Geneva's Municipal Code. The application
shall include or be accompanied by the following information and
documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The tax map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State-registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
§ 230-4 GENEVA CODE § 230-4
227:284
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
§ 230-4 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-4
227:285
§ 230-5. Construction inspections.
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that:
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter must be paid at the time of submission of an
application for a building permit, for an amended building permit, or for
renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected made, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
§ 230-4 GENEVA CODE § 230-5
227:286
§ 230-6. Operating permits.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be paid prior to or at the time of each
inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Operation permits required. Operating permits shall be required for
conducting the activities or types of use or occupancy classification
listed below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled
"Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by reference in 19
NYCRR section 1225.1;
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited to,
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible
dust as a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling;
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(4) Buildings containing rental dwelling unit(s);
(a) Exemption. Operating permits are not required for rental
dwelling units located within detached one- and two-family
dwellings as well as multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses).
(5) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(6) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the City Council of this City.
B. Responsibility. The owner of any building where it is proposed to
undertake any activity or to operate any type of use or occupancy listed
in Subsection A shall be required to obtain an operating permit prior to
commencing such activity or operation.
C. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
§ 230-5 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-6
227:287
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code and Energy Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance,
such tests or reports shall be performed or provided by such person or
persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
D. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises to
ensure compliance with the Uniform Code, Energy Code, this chapter,
or any other local law or regulation prior to the issuance of an operating
permit.
E. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
F. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions. The effective
period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating
permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the applicable
fee, and approval of such application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
G. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, Energy Code, this chapter, or any other
local law or regulation, such operating permit shall be revoked or
suspended.
H. Operating permits revoked due to real property transfer. Operating
permits shall be revoked upon transfer of title of real property to a new
owner. The new owner shall apply for a new operating permit that shall
be issued in the new owner's name and shall document that such
property is in conformance to any applicable provision of the Uniform
Code, Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation. If
violation(s) exist, the new owner shall submit a written corrective
action plan to the Code Enforcement Officer for review and approval.
I. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth of this chapter must be paid at the time submission
of an application for an operating permit, for an amended operating
permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating permit.
§ 230-6 GENEVA CODE § 230-6
227:288
ARTICLE III
Certificates of Occupancy
§ 230-7. Certificates of occupancy.
A. Certificate of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy shall be
required for any work which is the subject of a building permit and for
all structures, buildings, or portions thereof, which are converted from
one use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another.
Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof,
for which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only
by issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. Change of occupancy. No change shall be made in the nature of the
occupancy of an existing building or structure, or any portion thereof,
unless a certificate of occupancy authorizing the change has been
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. The owner of such building or
structure shall demonstrate that such change will comply with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code before a
certificate of occupancy can be issued.
C. Issuance of certificates of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall
be issued unless:
(1) An inspection is conducted which indicates substantial completion
of any work for which any applicable permit has been issued;
(2) No uncorrected deficiency or material violation of the Uniform
Code or Energy Code is observed within the area for work for
which the certificate is to be issued;
(3) Where applicable, a written statement of structural observations
and/or a final report of special inspections, prepared in
conformance with the requirements of Chapter 17 of the Building
Code of New York State, is submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer;
(4) Where applicable, flood hazard certifications, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code, are submitted
to the Code Enforcement Officer; and
(5) The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter must be paid.
D. Contents of certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall
contain the following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and tax map number of the property;
§ 230-7 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-7
227:289
(4) If the certificate of occupancy is not applicable to an entire
structure, a description of that portion of the structure for which
the certificate of occupancy is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy and the date of issuance.
E. Terms and conditions. The Code Enforcement Officer may include in
any certificate of occupancy such terms and conditions as he or she
deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the
purposes and intent of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
F. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines:
(1) That the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by
the temporary certificate, may be occupied safely;
(2) That any fire- and smoke-detecting and fire protection equipment
which has been installed is operational; and
(3) That all required means of egress from the building or structure
have been provided.
G. Duration of temporary certificate. A temporary certificate shall be
effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall be
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in the
temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of
the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring
the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
H. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy or a temporary
certificate was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not
corrected to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer within
§ 230-7 GENEVA CODE § 230-7
227:290
such period of time as shall be specified by the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke or suspend such
certificate.
I. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be paid at the time of submission of an
application for a certificate of occupancy or for temporary certificate.
§ 230-7 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-7
227:291

ARTICLE IV
Firesafety and Property Maintenance Inspections
§ 230-8. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer to ensure compliance with the Uniform Code,
Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation at the
following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings and
structures that contain rental dwelling unit(s) shall be performed at
least once every 24 months.
(a) Exemption. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
are not required for rental dwelling units located within
detached one- and two-family dwellings as well as multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses).
(4) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsections A(1) and (2) of this section, shall be
performed at least once every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer to ensure
compliance with the Uniform Code, Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law or regulation at any time upon:
(1) The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner; or
(2) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of a written statement
alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the
Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
(3) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or
§ 230-8 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-8
227:293
activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code
exist.
C. Court order or warrant. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
D. OFPC Inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure which
contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs firesafety
and property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such building or structure at least once
every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs
firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such multiple
dwelling at intervals not exceeding the interval specified in
Subsection A(3) of this section; and
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or (2)
of this section if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building, structure,
use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval specified
in Subsection A(3) of this section.
E. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be paid prior to or at the time each
inspection performed pursuant to this section. This subdivision shall not
apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
§ 230-8 GENEVA CODE § 230-8
227:294
Part 2
Administration And Compliance
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 230-9. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known and referred to as "Administration and
Compliance Provisions."
§ 230-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to provide the basic method for uniform
administration of, and compliance with, applicable standards and to
establish the responsibilities of those concerned therewith.
§ 230-11. Applicability.
This Part 2 shall apply to the provisions and to premises within the scope of
Part 1.
§ 230-9 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-11
227:295

ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 230-12. Code enforcement officers and inspectors.
A. Code enforcement officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
administer and enforce all the provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy
Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation.
B. Powers and duties. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, and the plans, specifications and
construction documents submitted with such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates and operating
permits, and to include in building permits, certificates of
occupancy, temporary certificates and operating permits such
terms and conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may
determine to be appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, firesafety and property maintenance
inspections, inspections incidental to the investigation of
complaints, and all other inspections required or permitted under
any provision of this chapter;
(4) To review and investigate complaints;
(5) To issue orders pursuant to this chapter;
(6) To maintain records;
(7) To collect fees pursuant to this chapter;
(8) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(9) In cooperation with the City Attorney, to pursue such legal actions
and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the Uniform Code,
Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation, or
to abate or correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform
Code, Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or
regulation
(10) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
C. Appointment. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the
City Manager.
§ 230-12 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-12
227:297
§ 230-13. Inspections.
D. Experience. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background
experience related to building construction or fire prevention and shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of
New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
E. Acting Code Enforcement Officer. In the event that the Code
Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as such for any reason, an
individual shall be appointed by the City Manager to serve as Acting
Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting Code Enforcement Officer shall,
during the term of his or her appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill
all duties conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
F. Inspectors. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the City
Manager to act under the supervision and direction of the Code
Enforcement Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the
exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the
Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each inspector shall, within
the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of
New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each
inspector shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator
pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
A. General. The City's code enforcement personnel shall be authorized, in
the performance of their duties, to conduct inspections of premises, or
parts of premises, at such times and in such manner as the they may
find convenient or necessary, with the consent of the person in
possession or occupancy.
B. Compliance to local and state codes. The City's code enforcement
personnel shall conduct inspections to ensure compliance with the
Uniform Code, Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or
regulation.
C. Right of entry. The City's code enforcement personnel are authorized to
enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject
to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures.
D. Warrant. If admission is refused or cannot be obtained from the person
in possession or occupancy, the City's code enforcement personnel shall
be authorized to obtain a warrant from City Court to make an
inspection, provided that reasonable or probable cause is shown.
§ 230-12 GENEVA CODE § 230-13
227:298
§ 230-14. Recordkeeping.
§ 230-15. Program review and reporting.
E. Emergency measures. In case of an emergency situation, the city's code
enforcement personnel may, without a warrant, enter any premises, or
parts of premises, to inspect the same, at any time, without the
permission of the person in possession or occupancy.
A. Official records. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent
official records of all transactions and activities conducted by all code
enforcement personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary
certificates, stop-work orders, and operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by this
chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. Freedom of Information Law. All such records shall be public records
open for public inspection in accordance to New York State's Freedom
of Information Law (FOIL).33 All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by State law and
regulation.
A. Annual report to this City. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually
submit to the City Manager a written report and summary of all
business conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the
inspectors, including a report and summary of all transactions and
activities described in § 230-14, Recordkeeping, of this chapter and a
report and summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
B. Annual report to the Secretary of State. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall annually submit to the Secretary of State, on behalf of this City, on
a form prescribed by the Secretary of State, a report of the activities of
33.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law, Art. 6.
§ 230-13 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-15
227:299
this City relative to administration and enforcement of the Uniform
Code, Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation.
C. Records requested by New York State. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall, upon request of the New York State Department of State, provide
to the New York State Department of State, from the records and
related materials this City is required to maintain, excerpts, summaries,
tabulations, statistics and other information and accounts of the
activities of this City in connection with administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code, Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law or regulation.
§ 230-15 GENEVA CODE § 230-15
227:300
ARTICLE VII
Violations and Remedies
§ 230-16. Stop-work orders.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code, Energy
Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation, without
regard to whether such work is or is not work for which a building
permit is required, and without regard to whether a building
permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property and, if applicable, upon any other person or entity
taking part or assisting in work performed at the affected property, and
any other person or entity to whom or to which a building permit has
been issued by:
(1) By personal service upon such person or entity in any manner
authorized by the Civil Practice Law and Rules for personal service
of a summons; or
(2) By regular mail addressed to such person or entity at the address
last known to the Code Enforcement Officer; or
§ 230-16 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-16
227:301
§ 230-17. Unsafe structures and equipment.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this City shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by the City of
Geneva's Municipal Code, Chapter 111, as now in effect or as hereafter
amended from time to time.
§ 230-18. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail to
comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any other
local law or regulation. The process for responding to a complaint shall
include such of the following steps as the Code Enforcement Officer may
deem to be appropriate:
§ 230-19. Compliance orders.
(3) By posting a copy of such order in a conspicuous place on the
building or structure which is subject of such order. If it is not
practicable to post a copy of the order on such building or
structure, by posting a copy of such order in a conspicuous place on
the property or premises where such building or structure is or is
to be located.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described within this
chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order in writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist
in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or
regulation. Upon finding that any such condition or activity exists, the
§ 230-16 GENEVA CODE § 230-19
227:302
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a compliance order. The
compliance order shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) Specify the condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code,
Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation;
(4) Specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy
Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation which is/are
violated by the specified condition or activity;
(5) Specify the period of time which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance;
(6) Direct that compliance be achieved within the specified period of
time; and
(7) State that an action or proceeding to compel compliance may be
instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified period
of time.
B. Time period for compliance. The time period in which compliance with
a compliance order issued pursuant to this subdivision must be
achieved shall be fixed by the Code Enforcement Officer, taking into
account the nature of the violation(s), the impact continuation of such
violation(s) would have on health and safety, the time period which the
Code Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for
achieving compliance, and such other factors as the Code Enforcement
Officer deems relevant. In no event shall the time period in which
compliance must be achieved exceed 30 days, unless:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer determines that a longer time
period is appropriate; and
(2) A detailed plan for achieving compliance is submitted to and
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Service. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the compliance
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected
property by:
(1) Personal service upon such person or entity in any manner
authorized by the Civil Practice Law and Rules for personal service
of a summons; or
(2) Regular mail addressed to the owner of the affected property at the
address last known to the Code Enforcement Officer; or
(3) Posting a copy of such order in a conspicuous place on the building,
structure, property or premises which is the subject of such order.
§ 230-19 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-19
227:303

ARTICLE VIII
Third-Party Review and Inspections
§ 230-20. Third-party reviews and inspections.
A. Reviews. The city's code enforcement personnel may require that the
review of an application for a building permit, including the review of
the construction documents and any other documents or information
submitted with or in connection with any such application, shall be
performed at the cost and expense of the owner of the subject premises
by a competent third-party reviewer acceptable to the city's Code
Enforcement Officer. Such reviewer shall be a registered architect, a
licensed professional engineer, a certified Code Enforcement Officer, or
other person whose experience and training has been demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the city's Code Enforcement Officer, but shall not be
a design professional of record for the project, nor an owner or
occupant or proposed owner or occupant of the subject premises, nor
the applicant for the permit, nor an employee or agent of any such
owner or occupant, proposed owner or occupant, or applicant. The
reviewer shall certify the results of his or her review to the city's code
enforcement personnel.
B. Inspections. The city's code enforcement personnel may require any
inspection necessary to ensure compliance with the Uniform Code,
Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation to be
performed at the cost and expense of the owner of subject premises by
a competent inspector acceptable to the city's Code Enforcement
Officer. Such inspector shall be a registered architect, a licensed
professional engineer, a certified Code Enforcement Officer, or other
person whose experience and training has been demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the city's Code Enforcement Officer, but shall not be the
design professional of record for the project, nor an owner or occupant
or proposed owner or occupant of the subject premises, nor the
applicant for any relevant permit, nor an employee or agent of any such
owner or occupant, proposed owner or occupant, or applicant. Such
inspector shall certify the results of his or her review to the city's code
enforcement personnel.
§ 230-20 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-20
227:305

ARTICLE IX
Abatement of violations by City
§ 230-21. Abatement of violations by this City.
A. Authority to abate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall abate any
violation against this chapter if the owner of the property upon whom
the compliance order is served fails, neglects or refuses to abate a
violation within the prescribed amount of time granted by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Reimbursement and surcharge. The owner of the property shall
reimburse this City for the actual cost plus a service charge of 50%
thereof to cover cost of supervision and administration.
C. Subsequent violations. The owner of any property found in violation of
this chapter shall be notified in writing only once in any given year for a
particular violation. Subsequent violations of a same nature at the
location during the same calendar year shall be corrected by the City or
its agent without notice to the owner, occupant or person having control
of said property. After initial notification, such owner, occupant or
person having control of said property will be presumed to have been
given sufficient notice of infraction for the entire calendar year.
§ 230-21 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-21
227:307

ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous.
§ 230-22. Responsibilities of owners.
Owners shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter regardless of
any agreement between or among lessors, operators, occupants or persons
as to which party shall be responsible.
§ 230-23. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this
chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the City
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this chapter shall be defended by the City Attorney, until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.
§ 230-24. Duties of City Attorney.
§ 230-25. Injunctive relief.
Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name of
this City, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain, enjoin,
correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of the Uniform
Code, Energy Code, this chapter, or any other local law or regulation, or any
term or condition of any permit, certificate, stop-work order, compliance
order, or other notice or order issued by the city's code enforcement
personnel pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In particular, but not by
way of limitation, where the construction or use of a building or structure is
in violation of any provision of the Uniform Code, Energy Code, this chapter,
or any other local law or regulation, or any stop-work order, compliance
order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, Energy Code, this
chapter, or any other local law or regulation, an action or proceeding may
be commenced in the name of this City, in the Supreme Court or in any
other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing
the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of the condition
in violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this
subdivision shall be commenced without the appropriate authorization from
the City Manager of this City.
A. General. The City Attorney shall, upon written request of the city's Code
Enforcement Officer, or upon his or her own motion, institute
appropriate action to restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, correct or remove
a violation, and to take such other legal action as is necessary to carry
out the terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. Appearance tickets. The City Attorney is hereby authorized to issue
appearance tickets for any violation of this chapter.
§ 230-22 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-26
227:309
§ 230-26. Remedies not exclusive.
Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to address any violation
described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified in this
section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, any section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified in
this chapter may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously
with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty specified in this
section, in any section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation
of, the penalties specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the Executive Law, and
any remedy or penalty specified in this chapter may be pursued at any time,
whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any penalty
specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the Executive Law.
§ 230-27. Variance or appeal.
A. Uniform Code and Energy Code. Variance or appeal from any part of
this chapter that is deemed consistent to regulations mandated within
the Uniform Code and Energy Code shall be petitioned in accordance
with the provisions of 19 NYCRR, titled "Variance Procedures," which is
administered by the Secretary of State.
B. City of Geneva's Municipal Code. Variance or appeal from any part of
this chapter that is deemed consistent to regulations mandated only by
the City of Geneva's Municipal Code shall be petitioned to the City of
Geneva's Zoning Board of Appeals. The City of Geneva shall not waive,
modify or otherwise alter this chapter that is deemed consistent to
regulations mandated by the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
(1) Grounds for appeal. The grounds for such variance or appeal shall
include the following:
(a) Undue economic hardship or burden.
(b) Restriction from the achievement of a valid state or federal
policy.
(c) Physical or legal impossibility.
(d) Impediment to the intended objective of the regulation.
(e) Unnecessary, in light of viable alternatives which meet the
intended objective of the more stringent ordinance, etc.
(2) Time to appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall accept appeal or
variance petitions filed within 60 days of the final order issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 230-26 GENEVA CODE § 230-27
227:310
§ 230-28. Intermunicipal agreements.
The City Council of this City may, by resolution, authorize the Enforcement
Officer to enter into an agreement, in the name of this City, with other
governments to carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that such
agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
(3) Appeal procedure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct an
open hearing in accordance with procedures set forth pursuant to
provisions of the General City Law, prescribed statutes, its bylaws
and procedures and provide for expeditious determination which
shall be binding upon the petitioner and upon the municipal
authorities involved within 60 days of the date of hearing.
(4) Fees for appeal. Upon filing of petition of appeal, a payment of $150
shall be paid to the Code Enforcement Officer to defray the
expenses of the public hearing and other expenses incidental
thereto.
(5) Judicial review. Any person or persons jointly or severally
aggrieved by the final determination of the Zoning Board of
Appeals may seek to have such order reviewed by the Supreme
Court in the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules and as otherwise provided for in the laws of the
State of New York.
§ 230-27 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-28
227:311

ARTICLE XI
Fee Schedule and Penalties
§ 230-29. Fee schedule for building and operating permits.
A fee schedule for building and operating permits shall be established by
resolution of the City Council of this City. Such fee schedule may thereafter
be amended from time to time by like resolution.
§ 230-30. Fees schedule for certificates of occupancy.
A fee schedule for certificates of occupancy shall be established by
resolution of the City Council of this City. Such fee schedule may thereafter
be amended from time to time by like resolution.
§ 230-31. Penalties for offenses.
Civil penalties: In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law, any
person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, Energy Code, this
chapter, or any other local law or regulation, or any term or condition of
any permit, certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
or other notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant
to any provision of this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty that is
established by resolution of the City Council of this City. Such penalty may
thereafter be amended from time to time by like resolution.
§ 230-29 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-31
227:313

ARTICLE XII
Recovery of Costs and Collection
§ 230-32. Recovery of costs.
Costs incurred by this City to abate violations of this chapter shall be
paid for by the municipal treasury upon certification of the city's Code
Enforcement Officer. Such costs shall be charged against the premises, and
shall constitute a lien thereon in favor of the municipality, and the amount of
such costs shall be entered on the tax rolls as being due and payable. Such
costs may also be recovered in any other lawful manner and, in particular,
Chapter 111 of this city's municipal code.
§ 230-33. Collection.
A. All delinquent fees, penalties and surcharges shall be paid by the owner
prior to any transfer of an ownership. If the fees and penalties are not
paid prior to any transfer, the new owner shall pay all delinquent fees
and penalties no later than 30 days after the transfer of ownership.
B. All of the above fees, penalties and surcharges shall be paid prior to the
issuance of any certificates or permits issued by the City. In the event
that they are not paid, they shall constitute a lien upon the real
property, to be collected in the same manner as other City charges.
§ 230-32 MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS § 230-33
227:315
Chapter 232
NOISE
§ 232-1. Unreasonable noise.
§ 232-2. Schools, hospitals and churches.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise on any street,
sidewalk or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning or
church while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital, which noise
unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous
signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalk or public place indicating the
presence of a school, church or hospital.
§ 232-3. Construction of buildings; projects.
It shall be unlawful for any person within a radius of 500 feet therefrom to
operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on
buildings, structures or projects or to operate any pile driver, steam shovel,
pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other construction
type device except to perform emergency work between the hours of 10:00
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, individually or in unison,
within the city to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued,
any unreasonably loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, except as
otherwise provided in this Code, which either annoys, disturbs or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of one or more
individuals of normal sensitivity within the limits of the city.
B. Unreasonably loud, unnecessary or unusual noise shall include but not
be limited to the following: Sound produced by the playing, using,
operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, CD and tape players,
television receiving set or other machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound, if such sound is loud enough to be clearly heard
25 feet from the source from which the sound is produced or
reproduced. The twenty-five-foot requirement shall not apply, however,
to multifamily dwellings and residences.
C. Unreasonably loud, unnecessary or unusual noises shall also include
sounds from sources and locations other than as specified in Subsection
B hereof which by reason of their volume, frequency, constancy,
duration or character annoy, disturb or endanger the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety as prescribed in Subsection A hereof.
D. Unreasonably loud, unnecessary or unusual noise shall not include:
Noise of safety, warning or emergency devices or signals, or any noise
for which a license or permit therefor has been granted in accordance
with the City of Geneva Municipal Code.
§ 230-33 GENEVA CODE § 232-3
232:316
p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day in such a manner in which
either annoys, disturbs or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of one or more individuals of normal sensitivity.
§ 232-4. Vehicle repair.
It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, rebuild or test any motor
vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the
next day in such a manner which either annoys, disturbs or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of one or more individuals of normal
sensitivity residing in the immediate area.
§ 232-5. Lawn care machinery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate motorized lawn care
equipment, to include lawnmowers, chippers, hedge trimmers, and the like,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next
day in such a manner which either annoys, disturbs or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of one or more individuals of normal
sensitivity.
§ 232-6. Use of decibel meters.
The Chief of Police of the City of Geneva has deemed it appropriate and
in the best interest of the city to reduce and/or mitigate noise problems
and complaints in the community, to supplement the provisions contained
herein by the establishment of acceptable standards of decibel readings for
ambient noise. These standards reflect community needs for such standards
taking into consideration such issues as surrounding circumstances, place,
time of day, and the like and are set forth hereinbelow:
A. Definitions. For the purpose of these standards, the following
definitions shall apply:
AMBIENT NOISE — The background average noise level within an
area, exclusive of any extraneous sounds.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level measured
with a meter using an A-weighted frequency response as prescribed by
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or its successor. Aweighting
is used to approximate the average human ear's response to
a range of sound frequencies.
CLASS A (RESIDENTIAL) LAND — Lands residentially zoned and used
primarily for sleeping purposes by people. Such lands shall include
those contained in the R1, R2 and MR zoning districts.
CLASS B (COMMERCIAL) LAND — Lands where people are likely to
communicate with one another by speech. Class B shall include public
lands and zoning districts designated as B1 and B2.
§ 232-3 NOISE § 232-6
232:317
CLASS C (INDUSTRIAL) LAND — Lands intended primarily for heavy
commercial or industrial use, and shall include those lands in zoning
districts F and F1.
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound that is not an impulsive sound.
DAYTIME — From 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
DBA — The abbreviation for A-weighted sound level in decibels.
FAST RESPONSE — The characteristic of a sound level meter which
allows for accurate measurement of impulsive sounds such as horn
blasts, explosive sounds, firearm discharges or passing vehicles.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — A sound characterized by excursions of the
sound pressure which exceed the ambient sound, by six or more
decibels, but last two seconds or less.
INDUSTRIAL OPERATION — The production, fabrication and storage
of man-made goods, and the production, transformation and storage of
energy in all forms.
MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL — The recorded or noted maximum RMS
(room-mean-square) sound pressure level noted using an instrument
which meets the requirements of the chapter. Maximum impulsive
sound level shall be measured using the fast response setting.
Maximum continuous sound level shall be measured using the slow
response setting.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — An imaginary line exterior to any
structure, along the ground surface, which separates the real property
owned by one person from that owned by another person, and the
vertical extension of such line.
RECEIVING LAND — The property line of the real property where the
sound is being heard, and where appropriate level restrictions apply.
In the case of any apartment, townhouse or condominium, the point-ofmeasurement
is within the affected unit.
SOUND LEVEL — The quantity, in decibels, measured using an
instrument satisfying the requirements of ANSI SI.4-1983. Sound level
is the frequency-weighted (see "A-weighting") sound pressure level
obtained with fast or slow response.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument designed to detect and
measure sound pressure levels and display this information in decibels,
in an analog or digital form. An instrument meeting the requirements
of this code shall conform to the requirements of ANSI SI.4-1983, Type
1 or Type 2.
B. Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use. Any noise
source that produces sound in excess of those levels set forth in Table I,
as measured at, or within the property boundary of the receiving land
use, shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 232-6 GENEVA CODE § 232-6
232:318
TABLE I
A. Continuous sound-slow response meter level.
Receiving Land
Use Category
Maximum Sound in dB(A)
Day Night
Class A
(residential)
65 55
Class B
(commercial)
70 60
Class C (industrial) 80 70
B. Impulsive sound-fast response meter level.
Receiving Land
Use Category
Maximum Sound in dB(A)
Day Night
Class A
(residential)
75 65
Class B
(commercial)
80 70
Class C (industrial) 90 80
With impulsive noise, the following adjustment in the
allowable maximum levels shall apply:
3-10 repetitions per
hour
Deduct 1 dB(A)
11-20 repetitions
per hour
Deduct 2 dB(A)
21-60 repetitions
per hour
Deduct 3 dB(A)
Over 60 repetitions
per hour
Deduct 4 dB(A)
C. In the event the background noise (ambient) level for a given
receiving land use exceeds the standards above, the following
maximum sound levels, measured using the criteria above, shall
apply:
(1) Any continuous sound which exceeds the
ambient by 10 dB(A) or more.
(2) Any impulsive sound which exceeds the ambient
by 20 dB(A) or more, with the above adjustment
applied.
D. The above table shall not apply to noise emanating from an
industrial operation, which noise shall be subject to the
following limits:
§ 232-6 NOISE § 232-6
232:319
(1) Performance standards: all heavy industrial and
light industrial uses proposed to be established
shall provide documentation of conformance
with the following standards as a minimum
condition of permit issuance.
(2) Noise:
(a) Noise shall be measured with a
sound level meter having an Aweighted
filter constructed in
accordance with specifications
of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI).
Measurements are to be made
at any point as indicated in
Table II following.
(b) Impact noise shall be assured
using the fast response of the
sound level meter. Impact
noises are intermittent sounds
such as from a punch press or
drop forge hammer.
Measurements are to be made
at any point as indicated in
Table II.
(c) Between the hours of 7:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. the permissible
sound levels in a residential
district shall be reduced by five
decibels for continuous and by
10 decibels for impact noises.
(d) The following sources of noise
are exempt:
[1] Transportation
vehicles not
under the
control of the
industrial use.
[2] Occasionally
used safety
signals,
warning
devises, and
emergency
pressure relief
valves.
§ 232-6 GENEVA CODE § 232-6
232:320
§ 232-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person alone or in concert who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $250, or by imprisonment not exceeding
15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 236
NUISANCES
[3] Temporary
construction
activity
between 7:00
a.m. and 7:00
p.m.
(e) The following table describes
the maximum pressure level
permitted for industrial source
measured in any adjacent
nonindustrial district or
industrial district lot adjacent
to the site.
TABLE II
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels, db(A)
(RE: 0.0002 Microbar)
Sound
Measured in
Continuous Slow Meter
Response
Impact Fast
Meter
Response
Decibels
Residential 50 60
Commercial 60 70
Industrial
district lot,
70 80
to the noise
source
§ 232-6 NOISE § 232-7
232:321

ARTICLE I
Public Nuisances
[Adopted 4-1-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
§ 236-1. Legislative findings.
The City Council finds that public nuisances exist in the City of Geneva in
the operation of certain establishments and the use of property in flagrant
violation of the penal laws relating to controlled substances, dangerous
drugs, all of which substantially and seriously interfere with the interest of
the public in the quality of life and total community environment, commerce
in the city, property values and the public health, safety and welfare. The
City Council further finds that the continued occurrence of such activities
and violations is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the City
of Geneva and of the business thereof and the visitors thereto. It is the
purpose of this chapter to authorize and empower the Chief of Police to
impose sanctions and penalties for such public nuisances, and such powers
may be exercised either in conjunction with, or apart from, the powers
contained in other laws without prejudice to the use of procedures and
remedies available under such other laws. The Council further finds that the
sanctions and penalties imposed by the Chief pursuant to this law constitute
an additional and appropriate method of law enforcement in response to
the proliferation of the above described public nuisances. The sanctions and
penalties are reasonable and necessary in order to protect the health and
safety of the people of the City and to promote the general welfare.
§ 236-2. Public nuisance defined.
For purposes of this section, a public nuisance is declared to exist where:
A. An arrest for a violation of any provision of Article 220 and 221 of the
New York State Penal Law has been made within 60 days prior to the
issuance of notice pursuant to this section, where said arrest has been
predicated on events, circumstances or activities occurring on the
premises;
B. A violation of Article 220 or 221 which has resulted in a criminal
conviction to Article 220 or 221 within the twenty-four-month period of
time prior to the arrest required in Subsection A above where said
conviction has been predicated on events, circumstances or activities
occurring on the premises;
C. Discovery by any law enforcement agency, or duly authorized agent
thereof, of a quantity and quality of a drug or substance on the
premises, the amount of which would subject an individual, if
prosecuted, to a conviction of Article 220 or 221 of the Penal Law, which
discovery has not lead to an arrest or conviction within the twenty-fourmonth
period of time prior to the arrest required in Subsection A above;
[Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
§ 236-1 NOISE § 236-2
232:323
§ 236-3. Other definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicates:
CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the City of Geneva or his designee.
CONVICTION — Defined and applied in accordance with the provisions of
§ 1.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City Geneva.
MORTGAGEE — The person who is listed as the mortgagee on any
unsatisfied or otherwise open mortgage recorded in the Ontario County
Clerk's office.
OWNER — The person in whose name the real estate affected by the order
is recorded in as the owner in the Office of the Ontario County Clerk.
PREMISES — The building, place, or property whereon the public nuisance
is being conducted or exists.
§ 236-4. Remedies to abate nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement procedures established elsewhere, the Chief,
after notice and opportunity for a hearing, shall be authorized:
§ 236-5. Service of notice.
D. Repetitive violations of Geneva Municipal Code, Chapter 236, Article II,
Nuisance Party Ordinance, within a twelve-month period of time,
following an initial notice of violation; and [Added 6-6-2012 by Ord.
No. 6-2012]
E. Repetitive violations of the New York State Property Maintenance codes
within a twelve-month period, following an initial notice of violation.
[Added 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
A. To order the discontinuance of such activity at the premises where such
public nuisance exists; and/or
B. To order the closing of the premises to the extent necessary to abate the
nuisance.
A. Prior to the issuance of orders by the Chief, pursuant to this section, the
Chief shall give notice and opportunity for a hearing to the owner,
lessor, lessee, agent and all the persons in possession or having charge
of the premises wherein the public nuisance is being conducted,
maintained or permitted. Such notice and opportunity to be heard shall
be given to a mortgagee of the premises. Such notice shall be served
upon an owner pursuant to Section 735 of the Real Property Actions
and Proceedings Law, and upon a mortgagee by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested, sent to the mortgagee's last known address,
provided that any service other than delivery to the person to be served
§ 236-2 GENEVA CODE § 236-5
232:324
§ 236-6. Lack of knowledge not a defense.
The lack of knowledge of, acquiescence or participation in or responsibility
for a public nuisance on the part of the owners, lessors, lessees, mortgagees
and all those persons in possession or having charge of as agent or
otherwise, or having any interest in the premises or personal property, used
in conducting or maintaining the public nuisance, shall not be a defense by
such owners, lessors and lessees, mortgagees and such other persons.
§ 236-7. Issuance of orders.
The Chief shall issue the orders provided for in § 236-4 of this chapter by
positing said orders on premises wherein the public nuisance is occurring
in violation of law and mailing a copy of said orders within one business day
of the posting of said order on the premises.
§ 236-8. Enforcement of orders.
shall be complete immediately upon delivery, mailing or posting without
the necessity of filing proof of service with the clerk of any court before
the hearing.
B. Such notice shall:
(1) Specify the activity creating the nuisance.
(2) Provide 30 days for elimination of the nuisance.
(3) Inform the person to whom it is directed of his/her right to apply
within 10 days for a hearing, before the Chief.
(4) Inform the owner/landlord that upon the expiration of 30 days after
service with no hearing, or upon noncompliance with any written
agreement reached at the hearing before the Chief, the Chief shall
act to obtain compliance as provided by this chapter.
(5) Inform the owner/landlord of his/her obligation to post a copy of the
notice within five days, in a conspicuous place so that all premises
occupants entering the premises shall have notice that the public
nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted on the
premises and that upon 30 days after service of the notice, the
Chief shall act to obtain compliance as provided, including, but not
limited to, the closing of the premises.
A. Five business days after the issuance of an order pursuant to § 236-4
and upon the directive of the Chief, officers of the Geneva Police
Department are authorized to act upon and enforce such orders.
B. Where the Chief closes a premises pursuant to this section, such closing
shall be for a period as the Chief may direct, but in no event shall the
closing be for a period of more than one year from such issuance of the
order pursuant to this section. If the owner, lessor, lessee shall file a
§ 236-5 NOISE § 236-8
232:325
§ 236-9. Closing not possession.
A closing directed by the Chief pursuant to this chapter shall not constitute
an act of possession, ownership or control by the city of the closed premises.
§ 236-10. Disobedience of orders; penalty.
§ 236-11. Promulgation of regulations.
The Chief may promulgate rules and regulations to carry out and give full
effect to the provision of this chapter.
§ 236-12. Administrative liability.
No officers, agent or employee of the City of Geneva, New York, shall be
personally liable for any damage resulting from any official determination,
order or action required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under
this chapter.
bond in any amount determined by the Chief, but which may not exceed
the value of the premises ordered to be closed and submit proof
satisfactory to the Chief that the nuisance has been abated and will
not be created, maintained or permitted to such period of time as the
premises has been directed to be closed by the order of the Chief, then
the Chief may vacate the provisions of the order that direct the closing
of the premises.
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to use or occupy or to permit
any other person to use or occupy any premise, or portion thereof,
ordered closed by the Chief.
B. Mutilation or removal of a posted order of the Chief shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $250, or by imprisonment not exceeding 15
days, or both, provided that such order contains therein a notice of such
penalty.
C. Intentional disobedience or resistance to any provision of the orders
issued by the Chief pursuant to this section, in addition to any other
punishment prescribed by law, shall be punishable by a fine or not more
than $500, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.
§ 236-8 GENEVA CODE § 236-12
232:326
ARTICLE II
Nuisance Party
[Adopted 9-3-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008]
§ 236-13. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as follows:
NUISANCE PARTY — A social gathering which is conducted on premises
within the City of Geneva and which, by reason of the conduct of the persons
in attendance, results in any one or more of the following conditions or
events occurring at the site of the social gathering or on neighboring public
or private property:
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — Any person who is an owner, occupant, tenant,
or otherwise has rightful possession or possessory control, individually or
jointly with others of any premises, who either sponsors, conducts, hosts,
invites or permits a social gathering on said premises.
§ 236-14. Nuisance parties prohibited.
No responsible person shall sponsor, conduct, host, invite or permit a
nuisance party.
A. Disorderly conduct;
B. Unlawful possession of an open container;
C. Outdoor urination or defecation in a public place;
Unlawful sale, furnishing, dispensing or consumption of an alcoholic
beverage;
D.
E. Sale or furnishing of an alcoholic beverage to an underage person;
Possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage by an underage
person;
F.
G. Unlawful possession, sale or use of a controlled substance;
H. Unlawful deposit of litter or refuse;
The damage or destruction of property without the consent of the
property owner;
I.
J. Unlawful pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
Standing or parking of vehicles that obstructs the free flow of traffic on
the public streets and sidewalks or that impedes the ability to render
emergency services;
K.
L. Unlawful loud noise.
§ 236-13 NOISE § 236-15
232:327
§ 236-15. Notice.
The owner of any residence determined to be conducting a nuisance party
shall be notified in writing by the City of Geneva Police Department and
requested to take such appropriate steps to prevent any recurrence.
§ 236-16. Authority to order party ceased.
Any Police Officer or Peace Officer who observes a nuisance party occurring
may order that the nuisance party be ceased and order all nonresidents on
the premises where the nuisance party has occurred to leave the premises
immediately.
§ 236-17. Remaining on premises prohibited.
No person shall remain on the premises where a nuisance party has been
ordered to be ceased by an officer of the City of Geneva Police Department
unless the person resides at the premises where the nuisance party has
occurred.
§ 236-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute an offense
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 in amount, or imprisonment for 15
days or both such fine or imprisonment together with a civil penalty to be
recovered by the City of Geneva in a civil action or proceeding to recover
cost of law enforcement, fire or other emergency response to a loud or
unruly gathering. All responsible parties shall be jointly and severally liable
for such costs.
§ 236-19. Review.
City Council shall undertake a review of this article no later than one year
following adoption. At that time, the Chief of Police shall provide statistics
relative to the number of complaints as they pertain to nuisance parties, as
well as the number of citations issued under this article.
§ 236-20. Severability.
In the event that any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this article is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the invalid or unconstitutional portions of the article shall be
deemed severable from the article and shall in no way affect the validity of
the rest of the article.
§ 236-15 GENEVA CODE § 236-20
232:328
Chapter 243
PARKING LOTS
§ 243-1. Public parking lot restrictions.
No person shall commit any of the following acts within any of the city
public parking lots:
§ 243-2. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 247
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 247-1. Playground regulations.
No person shall commit any of the following acts within any designated
playground in the City of Geneva.
A. Play ball, frisbee or any other sport involving the throwing of any
object.
B. Throw any snowballs, stones or any missile in, upon or across any
public parking lot or raise or fly a kite or balloon or interfere in any
manner with the free, safe and convenient use of such parking lot by
any person or vehicle.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within any designated
playground in the City of Geneva without authorization of the Director
of Public Works, and no person shall park a motor vehicle in any such
playground except in an area authorized for such parking without
authorization of the Director of Public Works. The following are
designated playgrounds: [Amended by Ord. No. 70-18, eff.
6-3-1970; Ord. No. 70-25, eff. 9-2-1970; 5-4-1983 by Ord. No.
83-11]
(1) Neider (North Genesee St.).
(2) Gulvin (Middle St.).
(3) Jefferson (Jefferson Ave.).
(4) Washington (Washington St.).
(5) J.J. Chartres Homes (Pre-Emption St.).
§ 236-20 PARKING LOTS § 247-1
243:329
§ 247-2. Park regulations.
§ 247-3. Rules and regulations of Lakeshore Park. [Added by Ord.
No. 91-13, eff. 6-5-1991]
(6) Loomis Woods (Carter Rd.).
(7) Richards Avenue.
(8) All temporary playgrounds as may be designated by the City
Manager.
(9) Brook Street Playground. [Added 6-3-1987 by Ord. No. 87-18]
B. No person shall park or stand a motor vehicle in the south entranceway
to the Jefferson Avenue Playground located between No. 202 and No.
210 Hamilton Street. [Added by Ord. No. 81-17, eff. 5-6-1981]
C. No person shall enter into any designated playground between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless otherwise authorized by the
Director of Recreation. [Added 5-4-1983 by Ord. No. 83-11;
amended 6-17-2003 by Ord. No. 3-2003]
A. No person shall commit any of the following acts within any city park.
(1) Play ball, frisbee or any other sport involving the throwing of any
object except where an area is expressly provided for that purpose.
(2) Enter into or upon any public park between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. except for through passage on the public sidewalks.
(3) Wade or swim in any fountain or body of water not expressly
designed or intended for bathing.
(4) No person shall smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or use any other
form of tobacco. [Added 8-5-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
B. Exceptions: Provisions regarding hours of operation and wading shall
not apply to the launching of boats. Provisions prohibiting smoking and
tobacco use shall not be applicable to areas immediately adjacent to the
Geneva Events Center. [Added by Ord. No. 70-20, eff. 8-5-1970;
amended 8-5-2015 by Ord. No. 7-2015]
A. Any group exceeding 25, utilizing park facilities, must obtain a permit
seven days in advance.
B. It is unlawful to have, possess, carry or consume alcoholic beverages in
the park.
C. Glass beverage containers are prohibited.
D. No overnight parking or camping allowed.
E. Fires are not permitted.
§ 247-1 GENEVA CODE § 247-3
243:330
F. Firearms and weapons are prohibited.
G. Fireworks are prohibited.
H. Vending is allowed by permit only.
I. Wildlife shall not be disturbed and hunting is prohibited.
J. Profanity, abusive language, fighting or disturbing the peace will not be
allowed.
K. No congregating between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
L. No person shall deface, destroy, remove or disturb any part of park
property.
M. Pets must be on leash.
N. Litter shall be placed in receptacles provided.
O. Motorized vehicles are prohibited on park property, with the exception
of parking lots and drives providing access to parking lots from the
road. Snowmobiles are prohibited. All vehicles must be driven in a safe
manner and drivers must adhere to all parking and traffic regulations.
P. No swimming along the lakeshore, this includes boat launch and piers,
except by special permit of the city.
Q. No person or persons shall make, permit to continue, or cause to be
made or continued, any noise disturbance or loud unusual noise in such
a manner or at such a volume that it interrupts and/or unreasonably
disturbs any persons, including radios and tape decks.
R. Riding of bikes is permitted on trails provided.
S. No overnight parking along the lakeshore or public areas.
T. Group use regulations:
(1) All activities must be conducted in a safe and orderly manner.
Potentially dangerous games involving thrown or propelled objects
are not allowed.
(2) Supervision at a ratio of one adult age 21 or older per 10 minors
must be provided.
(3) The group will be responsible for seeing that all litter is deposited
in trash cans provided.
(4) Group use is restricted to normal operating hours.
(5) Organizations or groups using park facilities for special events will
purchase insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 for bodily injury
liability and property damage (combined single limit). Such
insurance will be written by a company licensed to do business in
§ 247-3 PARKING LOTS § 247-3
243:331
§ 247-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 251
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 251-1. Injury to property.
No person shall willfully, without lawful authority, interfere with, injure or
damage any public building, structure, street sign, lamp or lamppost, traffic
signal or device, or any other property of any kind whatsoever belonging to
or under the control of the city.
§ 251-2. Public nuisances. [Amended 1-6-1993 by Ord. No. 1-93]
New York State and shall be evidenced by a certificate of insurance
which complies with the following provisions: (added by city rules
currently).
A. Loitering.
(1) No person shall loiter in or around public buildings or obstruct
corridors, stairways or doorways, so as to prevent free access by
members of the public, officers or employees. No person shall, by
his or her presence or by means either alone or in consort with
others, interfere with or interrupt the conduct of business in the
offices located in any such buildings.
(2) No person shall, without permission of the owner or occupant
thereof, conceal himself, loiter or prowl on the property of another
in such a manner as to reasonably cause alarm for the safety of
persons or property in the vicinity.
B. Spitting in public places. Spitting upon the sidewalk or crosswalk of any
public street, avenue, park, public square or place in the city, or upon
the floor of any hall in any apartment house which is used in common by
the tenants thereof, or upon the floor of any hall or office in any hotel or
lodging house which is used in common by the guests thereof, or upon
the floor of any theater, schoolhouse, church, store, factory or of any
building which is used in common by the public, or upon the floor of any
bus or other public conveyance, or upon the floor of any depot or station
or upon the station platform of any railroad or other common carrier, is
hereby prohibited.
§ 247-3 GENEVA CODE § 251-3
251:332
§ 251-3. Obstructing creeks or sewers.
No person shall throw any substance into any creek or into any sewer within
the city which may tend to interfere with the free passage of water within
said sewer or creek.
§ 251-4. Interference with television and radio reception.
No person shall erect, maintain, operate or use or cause to be erected,
maintained, operated or used, any electrical device, apparatus, equipment,
machine, transmission line or wiring which shall cause unreasonable
interference with television and radio reception.
§ 251-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 256
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food service — See Ch. 180.
§ 251-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 251-5
256:333

ARTICLE I
Peddlers and Solicitors
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 17 of the 1968 Code]
§ 256-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building or store in which or
where the person transacts business and deals in the goods, wares and
merchandise he hawks, peddles or solicits for during regular business
hours.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from place to place or house to house
or who stands in any street or public place taking or offering to take
orders for goods, wares or merchandise, or for services to be performed in
the future or for making, manufacturing or repairing any article or thing
whatsoever for future delivery. The term "solicitor" shall not apply to a
person selling milk or newspapers.
VENDOR, HAWKER and PEDDLER — Any person, either principal or agent,
who, from any vehicle, or any public street or public place or by going
from house to house or place of business to place of business on foot or
by vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barter or carries or exposes
for sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise, except milk and
newspapers.
§ 256-2. Exemptions.
A. Nothing in this article shall be held to apply to any sales:
(1) Conducted pursuant to law or by order of any court.
(2) At wholesale to dealers in such articles.
(3) By persons under the age of 18 years.
(4) Of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and persons who
produce such commodities.
(5) By any honorably discharged member of the armed forces who has
procured a license issued by the County Clerk as provided by the
General Business Law of the State of New York.
(6) By merchants having an established place of business within the
City or their employees for soliciting orders from customers and
delivering the same.
B. Nonprofit organizations and persons working for such organizations
shall also be exempt. However, such organizations shall register
annually with the City Clerk in the event that they plan to engage in
vending, hawking, peddling or soliciting, and shall indicate the type of
§ 256-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 256-2
256:335
§ 256-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City
to act as a vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor as herein defined without
first having obtained and paid for, and having in force and effect a license
therefor.
§ 256-4. Application for license.
§ 256-5. Bond; when required.
An application for a license as a solicitor who demands, accepts or receives
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall also be
accompanied by a cash deposit of $1,000 or a surety company bond of
$1,000 or other bond secured by sufficient collateral, said bond to be
approved by the City Attorney as to form and surety conditioned for making
a final delivery of the goods, wares or merchandise ordered or services to
be performed in accordance with the terms of such order or failing therein,
that the advance payment on such order be refunded. Any person aggrieved
by the action of any licensed solicitor shall have a right of action on the bond
activities to be undertaken and the time when they will be performed;
provided, however, that those who shall be exempt under the terms of
this subsection shall nevertheless register with the City Clerk before
doing any of the acts regulated by this article and receive from said
Clerk a special license indicating that he has so registered.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file
with the City Clerk a written application upon a form furnished by the
City Clerk and shall file at the same time satisfactory proof of good
character. Such application shall give:
(1) The number and kind of vehicles to be used by the applicant in
carrying on the business for which the license is desired.
(2) The kind of goods, wares and merchandise he desires to sell or the
kind of service he desires to perform.
(3) The method of distribution.
(4) The name, address and age of the applicant.
(5) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation he
represents.
(6) The length of time the applicant desires the license.
(7) Such other information as may be required by the City Clerk.
B. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied by a certificate
from the Sealer of Weights and Measures certifying that all weighing
and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have been examined
and approved.
§ 256-2 GENEVA CODE § 256-5
256:336
for the recovery of money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in
full force and effect, and in case of a cash deposit, such deposit shall be
retained by the city, for a period of six months after the expiration of any
such license, unless sooner released by the City Council.
§ 256-6. Issuance of license.
Upon the filing of the application, bond and certificate as provided in
the preceding section, the City Clerk shall, upon his approval of such
application, issue to the applicant a license as provided in § 256-3 signed
by said Clerk and setting forth the date of issuance and the effective date
of said license, which latter date shall be three days after the date of
issuance counting the date of issuance as the first day. Except as hereinafter
provided, no license shall be refused except for a specific reason and for the
protection of the public safety, health, morals or general welfare.
§ 256-7. License not assignable.
A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of such license who permits
it to be used by any other person, and any person who uses such license
granted to any other person shall each be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 256-8. Loss of license.
Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed on the part of the holder or his
agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof, under the original application
and bond, may be issued by the City Clerk upon the filing with him by the
licensee of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of the loss, and what,
if any, search has been made for its recovery.
§ 256-9. Licenses to be issued from book.
All licenses shall be issued from a properly bound book with proper
reference stubs kept for that purpose, numbered in that order in which they
are issued and shall state clearly the kind of vehicle to be used, the kind
of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold or service to be rendered, the
number of his license, the date of issuance and expiration of the license, fee
paid and the name and address of the licensee.
§ 256-10. Expiration of license.
Such licenses shall automatically expire on December 31 following the date
of issuance of such licenses, but such licenses may specifically state and
provide for an earlier expiration date.
§ 256-11. Restrictions on issuance of license.
Such license shall include the right to use only one vehicle in carrying on
the business for which the person is licensed. No license shall be granted to
a person under 18 years of age. No applicant to whom a license has been
refused or who has a license which has been revoked shall make further
§ 256-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 256-11
256:337
application until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since the
last previous rejection or revocation, unless he can show that the reason for
such rejection no longer exists. Every licensee, while exercising his license,
shall carry the license with him and shall exhibit the same upon demand.
§ 256-12. License fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-12, eff. 7-11-1979;
5-1-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002]
§ 256-13. Revocation of license.
The City Clerk may, at any time, for a violation of this or any other ordinance
or any law, revoke any license. When a license shall be revoked, no refund
of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be made. Notice of such
revocation and the reason or reasons therefor in writing shall be served by
the City Clerk upon the person named in the application or by mailing the
same to the address given in the application.
§ 256-14. Restrictions on licensees.
A. The license fees shall be as follows:
(1) For 10 days or less: $15 per day.
(2) For more than 10 days but less than six months, $100.
(3) For more than six months but not more than one year: $200.
B. All license fees shall be paid when the license is issued.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon private property for
the purpose of peddling or soliciting before the hour of 9:00 a.m. of any
day or after the hour of 7:00 p.m. of any day except upon the invitation
of the householder or occupant.
B. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor in plying his trade to ring
a bell or knock upon or enter any building within the downtown
business district or enter any building or home wherein there is painted
or otherwise affixed or displayed to public view any sign containing any
or all of the following words: "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," "No
Agents"; or any other wording, the purpose of which purports to
prohibit peddling or soliciting on premises. [Amended 1-5-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-2]
C. No peddler or solicitor shall peddle, vend or sell his goods or wares
within 200 feet of any place occupied exclusively as a public or private
school or for school purposes, nor shall he permit his cart, wagon or
vehicle to stand on any public highway within said distance of such
school property.
D. No peddler or solicitor shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the
quantity, character or quality of any article offered for sale. No person
shall by any trick or device or by any false representation obtain or
§ 256-11 GENEVA CODE § 256-14
256:338
§ 256-15. Orders.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing
made in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in
advance, and one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the
deposit is paid to the solicitor.
§ 256-16. Records.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep a record of all applications and
of all licenses granted under the provisions of this article giving the number
and date of each license fee paid and the date of revocation of all licenses
revoked.
§ 256-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions"
of this Code.
attempt to obtain admission to the house or building of any person in
the city.
E. No peddler or solicitor shall blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other
noisy device to attract public attention to his wares, or shout or cry out
his wares.
F. No sidewalk or street vendors shall be permitted unless they own
commercial property or operate an established place of business in the
City and locate their vending site on or immediately adjacent to said
commercial property or established place of business. [Amended
1-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2]
G. No private, for profit vendors associated with a City authorized festival
or special event shall be permitted unless approved by the City
Manager. [Added 1-5-1994 by Ord. 94-2]
§ 256-14 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 256-17
256:339

ARTICLE II
Transient Merchants
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 24 of the 1968 Code]
§ 256-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRANSIENT BUSINESS — One conducted in a store, hotel, house, building
or structure for the sale at retail of goods, wares or merchandise, excepting
food products, and which is intended to be conducted for a temporary
period of time and not permanently.
§ 256-19. Presumption.
If the place in which a business is conducted is rented or leased for a period
of six months or less, such fact shall be presumptive evidence that the
business carried on therein is a transient business.
§ 256-20. Taxation of transient merchants.
A tax is hereby levied upon all persons conducting a transient retail
business in the city. Such tax shall be based upon the gross amount of sales
made by such person during the year in which such business is conducted
and shall be at the same rate as other taxable real and personal property
is taxed for the year in the city. If at any time such tax becomes due
and payable, the tax rate of the City for the current year has not been
fixed, such rate shall be estimated by the Assessor. Such tax shall be due
and payable immediately upon the expiration of the permit hereinafter
mentioned or immediately upon the termination of such business, if the
same is terminated prior to the expiration of such permit, and shall be paid
to the City Comptroller.
§ 256-21. Permit required.
No person shall engage in, manage or conduct a transient retail business
in the City unless a permit for the carrying on of such business as herein
provided for shall have been obtained and shall be in force.
§ 256-22. Application.
A. Every person desiring to conduct a transient retail business in the City
shall present to the City Manager a verified application setting forth the
following facts:
(1) The name and place of residence of the person desiring to conduct
such business.
(2) The place where and the time during which such business is to be
conducted.
§ 256-18 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 256-22
256:341
§ 256-23. Bond required.
Every person shall present to the City Manager with such application a
bond with a sufficient surety or sureties in the penalty of $500, conditioned
that the person to whom such permit is granted will pay the tax imposed
by this article when due and that he will obey all the provisions of this
article. Before any permit is issued, such bond must be approved by the
City Manager as to the sufficiency of the surety or sureties and by the City
Attorney as to form and must be filed with the City Clerk.
§ 256-24. Issuance of permit.
§ 256-25. Report of sales.
Every person receiving such permit shall on Monday of each week after
receiving such permit file with the City Clerk a verified report of the gross
sales made in such business during the week preceding the filing of such
report. In case that any such person shall fail to file such report when due,
the City Manager may, in his discretion, immediately revoke the permit
granted to him.
(3) The name of the person who will be in personal charge of such
business.
(4) A description of the kind of merchandise in which such person
proposes to deal.
B. Such application shall also have annexed thereto a consent and
agreement, duly acknowledged, that, if the applicant shall fail or
neglect to file at the proper time any verified report of gross sales, as
herein required, the City Clerk may estimate the amount of such gross
sales for the period for which such report shall not have been filed and
that the amount so estimated shall be deemed the amount of gross sales
for such period for the purpose of computing the tax herein provided
for.
A. Upon the filing of such application and bond, the City Manager may
issue a permit to the applicant to conduct a transient retail business in
accordance with its terms.
B. Such permit shall state:
(1) The name of the person to whom it is granted.
(2) The place at which and the time during which such business may be
conducted.
(3) The kind of merchandise in which such person may deal.
C. No such permit shall be transferable.
§ 256-22 GENEVA CODE § 256-26
256:342
§ 256-26. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
§ 256-26 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 256-26
256:343
Chapter 264
(RESERVED)
Chapter 268
RAILROADS
§ 268-1. Rate of speed.
No person shall operate a railroad engine or train in the city across any
street or highway at a rate of speed in excess of 20 miles per hour unless
such crossing is protected by gates with persons to open and close the same
or by any type of automatic protection.
§ 268-2. Obstructing crossing.
§ 268-3. Ringing of bells and blowing whistles.
No person acting as engineer, driving or operating a locomotive in the city
shall ring the bell or sound the whistle or cause the same to be rung or
sounded except as a signal of immediate impending danger.
§ 268-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
Chapter 273
SANITARY CODE
§ 273-1. Enactment of rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations are enacted as the Sanitary Code of the
City of Geneva, New York and shall govern the security of life and health in
the City of Geneva, New York.
A. No officer or employee of a corporation in charge of a locomotive, train
or car, shall willfully obstruct, or cause to be obstructed any highway
crossing in the city for a longer period than five consecutive minutes.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, no such
officer or employee shall be subject to any civil, criminal or other
penalty where they have no control over the situation causing the
obstruction or when the railroad train cannot be moved without
endangering the safety of the passengers, the public or freight.
§ 256-26 GENEVA CODE § 273-2
268:344
§ 273-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meaning
given herein:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — Any local government, county
government, or state agency responsible for administration or enforcement
of an applicable law or regulation.[Added 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — Any person designated by the
authority having jurisdiction or Code Enforcement Officer to act on his or
her behalf.[Added 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
CITY — The City of Geneva, New York.
COMPOST — The humus-like product of the process of composting organic
waste, which may be used as a soil conditioner.[Added 7-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 4-2015]
COMPOSTING — A controlled biological treatment process by which
microorganisms decompose the organic fraction of waste, producing a
stable humus-like material.[Added 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
COMPOSTING MATERIAL — Organic waste in the process of becoming
compost.[Added 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
COMPOSTING OPERATION — All composting activities conducted on a site,
including all composting material, stored landscape waste and end-product
compost located on any site at any one time.[Added 7-1-2015 by Ord. No.
4-2015]
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a dwelling with
facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking
and eating purposes.34
FOOD WASTE — Animal and plant waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food.[Added
7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food and/or any
organic waste.35
HOUSE, BUILDING or DWELLING — Any structure enclosed by walls and
covered with a roof used for any purpose whatsoever.
LANDSCAPE WASTE — Grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and
other materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns, shrubbery,
vines and trees, including any discarded fruits, vegetables and other
vegetative material generated in the care of a garden.[Added 7-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 4-2015]
34.Editor's Note: The former definition of “Environmental health technician,” which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012.
35.Editor's Note: The former definitions of “Health Department” and “Health officer,” which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012.
§ 273-2 RAILROADS § 273-2
268:345
ORGANIC WASTE — Food waste, landscape waste, wood waste and other
nonhazardous carbonaceous waste.[Added 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
PERSON — A person, partnership, corporation or association.36
PREMISES — A lot, piece, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings and
structures thereon.37
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms, forming a single habitable
unit, used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking
or eating purposes.38
TRASH/RECYCLABLES — Nonorganic manufactured articles that have
outlived their usefulness, composed of materials such as paper, cardboard,
rags, glass, metal, plastics, ceramics, cleaning compounds, and upholstery
materials.[Added 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
§ 273-3. Nuisances.
Whatever is dangerous to human life or public health; whatever buildings,
premises or part or parts thereof, including the cellar, are overcrowded
or not provided with adequate means of ingress or egress, or are not
sufficiently supported, ventilated, drained, sewered, lighted or cleaned;
and whatever renders soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome, are
declared to be nuisances and to be illegal; and every person who created
or contributes to the same, or who permits the same to continue shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this code.
§ 273-4. Fowl. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
No fowl shall be killed or prepared for food except in a room with a properly
drained cement floor with sidewalls of a smooth nonabsorbent material of a
height of at least seven feet from the floor. Any such room shall be supplied
with running hot and cold water and shall be well ventilated, frequently
cleaned and kept free from feathers, entrails or other objectionable matter.
Each such room shall be supplied with a covered container to receive all
waste and the contents of said container shall be properly disposed of
when full or the day's slaughter completed. The room and its appurtenances
shall be examined and approved by the authority having jurisdiction or
authorized representative before being used.
§ 273-5. Domestic animals and household pets.
A. No domestic animal or household pet shall be kept within the City
under such conditions as shall constitute a health nuisance.
36.Editor's Note: The former definition of “Plumbing inspector,” which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012.
37.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “refuse,” added 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015.
38.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “rubbish,” added 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015.
§ 273-2 GENEVA CODE § 273-5
268:346
§ 273-6. Swine.
No swine shall be kept or harbored within the City.
§ 273-7. Organic waste. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-9, eff. 5-2-1979;
7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
B. No dog shall be allowed in any store, place or area where food is
handled or sold.
C. No dog or other animal or household pet shall be placed or permitted to
remain on the roof of any building for the purpose of disposing of
excreta.
A. Food waste must be disposed of in one of three ways: use of a sink
disposal unit, storage in an airtight container until it can be taken away
by a licensed trash collector, or by composting. In the case of
composting, only the plant component of the food waste and eggshells
may be composted. The animal waste component must be disposed of in
a sink disposal unit or by trash collection. Landscape waste must be
disposed of by setting it at curbside for the semiannual municipal
pickup, taking it to the city transfer station, or by composting.
B. Small-scale composting that does not require a permit under New York
State DEC regulation and enforcement code Chapter 4 shall be allowed
in the City of Geneva so long as it meets the following regulations
(1) Composting materials must consist only of plant food waste,
eggshells, and yard waste, but not animal feces.
(2) All compost must be generated and utilized on site.
(3) When only plant food waste is being composted, the composting
material and compost must be in a composting container, closed on
top and all four sides, with suitable holes and slots to allow for air
circulation. When only landscape waste is being composted, the
container need not have a top, but should be enclosed on at least
three sides with strong wire mesh or wood slats. When properly
mixed and covered with yard waste, food waste composting
material may be introduced into the more open yard waste
containers.
(4) The composting materials shall be mixed or turned at regular
intervals as conditions mandate, to remix ingredients, distribute
moisture, rebuild porosity and aid in the physical breakdown of the
composting material. Water or wet food waste should be added
during dry weather to maintain the appropriate moisture level.
(5) The composting operation should contain no more than 10 cubic
yards of composting material unless express written authorization
has been issued by the City of Geneva Department of Public Works.
§ 273-5 RAILROADS § 273-7
268:347
§ 273-8. Odors. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
No person shall permit or have any vegetable or animal substance, water or
other liquid on his premises or ground which shall give off an offensive odor
or be prejudicial to life or health. No person shall burn, boil, heat, dry, keep
or store any offal, swill, blood, bones, rags or decaying animal or vegetable
matter within the City limits without the written permission of the authority
having jurisdiction or authorized representative.
§ 273-9. Extermination.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination
of any insects, rodents or other pests in the said unit. Infestation of two
or more dwelling units in the same building shall make extermination the
responsibility of the owner of the building. Extermination of rooming units
shall be the responsibility of the owner or landlord; it shall be done monthly
by the landlord or more frequently if needed.
§ 273-10. Food waste containers. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No.
7-2012; 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
The occupant of any dwelling unit, building, premises or place of business
in the City where trash/recyclables and/or food waste is accumulated or
exists shall provide or cause to be provided suitable leak-proof and efficient
receptacles, with tight covers, for receiving and holding without leakage
all trash/recyclables and/or food waste that may accumulate from said unit,
premises, business or the portion thereof of which such person may be the
occupant. Such receptacles shall be kept securely closed at all times and
placed and kept in such a position as the authority having jurisdiction or
authorized representative may direct.
§ 273-11. Dumping. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012;
7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015; 9-6-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2017]
No person shall dump and/or store any trash/recyclables or organic waste
upon any property, public or private, including his/her own, or place
furniture and other materials principally designed for interior use in
exterior locations, including porches and lawns, in the City of Geneva,
except for the purposes of composting, waiting for trash/recyclables pickup
(6) The composting activities shall be located or constructed to
prevent composting material from sitting in ponded surface water,
and shall be situated no closer than 15 feet from the average
seasonal high water line of perennial water bodies.
(7) The composting container shall be located no closer than four feet
to any side or rear property line.
(8) In no event shall composting activities be conducted in a manner
that creates public nuisances such as bad odors, swarming insects,
or rodents.
§ 273-7 GENEVA CODE § 273-11
268:348
by a licensed hauler, or the biennial setting out of landscape waste for
municipal pickup as set out in §§ 273-7 and 273-10.
§ 273-12. Unsanitary buildings. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No.
7-2012]
Whenever the authority having jurisdiction or authorized representative
shall determine that any building or part thereof has, because of filth, poor
ventilation, lack of repair or any other cause become unsanitary and a
menace to health, he may condemn said building or part thereof and order
the occupants to vacate the same; and upon failure to comply with such
order he may forcibly remove said occupant and close the building or any
part thereof and the same shall not be again occupied without the written
consent of the authority having jurisdiction or authorized representative.
§ 273-13. Demolition of buildings. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No.
7-2012]
No building shall be demolished or removed from its site, except in an
emergency, without the written consent of the authority having jurisdiction
or authorized representative, upon proof that the said building has been
subjected to satisfactory extermination procedures for rodents, insects and
pests during the seven days prior to demolition or removal.
§ 273-14. Toilet facilities.
All toilet facilities, whether for management, employees or the general
public shall be properly constructed and maintained, and all toilet rooms
shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair, well lighted and well
ventilated. All handwashing facilities shall be supplied with hot and cold
running water and sanitary towels.
§ 273-15. Heat. [Added 7-7-1971; amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No.
7-2012]
In all buildings in which it is the obligation of the owner or the landlord to
provide heat, the said owner or landlord shall, between September 15 and
May 31, maintain heat of 68° F. in all dwelling units or rooms therein.
§ 273-16. Plumbing rules. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
The safety, usability, conformity with requirements and sanitary effects of
any plumbing installation in the City of Geneva shall be the decision of the
Building Inspector. The safety, sanitary effects and code conformability of
any plumbing to be installed or repaired in the City of Geneva shall be the
sole decision of the Building Inspector.
§ 273-17. Disposal of dead animals.
Upon the death of any animal within the City, except when the same is
properly and lawfully killed for food, the owner or person having control
§ 273-11 RAILROADS § 273-17
268:349
thereof shall immediately dispose of the carcass in a manner to avoid any
unsanitary condition. In the event that the owner of the dead animal is
unknown, it shall be the responsibility of the Department of Public Works to
dispose of such dead animals.
§ 273-18. Noise. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
No person shall make, cause to be made or continued any noise or sound
which endangers or injures the health or safety of another, whether in
the practice of any trade or calling, game or sporting event, business or
profession, musical or theatrical performance, or the running, driving or
flying of any vehicle, boat or motor, unless the said noise shall be necessary
for the protection or preservation of the property or of the health, safety, life
or limb of a person, without permission in writing of the authority having
jurisdiction or authorized representative.
§ 273-19. Mosquitoes. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
No person shall permit the collection of water, moisture or other liquid on
any property owned or controlled by him that in the opinion of the authority
having jurisdiction or authorized representative will be a harborage or
breeding place for mosquitoes, pests, insects or rodents.
§ 273-20. Authority having jurisdiction or authorized
representative. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
No person shall interfere with or obstruct the authority having jurisdiction
or authorized representative when in the performance of his or their official
duties.
§ 273-21. Enforcement Officer. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No.
7-2012]
The authority having jurisdiction or authorized representative shall be the
enforcement officer of this Sanitary Code.
§ 273-22. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by the Health Officer,
approved by City Council and eff. 8-2-1972; amended by Ord. No.
79-20, eff. 9-5-1979; 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
Any person who shall knowingly and willfully violate or assist in the
violation of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished by a fine for
the first offense in the amount of $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding
15 days, or by both said fine and imprisonment for each offense. For a
second offense committed within 12 months, the fine shall be $250 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both said fine and imprisonment
for each offense. For a third and subsequent violation committed within 12
months, the fine shall be $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days,
or by both said fine and imprisonment for each offense. Each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 273-17 GENEVA CODE § 273-23
268:350
§ 273-23. Alternative Dumping and Storing Violation Procedures.
[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 3-201839]
A. Procedure upon report of a violation of § 273-11. In addition to the
penalties set forth in § 273-22, the procedures set forth in Subsections
B through E or in Subsection F of this section of the City Code may be
followed by the Director of Public Works, at his option, upon receiving a
report of violation of § 273-11.
B. In the case of a report of a violation of § 273-11 made for the first time,
the Director of Public Works may issue a notice of violation to the
property owner of record or the person responsible for the violation,
advising him or her or it that, if the violation of § 273-11 is not corrected
within five days of the date of service of the notice of violation, the City
will cause the items dumped and/or stored to be removed and taken to
the appropriate landfill; that the actual costs of picking up and
disposing such items will be billed to the property owner and that, upon
his or her failure to pay such costs, they shall be added to the next real
property tax bill of such property owner.
C. The notice of violation provided for in Subsection B above shall be
served by ordinary, first-class mail and, in the case of a property owner
or the person responsible for the violation having an out-of-Town
address, the Zoning Officer shall add three days to the notice's five-day
period before enforcing the within provisions.
D. In the case of a property owner or a person responsible for the violation
of § 273-11, who has received a notice of violation provided for in
Subsection B above, additional written notice need not be given by the
Zoning Officer for subsequently reported violations of this section
involving the same circumstances.
E. Upon the expiration of the notice period provided for in Subsections B
and C above or upon notification of a subsequent violation of § 273-11,
pursuant to Subsection D above, if the property owner or the person
responsible for the violation of § 273-11 has failed to take remedial
action and the violation continues, the Director of Public Works shall
assign City workers or contract with private individuals to correct the
violation of § 273-11, and, upon the completion of such corrective work,
the Director of Public Works shall promptly bill the property owner or
the person responsible for the violation of § 273-11 for the actual cost of
the corrective work, at his or her address as shown on the tax rolls or
his or her or its last known address. Any charges remaining unpaid at
the time City tax notices are prepared shall be added as charges on
such City tax notices sent to the property owner. The City may bring a
civil action to recover such charges against the person responsible for
the violation of § 273-11 if he or she or it is not the owner of the
property where the violation occurred.
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 273-23 as § 273-24.
§ 273-23 RAILROADS § 273-23
268:351
§ 273-24. Interpretation of provisions in regard to other laws.
This Code is intended to supplement but not supersede the New York State
Public Health Law and the New York State Sanitary Code. If any of the
sections of this Code shall be inconsistent with the provisions of the New
York State Public Health Law or Sanitary Code, the provisions of the New
York State Public Health Law or Sanitary Code shall prevail.
Chapter 277
SANITARY SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary Code — See Ch. 273. Water and sewers — See Ch. 341.
F. As an alternative to the procedures set forth in Subsections B through E
above, the Director of Public Works may impose a charge of $10 for
each day the violation of § 273-11 continues after the expiration of the
notice period provided for in Subsections B and C above or upon
notification of a subsequent violation of § 273-11, pursuant to
Subsection D above. The Director of Public Works may impose a $10
per-day charge for each violation and subsequent violation. The
Director of Public Works shall promptly serve the property owner or
person responsible violation of § 273-11 with a notice of charge by mail
at his or her address as shown on the tax rolls or his or her last known
address. The Director of Public Works shall continue to issue notices of
charges to the property owner or person responsible for the violation of
§ 273-11 on a weekly basis. Any amounts remaining unpaid at the time
City tax notices are prepared are to be added as charges on such City
tax notices. The City may bring a civil action to recover such charges
against the person responsible for the violation of § 273-11 if he or she
or it is not the owner of the property where the violation occurred.
G. The property owner, the person responsible, or the person assessed
with a violation of § 273-11 under this section of the Code may submit
one appeal to the Office of the City Manager of the notice of violation
referred to in Subsections A through E or the initial notice of charge
described in Subsection F. Such appeal must be in writing and filed
within 20 days of the mailing of the initial notice of correction or notice
of charge. The City Manager shall determine the appeal within 15 days
of filing.
§ 273-23 GENEVA CODE § 273-24
268:352
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Definitions
§ 277-1. Purpose and policy.
§ 277-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT OR THE ACT — The Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Commissioner of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation if New York State has an
approved state pretreatment program and the Administrator of the EPA in a
non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment
program.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An authorized
representative of an industrial user shall be:
A. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for indirect contributors
into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the City of
Geneva and enables the City to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws.
B. The objectives of this chapter are:
(1) To prevent the introduction into the municipal wastewater system
of pollutants which will interfere with the operation of the system
or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
C. This chapter provides for the regulation of indirect contributors to the
municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to
certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing
customers' capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
§ 277-1 RAILROADS § 277-2
268:353
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and
(b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDER — Any person, persons or corporation who undertakes to
construct, either under contract or for resale within two years, any
habitable building.
BUILDING DRAIN — The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
CITY — The City of Geneva, New York.
CITY ENGINEER or DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
— The professional engineer retained as City Engineer for the City of
Geneva, or his authorized deputy or agent.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The approval authority, defined hereinabove; or
the Director if the City has an approved pretreatment program under the
provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.
DEVELOPER — Any person, persons or corporation who undertakes to
construct simultaneously more than one housing unit on a given tract or
land subdivision.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of New York.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of Vice President, if the
industrial user is a corporation.
A.
A general partner or proprietor if it is a partnership or proprietorship,
respectively.
B.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
C.
§ 277-2 GENEVA CODE § 277-2
268:354
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also
be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants
into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b),
(c) or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER or USER — A source of indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contribute to a violation of any requirement
of the City's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant
to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title
IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the
POTW.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), which
applies to a specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARDS — Any regulation developed under the authority
of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
§ 277-2 RAILROADS § 277-2
268:355
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
or duly authorized official of said Department.
PASS-THROUGH — The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into
the receiving waters in quantities or concentrations which are a cause of,
or significantly contribute to, a violation of any requirement of the POTW
treatment plant SPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any substance not normally present or present in
concentrations not normally found in aquatic systems, or that may be
potentially toxic or otherwise objectionable.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or SEWAGE WORKS —
A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292),
which is owned in this instance by the City. This definition includes any
sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does
not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility
providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall also
§ 277-2 GENEVA CODE § 277-2
268:356
include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons
outside the City, who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of
the City's POTW.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE or WASTEWATER — A combination of the water-carried wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and
stormwaters as may be present.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL, MAY — "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — Any violation that meets one or more
of the following criteria:
A. Any discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard;
Any other industrial user that discharges an average of at least 25,000
GPD of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blow down wastewaters) to the publicly owned treatment works;
B.
An industrial user that contributes process waste stream which is at
least 5% of the average dry weather hydraulic capacity or organic
capacity of the publicly owned treatment works; or
C.
Any industrial user so designated by the publicly owned treatment
works due to the reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
publicly owned treatment works' operation or violating a pretreatment
standard.
D.
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits;
A.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
B.
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement (daily
maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative
standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through
C.
§ 277-2 RAILROADS § 277-2
268:357
SPDES — State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972,
or its most recent edition.
STATE — State of New York.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — A sewer which carries stormwaters
and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 307(a) of
the Clean Water Act, or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the City's POTW.
WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT or WASTEWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT — As set forth in § 277-47 of this chapter.
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public);
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
D.
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
E.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
F.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation
of best management practices, which the POTW determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
H.
§ 277-2 GENEVA CODE § 277-2
268:358
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
WWTF or WWTP — Wastewater treatment facility or wastewater treatment
plant.
§ 277-2 RAILROADS § 277-2
268:359

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 277-3. Prohibitions against insanitary disposal of sewage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to improperly place, deposit, or permit
to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property
within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human
or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 277-4. Use of natural outlet prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, either directly
or through any storm sewer, within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said City, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. Use of separate
storm sewers and sanitary sewers is mandatory, and no combined sewers
will be allowed.
§ 277-5. Private sanitary disposal system prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tanks, cesspool or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage.
§ 277-6. Connection with available public sewer system required.
[Amended 9-4-2019 by Ord. No. 5-2019]
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City, is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after the date of official
notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the
property line. Said owner shall maintain and repair all lateral sewers to
such building or vacant lot.
§ 277-3 RAILROADS § 277-6
268:361

ARTICLE III
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 277-7. Conditions for connection.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 277-6, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this article and with the provisions
of the City and standard specifications of the State Department of Health.
§ 277-8. Application; fees.
A. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written approval signed by the
Director of Public Works. The application for such permit shall be made
on a form furnished by the City which the applicant shall supplement by
any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed
necessary by the Director.
B. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written approval from the Director of
Public Works or Chief Operator. No unauthorized person shall make
connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, driveway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer.
C. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Work
will be performed by Department of Public Works personnel. Before the
commencement of work, a fee, which is to be adjusted administratively
annually based on the inflation rate, is charged as listed below:
(1) Sewer tap fee, installed, complete from sewer main to the City
right-of-way line.
(a) Tapping fees for four- and six-inch sewer lines:
[1] Service materials: $350.
[2] Materials for excavation: $1,144.
[3] Equipment: $916.
[4] Labor: $1,200.
[5] Total cost: $3,610.
(b) Tapping fees for eight- and twelve-inch sewer lines:
§ 277-7 RAILROADS § 277-8
268:363
[1] Service materials: $780.
[2] Materials for excavation: $1,725.
[3] Equipment: $1,345.
[4] Labor: $1,415.
[5] Total cost: $5,265.
(2) Cost of tap fees for sewer lines larger than 12 inches in size will be
determined on an individual basis.
(3) Disconnect fee:
(a) Four- to six-inch sewer lines: $2,500.
(b) Cost of disconnecting a six-inch-or-larger sewer line will be
determined on an individual basis.
D. Cost to televise existing sewer laterals:
(1) The following fees will be charged for utilization of City equipment
to televise sewer laterals:
(a) Owner-occupied residences: $200 (flat fee).
(b) Investor rental properties: $375 (flat fee).
(c) Industrial/commercial/retail/not-for-profit entities: $450 per
hour.
(d) Senior exemption: All seniors who are income eligible pursuant
to the Over 65 Property Tax Exempt Program will not be
charged for this service.
(2) Prior to utilization of City equipment, the private owner or business
representatives must ensure that the sewers are snaked-cleaned.
In the event that the problem is determined to be within the City
right-of-way, no fee will be charged. If the problem is determined to
be within the owner's property line, the fee will be billed to the
property owner and, in the event of nonpayment, any such charge
will be added to the next annual tax bill.
(3) All users are responsible for maintenance of sanitary sewer lines to
the City right-of-way. If a problem occurs, it is the property owner's
responsibility to determine whether or not the problem is on City
property. If City employees are required to respond to a problem
that is not on City property, the property owner will be charged at
current rates for time, equipment and material.
(4) At no time shall City employees access a sanitary line through a
private basement, commercial property or industrial property. If
cleaning or inspection is required, the property owner must
provide sanitary access through a cleanout from the right-of-way. If
§ 277-8 GENEVA CODE § 277-8
268:364
§ 277-9. (Reserved)
§ 277-10. Compliance with state requirements.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Health of
the State of New York. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage
disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the
area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool
shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
§ 277-11. Connection with public sewer upon availability.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 277-6, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable material. All costs associated with
securing abandoned facilities shall be borne by the property owner.
§ 277-12. Responsibility of owner.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
§ 277-13. Requirements not exclusive.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the authorized
representative of the New York State Department of Health.
§ 277-14. through § 277-16. (Reserved)
the sanitary line is blocked for any reason, a determination will
be made as to the location of the blockage. The blockage will be
repaired by City personnel only if it is within the City right-of-way.
All other repairs will be made by the property owner at his or her
expense.
§ 277-8 RAILROADS § 277-14
268:365

ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers, Connections and Fees
§ 277-17. Separate building sewers required.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
§ 277-18. Use of old sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with a new building only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Director, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
§ 277-19. Building sewer pipe.
Sanitary sewers from building discharge to the sanitary main in the City
right-of-way shall be constructed of:
§ 277-20. Size and slope of building sewer.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval
of the Director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches.
The slope of such four-inch pipe shall be not less than 1/4 inch per foot. The
slope of a six-inch pipe shall be not less than 1/8 inch per foot.
§ 277-21. Building sewer location.
Building sewers must be laid no closer than 10 feet from parallel water
service pipes. Where building sewers must cross water pipes, the pipe
length should be centered over or under the water pipe so that the pipe
joints are as far as possible from the water pipe. If any joint is less than
10 feet from the water pipe, it must be encased in concrete. No building
sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which
might thereby be weakened. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall
be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. The
building sewer shall be laid with a minimum depth of cover of four feet. The
building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade and in straight alignment
where possible. Changes in direction shall be made with fittings that have
offsets of 60° or less unless a cleanout is installed and brought to the
surface.
A. Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) conforming to ASTM D3034 with a
minimum pipe stiffness of 46 psi at a maximum deflection of 5% and a
standard dimension ratio (SDR) of 35 or less.
B. Ductile iron pipe conforming to ASTM C151 and C110.
§ 277-17 RAILROADS § 277-22
268:367
§ 277-22. Artificial lifting of sewage.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by
approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 277-23. Building sewer installation and backfill.
Ductile iron and PVC pipe shall be installed and backfilled in accordance
with ASTM 2321. Blocking under the pipe is not permitted. Trenches may
not be backfilled until the work has been inspected. If groundwater is
encountered or the excavation contains stormwater, the water level in the
excavation must be lowered to a level below the invert of the public sewer
before removing the lateral plug. Cleanouts must be provided at the City
right-of-way.
§ 277-24. Joints and connections.
All joints and connections shall be gastight and watertight. Ductile iron pipe
shall be installed using mechanical or push-on joints conforming to ASTM
C111. PVC pipe shall be joined with push-on joints or solvent welded joints
conforming to ASTM D3034.
§ 277-25. (Reserved)
§ 277-26. Inspection; responsibility of plumber; penalties.
§ 277-27. Barricades and lights to protect public.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
A. The plumber to whom a permit is issued shall notify the Highway/Sewer
Superintendent or Code Enforcement Officer when the building sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer lateral.
B. Building sewer pipe installations must be inspected by the Highway/
Sewer Superintendent or Code Enforcement Officer before backfilling
has been started and before any connection to the public sewer lateral
has been started. All inspections will be performed during normal
working hours for the City DPW.
C. The backfilling of a trench or connection to a public sewer lateral before
inspection by the Superintendent will subject the plumber to whom the
permit has been issued to a penalty up to $1,000 for each offense plus
all costs associated to repair condition. Violation of any terms of this
chapter or any other of the rules and regulations of the City by a
plumber or persons in his employ may result in suspension or
revocation of recognition of the plumber by the City.
§ 277-22 GENEVA CODE § 277-27
268:368
ARTICLE V
Sewer Extensions
§ 277-28. Sanitary sewer extension standards.
All extensions to the sanitary sewer system owned and maintained by
the City shall be properly designed in accordance with the Recommended
Standards of Sewer Works, as adopted by the Great Lakes-Upper
Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers and in strict
conformance with all requirements of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC). Plans and specifications for sewer
extensions shall be submitted to, and approval obtained from, the Director
of Public Works and NYSDEC before construction may proceed. The design
of sewers must anticipate and allow for flows from all possible future
extensions or developments within the immediate drainage area.
§ 277-29. Construction of sewer extensions; assessment of cost.
Sewer extensions may be constructed by the City under public contract,
by City forces, if, in the opinion of City Council, the number of properties
to be served by such extension warrants its costs. Property owners will
be assessed the full costs of constructing an eight-inch sanitary sewer for
the width of their property. Property owners may propose sewer extensions
within City limits by drafting a written petition, signed by a majority of
the benefiting property owners, and filing it with the City Clerk. The City
Council has the right to order sewer extensions where deemed necessary
for the health of the community and assess charges against property
owners.
§ 277-30. Construction of sewer extension by owner or developer.
§ 277-31. Sewer design and specifications.
Sewer design shall be in accordance with § 277-28 and the following
provisions:
A. If the City does not elect to construct a sewer extension under public
contract, the property owner, builder or developer may construct the
necessary sewer extension, if approved by the City Council. He or they
must pay for the entire installation, including all expenses incidental
thereto. Each building sewer installed must be installed and inspected
as previously required, and the inspection fees shall be paid.
B. Design of sewers shall be as specified in §§ 277-28 and 277-31. The
installation of the sewer extension must be subject to full-time
inspection by the City Engineer, the Director of Public Works or his
appointee, and the expenses for this inspection shall be paid for by the
owner, builder or developer. The Director of Public Works' decisions
shall be final in matters of quality and methods of construction. The
sewer, as constructed, must pass the leakage test required in § 277-32
before it is to be used.
§ 277-28 RAILROADS § 277-31
268:369
§ 277-32. Leakage test before approval.
All sewers shall be tested for leakage prior to being placed in service. The
leakage shall be determined by exfiltration, infiltration or low-pressure air.
The testing method shall be as directed by the Engineer or Director of
A. Pipe shall be ductile iron conforming to ASTM C151 and/or polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) conforming to ASTM D3034 with a minimum pipe
stiffness of 46 psi at a maximum deflection of 5% and a standard
dimension ratio (SDR) of 35 or less.
B. Ductile iron pipe joints shall be push-on or mechanical conforming to
ASTM C111.
C. Polyvinyl chloride pipe shall be joined with push-on or mechanical joints
conforming to ASTM C111.
D. Joints of any of these types of pipe shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer's published recommendations.
E. Ductile iron and PVC pipe shall be installed and backfilled in
accordance with ASTM 2321. Polyvinyl chloride pipe deflection shall be
checked by pulling a deflection gauge through completed pipelines by
hand.
F. Manholes shall be constructed with a poured three-thousand-psi
concrete base, steel-troweled concrete or mortar inverts and precast
four-foot diameter concrete manhole barrel sections and a tapered top
section as specified by ASTM C0478, or cement brick or block solid. The
manhole frame and cover shall be the standard design of the City and
shall be set with no less than two courses of brick underneath to allow
for later adjustment in elevation.
Pipe Diameter
(inches) Trench Width
8 3' - 3"
10 3' - 6"
12 3' - 9"
G. If the trench widths are found, during field inspection, to exceed the
limits in the above table, the sewer pipe shall be encased with a
minimum of six inches of concrete. Pipe shall be firmly and evenly
bedded on a minimum of three inches of No. 2 crushed stone (NYSDOT
Specification). Pipe thickness and field strength shall be calculated on
the following criteria:
Safety factor 1.5
Load factor 1.7
Weight of soil 120 lbs. cu. ft.
§ 277-31 GENEVA CODE § 277-32
268:370
Public Works. If the line fails the test, the contractor shall explore for and
repair the cause of the excessive leakage. After repairs have been made,
the line shall be retested. This procedure shall be repeated until the pipe
complies.
A. Exfiltration testing. Exfiltration tests shall be made by filling a section
of pipeline with water and measuring the quantity of leakage. The head
of water at the beginning of the test shall be at least two feet above the
highest pipe within the section being tested. Should groundwater be
present within the section being tested, the head of water for the test
shall be two feet above the level of the groundwater. Should the
requirement of two feet of water above the highest pipe subject any
joint at the lower end of the test section to a differential head greater
than 11.5 feet, another method of testing shall be employed.
B. Infiltration testing. Infiltration tests will be allowed only when the
groundwater level is two feet or more above the highest pipe of the
section being tested. The quantity of water leaking into each section of
pipeline shall be measured by a calibrated weir constructed at the
outlet of the section being tested.
C. Allowable leakage.
(1) The allowable leakage (exfiltration or infiltration) shall not exceed
the following in gallons per 24 hours per inch of diameter per 1,000
feet of pipe.
Type of Pipe Leakage
Ductile iron, mechanical or push-on joints 10
Polyvinyl chloride, thermal plastic or
fiberglass with rubber joints
10
Polyvinyl chloride, thermal plastic or
fiberglass with solvent-cemented joints
0
(2) Regardless of the above allowable leakage, any spurting leaks
detected shall be completely and permanently stopped.
D. Manhole testing. Each manhole shall be tested by either exfiltration or
infiltration. A manhole will be acceptable if the leakage does not exceed
an allowable of one gallon per vertical foot of depth for 24 hours.
Regardless of the allowable leakage, any leaks detected shall be
permanently stopped. An exfiltration test may be performed prior to or
after backfilling. The test shall be made by filling the manhole with
water and observing the level for a minimum of eight hours. Infiltration
tests shall be performed when the groundwater level is above the joint
of the top section of a precast manhole.
E. Air testing.
(1) Air testing shall not be performed until the backfilling has been
completed. Low-pressure air tests shall conform to ASTM C828
§ 277-32 RAILROADS § 277-32
268:371
§ 277-33. Maintenance and ownership assumed by City after final
approval.
All sewer extensions constructed at the property owner's, builder's or
developer's expense, after final approval and acceptance by the City
Engineer or Director of Public Works, shall become the property of the City
and shall thereafter be maintained by the City.
§ 277-34. Sewer permit required before issuance of building permit.
No builder or developer shall be issued a building permit for a new dwelling
or structure requiring sanitary facilities within the City until a sewer permit
has been received from the Department of Public Works, and all new
developments shall be provided with an approved system of sanitary
sewers.
except as specified herein and shall not be limited to type or size of
pipe. All sections of pipelines shall be cleaned and flushed prior to
testing.
(2) The air test shall be based on the average holding pressure of
three-psi gauge, a drop from 3.5 to 2.5 psi, within the period of time
allowed for the size of pipe and the length of the test section. The
time allowed for the one-psi drop in pressure, measured in seconds,
will be computed by the Engineer/Director of Public Works and will
be based on the limits of ASTM C828. When groundwater is
present, the average test pressure of three psig shall be above any
back pressure due to the groundwater level. The maximum
pressure allowed under any condition in air testing shall be 10 psig.
The maximum groundwater level for air testing is 13 feet above the
top of the pipe.
(3) The equipment required for air testing shall be furnished by the
contractor and shall include the necessary compressor, valves and
gauges to allow for the monitoring of the pressure, release of
pressure and a separable test gauge. The test gauge shall be sized
to allow for the measuring of the one-psig loss allowed during the
test period and shall be on a separate line to the test section.
§ 277-32 GENEVA CODE § 277-34
268:372
ARTICLE VI
Use of Public Sewers
§ 277-35. Discharging sewage to natural outlets.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City or in
any area under the jurisdiction of said City any sewage or other polluted
waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 277-36. Use of storm sewers.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, upon approval of the Director, to a storm sewer
or natural outlet. This approval does not diminish the responsibility of the
applicant to obtain a direct discharge permit from the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
§ 277-37. Prohibited discharges.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or
interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general
prohibitions apply to all such users of the Geneva POTW, whether or not
the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
any other federal, state or local pretreatment standards or
requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to
the City of Geneva POTW:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no
time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the
system) be more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10% of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Any pollutants which
create an explosion or fire hazard in the publicly owned treatment
works, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed
cup flash point of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21 shall be prohibited. Unless explicitly
authorized by a limitation set forth in § 277-42 or a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter, prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to, the discharge of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, carbides, hydrides, sulfides and
any other substance in amounts and/or concentrations in which the
City, State of New York, or EPA determines to constitute a fire or
other hazard to the POTW.
§ 277-35 RAILROADS § 277-37
268:373
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
POTW. Unless explicitly authorized by the discharge limitations set
forth in § 277-42 or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, such
substances include, but are not limited to, the discharge of grease,
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides,
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone, marble dust, metal, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics,
gas, tar, asphalt, residues from refining or processing fuel or oil in
any form, mud, stone or stone grindings.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 9.5,
unless a permit is specifically issued to accommodate such
wastewater, or wastewater having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/
or personnel of the POTW.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singularly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, create a hazard
to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters
of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in the national
categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include
but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act.
(5) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the publicly owned treatment works or the
collection system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health
and/or safety problems; any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases
or solids which either singularly or by interaction with other wastes
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and
repair.
(6) Any substance which may cause the POTW effluent or any other
product of the treatment plant, such as residues, sludges or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
treatment plant cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed
under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act; or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
§ 277-37 GENEVA CODE § 277-37
268:374
(7) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its New York
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit or
the receiving water quality standards.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes or
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction to the
POTW system which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.), unless a permit is
issued to accommodate such temperature.
(10) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user
knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW
or is in contravention of permit conditions.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the POTW in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
(12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance, either by itself or in combination with any other
waste.
(13) Any commercial, industrial, institutional, or residential water or
waste containing fats, waxes, greases or oils, whether emulsified or
not, containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32° F. and 10° F. (0° C. and 40° C.); any
vegetable oil, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or
products of mineral oil origin that will cause interference or passthrough
at the POTW.
(14) Any water or waste that will cause interference or pass-through.
(15)Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
(16) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharged points
designated by the publicly owned treatment works. No person shall
discharge any holding tank waste into a manhole or other opening
in a sanitary sewer. All holding tank waste discharged within the
Geneva POTW system shall be discharged at a facility at locations
designated by the Director or Chief Operator. Each separate load of
holding tank waste shall be registered with the Chief Operator of
§ 277-37 RAILROADS § 277-37
268:375
§ 277-38. Interceptors.
§ 277-39. Maintenance and accessibility of interceptors.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times and
shall be readily accessible and open to inspection by the Director of Public
Works or Chief Operator at any time. If, at any time, City maintenance
personnel find these interceptors to be not properly maintained, the City
shall perform such maintenance as to make them effective. All costs
associated with any maintenance by City personnel shall be passed onto the
property owner.
the treatment facility. The user shall pay the applicable charges
and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the
Department. The Department shall have the right to inquire about
the type of waste, the approximate volumes, and the origin of
holding tank wastes. The transporter of such wastes shall also have
a waste hauler's permit from the NYSDEC.
(17) Unusual flow rates or concentration of wastes, constituting slugs,
except by written wastewater permits.
B. When the Director or Chief Operator determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW any of the above enumerated substances or
any substance not listed, in such amounts as to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, the Director or Chief Operator shall advise the
user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the POTW pursuant to
procedures in § 277-67 of this chapter.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when required by
code and/or when the above set limits for those substances are
exceeded, and/or when, in the opinion of the Director or Chief Operator,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or individual dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director or Chief
Operator and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
B. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and
equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall
be gastight and watertight. All interceptors shall meet specifications
and requirements as outlined in Sections 1003 and 1004 of the
Plumbing Code of New York State.
§ 277-37 GENEVA CODE § 277-39
268:376
ARTICLE VII
Discharge Standards and Limitations
§ 277-40. National categorical pretreatment standards.
Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards
for a particular industrial subcategory, the national standard, if more
stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under
this chapter. The Director or Chief Operator shall notify all affected users of
the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
§ 277-41. Modification of national categorical pretreatment
standards.
Where the City's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal
of pollutants limited by national pretreatment standards, the City may apply
to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the national
pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the
amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the
wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent
which is achieved by the system in 95% of the samples taken when
measured according to the procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 403, General
Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution,
promulgated pursuant to the Act. The City may then modify pollutant
discharge limits in the national pretreatment standards if the requirements
contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval
authority is obtained.
§ 277-42. Discharge limitations.
A. No user shall discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewer system when
any of the pollutant concentrations exceed the limits specified in the
following. These concentrations shall be applied to wastewater
effluents at a point just prior to discharge into the City sewer system.
With the express written consent of the Director of the Department of
Public Works or the Chief Operator of the POTW, users with multiple
discharge outfalls may combine waste streams by calculation to report
on wastewater characteristics.
Table 1
Substance
Concentration Limit
(mg/L)
Arsenic 0.10
Cadmium 0.20
Cyanide-complex 0.80
Chromium, hexavalent 0.10
Chromium-total 1.00
§ 277-40 RAILROADS § 277-42
268:377
§ 277-43. Special conditions.
Table 1
Substance
Concentration Limit
(mg/L)
Copper 1.00
Iron 10.0
Lead 0.10
Mercury 0.001
Nickel 2.00
Selenium 0.05
Silver 0.10
Zinc 0.60
Phenolic compounds 5.00
Oil and grease 100.00
Sulfide 3.00
B. The Director of the Department of Public Works may impose mass
limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations above. The
Director may also develop and impose limitations on additional
parameters on a case-by-case basis.
C. All users are prohibited from discharging those materials listed in
§ 277-37 in excess of the applicable limits set forth herein.
A. No person shall discharge or permit the discharge or infiltration into
the City sewer system of wastes containing the following pollutants in
excess of the listed concentrations unless prior approval is granted by
the Director or Chief Operator of the POTW:
(1) Wastes containing more than 200 mg/l of five-day biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD).
(2) Wastes containing more than 200 mg/l of total suspended solids
(TSS).
(3) Wastes containing more than 100 mg/l of total organic carbon
(TOC).
(4) Wastes containing more than 400 mg/l of chemical oxygen demand
(COD).
(5) Wastewater in volumes constituting greater than 25,000 gallons/
day.
B. Allowable increases of the pollutant concentrations in Subsection A(1)
through (4), as well as volume in Subsection A(5), may be subject to a
§ 277-42 GENEVA CODE § 277-43
268:378
§ 277-44. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than national requirements and limitations
or those in this chapter.
§ 277-45. Excessive discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the City or state.
surcharge due to extra-strength wastes, as set forth in § 277-61 of this
chapter.
§ 277-43 RAILROADS § 277-45
268:379

ARTICLE VIII
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits and Other Requirements
§ 277-46. Authority of Director over harmful wastes.
§ 277-47. Industrial waste discharge permits.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, containing any substances or
possessing characteristics enumerated in this chapter, or which in the
judgment of the Director or Chief Operator may have a deleterious
impact on the POTW, receiving waters, POTW process residuals, or
which may otherwise create a hazard to health, or life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Director or Chief Operator may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes; and/or
(5) Require the discharger to apply for an industrial waste discharge
permit.
B. If the Director or Chief Operator permits the introduction of said wastes
into the POTW, whether following pretreatment or an alternative
discharge program, the design and installation of the plans and
equipment, or implementation of the discharge program, shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Director or Chief Operator,
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and
laws.
A. It shall be unlawful to discharge without a state or City permit (as
applicable) to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of said City, and/or to the POTW, any wastewater except
as authorized by the Director or Chief Operator in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Each industrial user whose wastewater flow and/or wastewater
strength is different from that of domestic waste (defined as having a
concentration of any parameter in excess of those listed in §§ 277-42
and 277-43 of this chapter), or discharges EPA priority pollutants,
NYSDEC substances of concern, or any other substance which the
Director or Chief Operator deems to be of concern, must obtain an
industrial waste discharge permit prior to connection or discharge to
the City POTW. Each industrial user, as determined by the Director or
Chief Operator, currently connected must obtain an industrial waste
permit within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 277-46 RAILROADS § 277-48
268:381
§ 277-48. Permit application.
A. Industrial users required to obtain an industrial waste discharge permit
shall complete and file with the Department an application in the form
prescribed by the Director or Chief Operator at least 90 days prior to
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the
application, the user may be required to submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Legal name, address and location of person, corporation or legal
entity responsible for subject establishment.
(2) Name, address, location of subject establishment.
(3) Name and telephone number of person to contact regarding both
industrial waste characteristics and permit application [if different
from Subsection A(1) preceding].
(4) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in this chapter, as determined by a
laboratory certified by the State of New York.
(5) Time and duration of contribution.
(6) Site plans or floor plans showing all sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by the size, where available.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged.
(8) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any City, state or national
pretreatment standards.
(9) If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
(10) Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(11) Completion of an NYSDEC Industrial Chemical Survey.
B. The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the City may issue an industrial waste discharge permit
subject to terms and conditions provided herein. The industrial waste
discharge permit approval will be subject to an annual fee of $100.
§ 277-48 GENEVA CODE § 277-49
268:382
§ 277-49. Permit conditions.
Industrial waste discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, regulations,
charges and fees established by the City. The conditions of the industrial
waste discharge permit may contain the following:
§ 277-50. Duration of permits.
A. Effluent limitations or other appropriate limitations when toxic
substances are present in the user's wastewater discharge.
B. Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling
locations, frequency and method of sampling, number types and
standards for analytical tests and reporting schedule.
C. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
D. Pretreatment requirements.
E. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the City, and affording the City
access and the ability to copy thereto.
F. Requirements for notification of the Director or Chief Operator of any
new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the POTW.
G. Requirements for the submission of information concerning the
disposal of waste material separated from the authorized discharge.
H. Where it is determined that a slug control plan is necessary, the City
shall add the requirement to implement a slug control plan.
A. Industrial waste discharge permits shall be issued for a specified period
of time (normally one year), not to exceed three years. A permit may be
issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a
specific date.
B. In order to renew a permit, the permittee shall have paid all fees
relating to this chapter according to the schedules set in this chapter,
and submitted an up-to-date industrial waste questionnaire and other
information as required by the Director or Chief Operator no later than
120 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. If the permittee
is not notified by the Department 30 days prior to the expiration of the
permit, the permit shall be extended one additional year. Notification
may consist of a request for additional information. The duration of a
permit may be extended by the Director or Chief Operator during
consideration for renewal.
C. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification
and change by the Department during the life of the permit as
§ 277-49 RAILROADS § 277-50
268:383
§ 277-51. Permit modifications by permittee.
A permittee requesting any modification of a permit shall do so at least 90
days prior to the date the permittee plans to implement the modification.
Application to the Director or Chief Operator for modification shall include
any information as may be deemed necessary by the City to evaluate the
modification application.
§ 277-52. Transfer of permit.
Industrial waste discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A permit shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new
owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without
the prior approval of the Director or Chief Operator. In the event of any
change in ownership of the industrial facility, the permittee shall notify the
new owner of the existence of the permit by letter, a copy of which shall be
forwarded to the Director or Chief Operator. If the operations and processes
are to remain the same, the permit may be approved by the Director or
Chief Operator for the new owner. A new industrial waste discharge permit
application shall be made by the new owner and facility if any other changes
are made other than the control of ownership.
§ 277-53. Suspension, modification or revocation of permits.
limitations or requirements as identified in this chapter are modified or
changed. The permittee shall be informed of any proposed changes in
his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.
A. Industrial waste discharge permits may be modified, suspended or
revoked where the Director or Chief Operator finds after a hearing held
in conformance with the procedures set forth in this chapter:
(1) A violation of any term of the permit, or any order or determination
of the Director or Chief Operator promulgated under this chapter
or other applicable City ordinances;
(2) That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or failure to
disclose fully all relevant facts;
(3) A change in conditions or the existence of a condition which
requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination
of the authorized discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the permittee's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring;
(5) Failure of the permittee to report significant changes in operations,
or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or
§ 277-50 GENEVA CODE § 277-53
268:384
§ 277-54. Monitoring facilities.
(6) Failure of the permittee to pay all associated fees within 90 days of
billing issuance.
B. The terms and conditions of any permit may be subject to modification
by the Director and/or Chief Operator during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least 30
days prior to the effective date of any change. Any changes or new
conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance. With respect to the suspension or revocation of a permit,
industrial users will be notified of the proposed revocation or
termination of their permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause
pursuant to § 277-69 as to why the proposed action should not be taken.
C. Any user of the POTW aggrieved by any action taken by the Director or
Chief Operator pursuant to this section may seek review of such action
by filing a petition with the Sewer Complaint Review Board. A copy of
the petition shall be filed with the City Manager, who shall schedule a
hearing before the Sewer Complaint Review Board and notify the user
of the time and place of the hearing, which shall be at least 15 days
after filing the petition. The hearing proceedings shall be governed by
the applicable provisions set forth in § 277-69.
D. Any final civil penalty and/or administrative action, fine or order issued
by the Sewer Complaint Review Board shall be reviewable pursuant to a
proceeding commenced pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules within 30 days of the final determination of the Sewer
Complaint Review Board being filed with the City Manager.
A. Users who discharge, who propose to discharge, or who in the
judgment of the Director or Chief Operator could discharge, now or in
the future, wastewater with constituents and characteristics different
from that produced by a domestic premises may be required to install a
monitoring facility.
B. When, in the judgment of the Director or Chief Operator, there is a
significant difference in the wastewater constituents and
characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the
Director or Chief Operator may require that separate monitoring
facilities be installed for each discharge.
C. Monitoring facilities are to be constructed at a common location into
which all flows from the user are combined. Monitoring facilities that
are required to be installed shall be constructed, operated and
maintained at the user's expense. If the monitoring facility is inside the
user's fence, there shall be accommodation to allow safe and immediate
access for the Department personnel such as a gate secured with a
Department lock. There shall be ample room in or near such facility to
allow accurate sampling and composition of samples for analysis. The
§ 277-53 RAILROADS § 277-54
268:385
§ 277-55. Inspection and sampling.
§ 277-56. Pretreatment.
entire facility and the sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
and at the expense of the user. In the event that no special monitoring
facility is required, sampling shall be conducted at a point or points
selected by the Director or Chief Operator.
A. The Director or Chief Operator and other authorized employees of the
Department and employees of the EPA and NYSDEC bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties
at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation,
sampling, flow measurement and testing to ascertain compliance with
this chapter. The Department shall have the right to set up on the user's
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or flow
measurement. Where a user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Department
will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing
their specific responsibilities. All costs associated with inspection and
sampling shall be at the expense of the user.
B. No representative is authorized to require information concerning an
industrial process except to the extent necessary to ascertain the kind
and source of discharge to sewers. While on private property the City's
representatives shall observe all established safety rules applicable to
the premises. The City shall indemnify a property owner against loss or
damage to the owner's property and against third-party claims caused
by representatives of the City while upon the property except for loss or
damage or third-party claims caused by the negligence of the owner or
the owner's failure to maintain safe conditions.
A. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Director or Chief Operator, users
shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established by
this chapter and by Section 307 of the National Act before discharging
into the City sewer system. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the Department shall be provided
and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the Director or Chief Operator for review, and shall be approved by the
Director or Chief Operator before construction of the facility. The
review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no
way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent complying with the provisions of this
chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the
Department. When pretreatment regulations are adopted by EPA or
§ 277-54 GENEVA CODE § 277-56
268:386
§ 277-57. Accidental discharge.
NYSDEC for any industry, then that industry must immediately conform
to the EPA or NYSDEC timetable for adherence to national or state
pretreatment requirements and any other applicable requirements
promulgated by EPA or NYSDEC in accordance with Section 307 of the
National Act. Additionally, such industries shall comply with any other
stringent standards necessitated by local conditions as determined by
the City.
B. The City may adopt any charges and fees which may be necessary for
reimbursement of administrative and technical costs of complying with
the City's requirements under this chapter and related ordinances.
These fees related solely to the matters covered by this chapter are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the City.
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental and slug discharges
of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter.
Facilities to prevent accidental and slug discharges of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection shall be submitted to the Director or Chief Operator for
review, and shall be approved by the Department before construction of
the facility.
B. Notification.
(1) Users shall notify the Department immediately upon discharging
wastes in violation of this chapter due to:
(a) Breakdown of pretreatment equipment.
(b) Accidents caused by human error or negligence or mechanical
failure.
(c) Other causes, such as acts of nature.
(2) Such notification will enable countermeasures to be taken by the
Department to minimize damage to the City sewers, treatment
facilities, treatment processes and receiving waters.
C. In order that employees of the users be informed of Department
requirements, users should make available to their employees copies of
this chapter together with such other wastewater information and
notices which may be furnished by the Department from time to time
directed toward more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be
furnished and permanently posted on the user's bulletin board advising
employees whom to call in case of an accidental or slug discharge in
violation of this chapter.
D. The Director or Chief Operator shall be notified within five days of the
date of occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the
§ 277-56 RAILROADS § 277-57
268:387
§ 277-58. Confidential information.
§ 277-59. Special arrangement.
No statement in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement between the Director or Chief Operator and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual constituents or
characteristics may be accepted by the Director or Chief Operator for
treatment subject to the proper payment by the industrial user. Under no
circumstances shall any special agreement circumvent national categorical
pretreatment standards.
§ 277-60. Analysis procedures.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the constituents and characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest editions of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater; Methods for Chemical Analysis
of Water and Waste of the EPA and the latest version of 40 CFR Part 136
(Analysis of Pollutants). For purposes of compliance with any requirements
causes of the discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future
occurrences.
E. Such notification will not relieve users of notice as described in
Subsection B preceding, liability for any expense, loss or damage to the
sewer system, treatment facility, or treatment process, or for any fines
imposed on the Department on account thereof under Section 309 of
the National Act, or any liability for civil or criminal penalties.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director or Chief Operator
at the time the information is submitted that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit, or any state or federal agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Information accepted by the Director or Chief Operator as
confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or the
general public by the Director or Chief Operator until and unless a tenday
notification is given to the user. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
§ 277-57 GENEVA CODE § 277-60
268:388
of this chapter, a laboratory certified by the applicable authority in the State
of New York shall perform the analyses.
§ 277-60 RAILROADS § 277-60
268:389

ARTICLE IX
Surcharge Due to Extra-Strength Wastes
§ 277-61. Imposition of surcharge.
Any user who discharges pollutants in excess of concentrations in § 277-42
or § 277-43 of this chapter may be subject to a surcharge. This surcharge
may be in addition to any other fees, charges, sewer rents, fines or taxes
provided by law. The Director or Chief Operator of the POTW may impose
mass limitations on pollutants discharged in excess of concentrations listed
in § 277-42 or § 277-43. Surcharges will be assessed based on
concentrations and treatment costs as determined by the Director or Chief
Operator of the POTW.
§ 277-62. Volume determination.
In applying the surcharge formulae, the Director or Chief Operator may
represent flow discharged into the sewer system by:
§ 277-63. Determination of pollutant concentration.
The pollutant concentration of any wastewater shall be determined from
the analysis of representative samples taken prior to discharge into the City
sewers, taken by representatives of the Director or Chief Operator. The
intent of any sampling procedure is to establish the pollutant concentration
in the wastewater discharge during an average or typical working day.
This concentration may be derived according to the best judgment of the
Director or Chief Operator.
§ 277-64. Dispute of pollutant concentration.
In the event that the pollutant concentration of the waste discharged from
a premises to a public sewer as determined under § 277-63 of this chapter
A. The amount of water supplied to the premises as shown on the water
meter, or water records if the premises are metered;
B. The volume of wastewater discharged into the sewer system as
determined by the measurements and samples taken at a monitoring
facility installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer
system;
C. The volume of wastewater discharged into the sewer system as
determined by the measurements and samples taken at a monitoring
facility installed by the City;
D. Allowances for water not discharged to the sewer system will be made
at the discretion of the Director or Chief Operator; or
E. A figure determined by the Director or Chief Operator by any
combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable method.
§ 277-61 RAILROADS § 277-64
268:391
is disputed by a user, a program of resampling and flow measurement with
subsequent analytical determination may be instituted as follows:
§ 277-65. Collection of surcharges.
All sums charged for treatment of wastes shall be billed by the City and
collected in the same manner as provided in Chapter 341, Article III,
§ 341-20, of the City Code, and shall be subject to penalties and suspension
of water for nonpayment of either water or use of sewers, or cessation of
sewer service.
A. The person must submit a request for resampling and flow
measurements of the wastes to the Director or Chief Operator.
B. A consultant or agency of recognized professional standing in the
employ of the user must confer with representatives of the Director or
Chief Operator in order that an agreement may be reached as to the
various factors which must be considered on a new sampling and flow
measurement program.
C. The consultant or agency of recognized professional standing employed
by the user shall conduct a resampling and reanalysis program, under
the direction of the Director or Chief Operator, for at least two twentyfour-
hour periods.
D. The results of the resampling and the reanalysis shall be considered to
be the current analysis of the wastes discharged to the sewer system
and shall be used for determining the acceptability of the sampling and
analysis results in question. The new results may be used in place of the
results in question or in addition to other data collected by the
Department for determining the industrial waste surcharge, and/or
compliance with this chapter.
E. Cost of sampling, analysis and flow measurement for regular
monitoring purposes will be charged to the industry. Such activities,
when in support of noncompliance or other enforcement actions, shall
be billed to the user in total.
F. Analysis of samples shall be performed by a laboratory certified by New
York State.
§ 277-64 GENEVA CODE § 277-65
268:392
ARTICLE X
Procedures
§ 277-66. Enforcement.
The Director or Chief Operator is hereby authorized to enforce all
pretreatment requirements necessary to ensure compliance with the terms
and conditions of the City of Geneva State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System Permit issued by the NYSDEC pursuant to the Act.
§ 277-67. Harmful contribution.
§ 277-68. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Director or Chief Operator finds that any user has violated or
is violating this chapter, the industrial wastewater discharge permit, or any
prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the City may serve
upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within
15 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction
thereof shall be submitted to the Director or Chief Operator by the user.
§ 277-69. Show-cause order and hearing.
A. The City may immediately suspend wastewater treatment service and/
or an industrial wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the City, in order to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, cause interference to the POTW, or cause the City to
violate any condition of its SPDES permit.
B. Any person verbally or in writing notified by the City of an immediate
suspension of wastewater treatment service and/or an industrial
wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
immediately with the suspension notification and order, the City shall
take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
wastewater treatment service and sewer connection to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals or the environment. The City shall reinstate the industrial
wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service
upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge.
A. The City may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before a Sewer Complaint
Review Board why the proposed or enacted enforcement action should
not be taken or continued. The Board shall consist of the Mayor of the
City, the Deputy Mayor and the City Manager. A notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
Board regarding the violation, the reasons that the action is to be or has
been taken, and the proposed or implemented enforcement action, and
§ 277-66 RAILROADS § 277-69
268:393
directing the user to show cause before the Board why the proposed
or implemented enforcement action should not be taken or continued.
The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 15 days before the
hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
B. Any user of the POTW aggrieved by any action taken by the Director or
Chief Operator pursuant to this § 277-69 may seek review of such action
by filing a petition with the Sewer Complaint Review Board. A copy of
the petition shall be filed with the City Manager, who shall schedule a
hearing before the Sewer Complaint Review Board and notify the user
of the time and place of the hearing, which shall be at least 15 days
after filing the petition. The hearing proceedings shall be governed by
the applicable provisions set forth in § 277-69.
C. Any final civil penalty and/or administrative action, fine or order issued
by the Sewer Complaint Review Board shall be reviewable pursuant to a
proceeding commenced pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules within 30 days of the final determination of the Sewer
Complaint Review Board being filed with the City Manager.
D. Whenever, because of danger to the public health, safety or welfare, it
appears prejudicial to the public interest to delay action for 15 days, the
Director or Chief Operator may serve the respondent with an order
requiring certain action or the cessation of certain activities
immediately or within a specified period of less than 15 days, and the
Director or Chief Operator shall provide an opportunity to be heard
within 15 days after the date the order is served.
E. The Board may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may
designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the
Department of Public works to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Board notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the Board for action thereon.
F. In conducting any hearing proceedings authorized by this chapter, the
Sewer Complaint Review Board, or its designee, shall adhere to the
applicable procedures set forth in Article 3 of the New York State
Administrative Procedure Act, and, in particular, be bound by the
evidentiary requirements set forth in § 306 therein.
G. The City Attorney may prefer charges, attend hearings, present the
facts, and take any and all proceedings in connection therewith.
§ 277-69 GENEVA CODE § 277-69
268:394
H. At a hearing, the respondent may appear personally, shall have the right
of counsel, and may cross-examine witnesses against him and produce
evidence and witnesses in his behalf.
I. A record, or summary thereof, of the proceedings of said hearings shall
be made and filed with the Department. If requested to do so by any
interested party concerned with said hearing, the full stenographic
notes of the testimony presented at said hearing shall be taken and
filed. The stenographer shall, upon the payment of his fees allowed by
law therefor, furnish a certified transcript of the whole or any part of his
notes to any party to the action requiring the same.
J. Unless precluded by law, disposition may be made of any hearing by
stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, default, or other informal
method. Within 10 days of the notice specified in § 277-68, the user may
request a prehearing conference with the City's representatives for an
informal disposition of any or all charges.
K. Upon request made by any party upon the Department within a
reasonable time, but prior to the time for commencement of judicial
review, of its giving notice of its decision, determination, opinion or
order, the Board or its representative shall prepare the record together
with any transcript of proceedings within a reasonable time and shall
furnish a copy of the record and transcript or any part thereof to any
party as he may request. Except when any law provides otherwise, the
Department is authorized to charge not more than its cost for the
preparation and furnishings of such record or transcript or any part
thereof, or the rate specified in the contract between the agency and a
contractor if prepared by a private contractor.
L. After conducting a hearing proceeding authorized by this section, the
City, or its designee, retains its right to modify and/or amend its initial
determination prior to a final ruling by the Sewer Complaint Review
Board.
M. A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it
alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in 40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and the specific prohibitions in 40 CFR 403.5(b)(3), (4), and
(5) where the user can demonstrate that:
(1) It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, along or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
would cause pass-through or interference; and
(2) Local limit.
(a) A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or
interference, as the case may be, was developed in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.5(c) for each pollutant in the user's discharge
that caused pass-through or interference, and the user was in
compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and
during the pass-through or interference; or
§ 277-69 RAILROADS § 277-69
268:395
(b) If a local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or
interference, as the case may be, has not been developed in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c) for the pollutant(s) that
caused the pass-through or interference, the user's discharge
directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference
did not change substantially the nature or constituents from
the user's prior discharge activity when the POTW was
regularly in compliance with the POTW's NPDES permit
requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable
requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal.
N. Nothing contained in this § 277-69 shall prevent, abridge and/or
abrogate the authorities and procedures granted to the City as set forth
in § 277-67 to take immediate measures to prevent or stop an actual or
threatened wastewater discharge that presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, cause interference to the POTW, or
cause the City to violate any condition of its SPDES permit.
§ 277-69 GENEVA CODE § 277-69
268:396
ARTICLE XI
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 277-70. Administrative sanctions.
§ 277-71. Criminal sanctions.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of, or who fails to perform
any duty imposed by, this chapter, or any order or determination of the
Director or Chief Operator issued pursuant to this chapter, or any order
or determination of the Director or Chief Operator, including the terms
of any permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to the City for a civil
penalty to be determined in accordance with the provisions of
§ 277-75D(3) and for each violation to be assessed after a hearing held
in conformance with the procedures set forth in § 277-69.
B. In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in Subsection A
above, the Director or Chief Operator shall have the power, following a
hearing held in conformance with the procedures set forth in Article X
of this chapter, to issue an order suspending, revoking or modifying the
violator's permit and enjoining the violator from continuing the
violation. Any such order of the Director or Chief Operator shall be
enforceable in an action brought by the City Attorney at the request of
the Director or Chief Operator in the name of the Department in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Any civil penalty or order issued by the Director or Chief Operator
pursuant to this section shall be reviewable in a proceeding 60 days
after service in person or by mail of a copy of the determination or order
upon the attorney of record of the applicant and of each person who has
filed a notice of appearance, or the applicant in person if not directly
represented by an attorney.
D. Any user of the POTW aggrieved by any action taken by the Director or
Chief Operator pursuant to this section may seek review of such action
by filing a petition with the Sewer Complaint Review Board. A copy of
the petition shall be filed with the City Manager, who shall schedule a
hearing before the Sewer Complaint Review Board and notify the user
of the time and place of the hearing, which shall be at least 15 days
after filing the petition. The hearing proceedings shall be governed by
the applicable provisions set forth in § 277-69.
E. Any final civil penalty and/or administrative action, fine or order issued
by the Sewer Complaint Review Board shall be reviewable pursuant to a
proceeding commenced pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules within 30 days of the final determination of the Sewer
Complaint Review Board being filed with the City Manager.
§ 277-70 RAILROADS § 277-71
268:397
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct and be subject to recovery of costs for damages.
§ 277-72. Civil liability.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition,
be civilly liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned to
the City by reason of such violation.
§ 277-73. Injunction.
The City Attorney, on his own initiative or at the request of the Director
or Chief Operator, shall have the right to seek equitable relief in the name
of the City to restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance with,
this chapter, or any order or determination issued thereunder by the City
Manager.
§ 277-74. Summary abatement.
§ 277-75. Enforcement response plan.
A. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, whenever the
Director or Chief Operator finds, after investigation, that any user is
causing, engaging in or maintaining a condition or activity which, in his
judgment, presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety or
welfare, or to the environment, or is likely to result in irreversible or
irreparable damage to the public sewer system, and it therefore
appears to be prejudicial to the public interest to delay action until
notice and an opportunity for a hearing can be provided, the Director or
Chief Operator may, without prior hearing, order such user by notice, in
writing wherever practicable or in such other form as in the Director's
or Chief Operator's judgment will reasonably notify such person whose
practices are intended to be proscribed, to discontinue, abate or
alleviate such condition or activity, or where the giving of notice is
impracticable, in the event of a user's failures to comply voluntarily
with an emergency order, the Director or Chief Operator may take all
appropriate action to abate the violating condition. As promptly as
possible thereafter, not to exceed 15 days, the Director or Chief
Operator shall provide the user an opportunity to be heard in
accordance with the provisions of Article X of this chapter.
B. The Director or Chief Operator, acting upon the belief that an
emergency exists, shall be indemnified against any personal liability
that may arise in the performance of his duties to protect the public
health, safety or welfare, or preserve the public sewer system.
A. Introduction. The enforcement response plan is an outline of the
procedures to be followed to ensure compliance by industrial users with
the City of Geneva's Sewer Use Ordinance, and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency's and New York State's pretreatment
regulations. The enforcement response plan is divided into four
§ 277-71 GENEVA CODE § 277-75
268:398
sections. Subsection B describes procedures to review and update the
list of industrial users, to track and screen compliance monitoring
data and to schedule sampling and inspection of significant industrial
users (SIU). Subsection C describes the type of enforcement action the
City will take in response to anticipated industrial user violations and
contains the enforcement response guide. Subsection D describes the
enforcement options in detail. Subsection E will contain standard forms
and letters to be used to implement the enforcement response plan.
B. Administrative procedures.
(1) Personnel. The Public Works Director is responsible for the overall
implementation of the pretreatment regulations and the
enforcement response plan. The WWTF Chief Operator is
responsible for the day-to-day implementation of the pretreatment
program and enforcement response plan. The Public Works
Director will annually evaluate the WWTF's staff ability to
implement the program and provide the necessary level of funding
and personnel to accomplish the requirements of the pretreatment
program.
(2) Industrial user inventory.
(a) The general pretreatment regulations require the periodic
updating of the industrial users contributing to the Geneva
WWTF.
(b) Every five years a complete industrial user survey shall be
done. At least annually the industrial user list shall be updated.
New industrial users must file an industrial residual waste
questionnaire and an industrial chemical survey before
commencing discharge to the system.
(c) The WWTF Chief Operator shall oversee the industrial user
survey. The survey shall be comprehensive and complete. The
telephone book, Chamber of Commerce listing, local business
directory and inspection of commercial areas shall be used to
update the master list. The master list shall include all
businesses in the service area. The master list shall be
surveyed to determine what industries are dry processes or
wet processes. All industries that discharge to the POTW shall
be sent an industrial chemical survey and an industrial residual
waste questionnaire to be completed and returned. All
completed forms shall be reviewed to determine if they should
be classified as a categorical or a significant industrial user.
(d) Annually the industrial user list shall be reviewed to determine
if new industrial users have entered the system. This review
will be based on building permits, and records from the
Planning Commission and Building and Code Enforcement
Department. The Public Works Director will forward to the
WWTF Chief Operator a copy of all industrial permits issued
§ 277-75 RAILROADS § 277-75
268:399
for new connection to the sewer system. The Planning and
Zoning Commission sends minutes of all meetings to the Public
Works Director. The Public Works Director will forward any
minutes to the WWTF Chief Operator that involve new
industrial activity.
(e) The Building and Code Enforcement Department forward all
cases of Sewer Use Ordinance violations to the Public Works
Director, who will forward any pertinent information to the
WWTF Chief Operator.
(f) Before new industrial users can commence discharge, they
must have completed an industrial chemical survey and an
industrial residual waste questionnaire. The Public Works
Director and WWTF Chief Operator will review the forms and
determine if the industrial user will be a categorical industry or
an SIU. If the user is determined to be either, he or she must
have valid discharge permit as required by the Sewer Use
Ordinance.
(3) Compliance monitoring.
(a) Significant industries, as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance,
are required to conduct self-monitoring and submit selfmonitoring
reports in accordance with their industrial user
discharge permit. The frequency of self-monitoring is
determined by past history of compliance, discharge volume
and the possibility for pass-through, interference or danger to
POTW works. The United States EPA Pretreatment Compliance
Monitoring and Enforcement (PCME) Guidance (July 1986)
document will be used as a guide for self-monitoring frequency.
Ultimately the self-monitoring program must meet the
requirements and intent of the general pretreatment
regulations and be effective and timely in determining
compliance with categorical and local discharge limits.
(b) The WWTF Chief Operator must schedule at least one
inspection and one sampling of an SIU annually. The sampling
must be for both categorical and local limits. The sampling, at
a minimum, must develop data that is admissible in a court of
law. The sampling and testing procedures must conform to
United States EPA standard practices. The PCME guidance
document will be used as a reference for the sampling.
(4) Screening data.
(a) The City will monitor all industrial sampling reports for
pretreatment compliance. Any instance of noncompliance,
including nondischarge violations, will require an enforcement
response as outlined in Subsection C.
C. Enforcement response.
§ 277-75 GENEVA CODE § 277-75
268:400
(1) Determining enforcement response. The key element of this
enforcement response plan is the Enforcement Guide (Table 1.1 -
1.5). This guide is a matrix which describes violations and indicates
the range of appropriate enforcement options. These options are:
notice of violation, administrative fines, administrative orders, civil
litigation, criminal prosecution, termination of sewer service and
supplemental enforcement responses. Subsection D will fully
describe the options. The response guide offers several levels of
enforcement responses for each type of violation. In deciding what
level of response is appropriate, the past history of the industrial
user, severity of the violation, duration of the violation, the effect of
the violation on the POTW and the environment, the intent or
negligence of the industrial user and the overall attitude of the
industrial user should be considered. Typically for minor violations,
notices of violations are issued. If the industrial user does not
return to compliance within the specified time frame, the
enforcement response escalates until the industrial user is back in
compliance. The criteria for determining the appropriate
enforcement response are discussed in detail:
(a) Severity of the violation. Notices of violations (NOV) are used
for isolated instances of noncompliance, but any violation, no
matter how minor, must be addressed. The EPA recommends
an industrial user that has a significant noncompliance
violation, as that term is defined in § 277-2, be issued an
enforceable order, i.e., administrative order, that requires a
return to compliance by a specific date.
(b) Duration of violation. Violations that extend over long periods
of time should subject the industrial user to escalated
enforcement actions. If the industrial user fails to comply with
the administrative order, then additional fines may be applied.
If the violations are causing harm to the POTW or the receiving
stream, then civil action or service termination should be
considered.
(c) Effect on POTW or receiving stream. If any violation causes
upsets, interference or pass-through of the POTW to the
receiving stream, it should be dealt with a severe and swift
response. At a minimum the industrial user should be issued an
administrative order with a fine. If the violation resulted in
fines by the EPA or NYSDEC to the City, the industrial user
should be responsible for the fines. If the violation resulted in
increased treatment costs or harm to process equipment or
treatment works, the industrial user should be responsible for
the increased costs.
(d) Past history of the user. The past history of compliance of the
industry should be considered when considering what level of
enforcement is appropriate. An industrial user with a good
compliance history may be given the least severe, and an
§ 277-75 RAILROADS § 277-75
268:401
industrial user with a poor compliance history may be given a
more severe enforcement response for the same violation.
(e) Attitude and good faith of user. The attitude and good faith of
the industrial user in correcting its noncompliance should be
taken into consideration when determining the enforcement
response, but a good attitude cannot eliminate the need for
some type of enforcement response.
(2) Personnel responsibilities for enforcement response. The City
Manager, the Public Works Director and the WWTF enforcement
guide clearly define what actions are to be taken by the City. The
City Manager, Director of Public Works and the Chief Operator are
the three City personnel involved in enforcement responses. By
having responsibilities explicitly spelled out, responses to
noncompliance will be swift and consistent. The general rule is that
the Chief Operator will issue notices of violations and
administrative orders. The Public Works Director will have the
authority to issue administrative orders with fines and show-cause
orders. The City Manager will have the authority to issue showcause
orders, initiate civil action, initiate criminal investigation and
terminate service.
(3) Enforcement response guide. The enforcement response guide
(Table 1.1 - 1.5) will be used to determine the enforcement options
for industrial user noncompliance. The option selected should be
based on the criteria set forth in Subsection C(1). The following are
abbreviations and terms used in the enforcement response guide:
AO — Administrative Order
CM — City Manager
CO — WWTF Chief Operator
Civil action — Civil litigation against the IU seeking equitable
relief, monetary penalties and actual damages
Criminal
investigation
— Pursuing punitive measures against an
individual and/or organization through a court
of law
Fine — Monetary penalty assessed by City
IU — Industrial user
NOV — Notice of violation
PWD — Public Works Director
SNC — Significant noncompliance
§ 277-75 GENEVA CODE § 277-75
268:402
Show cause — Formal meeting requiring the IU to appear and
demonstrate why the City should not take a
proposed enforcement action or continue with
an implemented action against it. The meeting
may also serve as a forum to discuss corrective
actions and compliance schedules.
Unauthorized Discharges (no permit)
Noncompliance
Nature of the
Violation
Enforcement
Responses Personnel
1. Unpermitted
discharge
IU unaware of
requirement;
no harm to
POTW/
environment
Phone call;
NOV with
application
form
CO
IU unaware of
requirement;
harm to POTW
- AO with fine PWD
- Civil action CM
Failure to apply
continues after
notice
- Civil action CM
- Criminal
investigation
CM
- Terminate
service
CM
2. Nonpermitted
discharge
(failure to
renew)
IU has not
submitted
application
within 10 days
of due date
Phone call;
NOV
CO
Discharge
Limit Violation
1. Exceedance
of local or
national
standard
(permit
limit)
Isolated, not
significant
Phone call;
NOV
CO
Isolated,
significant (no
harm)
AO, to develop
action plan
CO
Isolated, harm
to POTW or
environment
- Show cause
order
CM
§ 277-75 RAILROADS § 277-75
268:403
Unauthorized Discharges (no permit)
Noncompliance
Nature of the
Violation
Enforcement
Responses Personnel
- Civil action CM
Recurring, no
harm to POTW/
environment
AO with fine PWD
Recurring,
significant
AO with fine PWD
Monitoring and Reporting Violations
1. Reporting
violation
Report is
improperly
signed or
certified
Phone call or
NOV
CO
Report is
improperly
signed or
certified after
notice by
POTW
- AO CO
- Show cause
order
PWD, CM
Isolated not
significant (10
days late)
Phone call;
NOV
CO
Significant
(report 30 days
late)
AO to submit
with fine per
additional day
PWD
Reports are
always late or
no reports at
all
- AO with fine PWD
- Show cause
order
PWD, CM
- Civil action CM
Failure to
report spill or
changed
discharge (no
harm)
NOV CO
§ 277-75 GENEVA CODE § 277-75
268:404
Unauthorized Discharges (no permit)
Noncompliance
Nature of the
Violation
Enforcement
Responses Personnel
Failure to
report spill or
changed
discharge
(results in
harm)
- AO with fine PWD
- Civil action CM
Repeated
failure to
report spills
- Show cause
order
PWD, CM
- Terminate
service
CM
Falsification - Criminal
investigation
CM
- Terminate
service
CM
2. Failure to
monitor
Failure to
monitor all
pollutants as
required by
permit
NOV or AO CO
Recurring
failure to
monitor
- AO with fine PWD
- Civil action CM
3. Improper
sampling
Evidence of
intent
- Criminal
investigation
CM
- Terminate
service
CM
4. Failure to
install
monitoring
equipment
Delay of less
than 30 days
NOV CO
Delay of more
than 30 days
AO to install
with fine for
each additional
day
PWD
Recurring,
violation of AO
- Civil action CM
§ 277-75 RAILROADS § 277-75
268:405
Unauthorized Discharges (no permit)
Noncompliance
Nature of the
Violation
Enforcement
Responses Personnel
- Criminal
investigation
CM
- Terminate
service
CM
5. Compliance
Schedules
(in permit)
Missed
milestone by
less than 30
days or will not
affect final
milestone
NOV or AO CO
Missed
milestone by
more than 30
days or will not
affect final
milestone
(good cause for
delay)
AO with fine CM
Missed
milestone by
more than 30
days or will
affect final
milestone (no
good cause
delay)
- Show cause
order
PWD, CM
- Civil action CM
- Terminate
service
CM
Recurring
violation or
violation of
Schedule in AO
- Civil action CM
- Criminal
investigation
CM
- Terminate
service
CM
Other Permit Violations
1. Wastestreams
are diluted
in lieu of
treatment
Initial violation AO with fine PWD
§ 277-75 GENEVA CODE § 277-75
268:406
Unauthorized Discharges (no permit)
Noncompliance
Nature of the
Violation
Enforcement
Responses Personnel
Recurring - Show cause
order
PWD, CM
- Terminate
service
CM
2. Failure to
mitigate
noncompliance
or halt
production
Does not result
in harm
NOV CO
Does not result
in harm
- AO with fine PWD
- Civil action CM
3. Failure to
properly
operate and
maintain
pretreatment
facility
See no. 2 above
Violations Detected During Site Visits
1. Entry denial Entry denied or
consent
withdrawn
Obtain warrant
and return to
IU
CO
Copies of
records denied
2. Illegal
discharge
No harm to
POTW or
environment
AO with fine PWD
Discharge
causes harm or
evidence of
intent/
negligence
- Civil action CM
- Criminal
investigation
CM
Recurring,
violation of AO
Terminate
service
CM
3. Improper
sampling
Unintentional
sampling at
incorrect
location
NOV CO
§ 277-75 RAILROADS § 277-75
268:407
Unauthorized Discharges (no permit)
Noncompliance
Nature of the
Violation
Enforcement
Responses Personnel
Unintentionally
using incorrect
sample type
NOV CO
Unintentionally
using incorrect
sample
collection
techniques
NOV CO
4. Inadequate
recordkeeping
Inspector finds
files incomplete
or missing (no
evidence of
intent)
NOV CO
Recurring AO with fine PWD
5. Failure to
report
additional
monitoring
Inspection finds
additional files
NOV CO
Recurring AO with fine PWD
Time Frames for Responses
A. All violations will be identified and documented within
five days of receiving compliance information.
B. Initial enforcement responses [involving contact with
the industrial user and requesting information on
corrective and preventative action(s)] will occur within
15 days of violation detection.
C. Follow-up actions for continuing or reoccurring
violations will be taken within 60 days of the initial
enforcement response. For all continuing violations, the
response will include a compliance schedule.
D. Violations which threaten health, property or
environmental quality are considered emergencies and
will receive immediate responses such as halting the
discharge or terminating service.
E. All violations meeting the criteria for significant
noncompliance will be addressed with an enforceable
order within 30 days of the identification of significant
noncompliance.
D. Enforcement response options. Subsection C and the enforcement
response guide (Table 1.1-1.5) will be used to determine the
appropriate enforcement response. This section provides in detail the
§ 277-75 GENEVA CODE § 277-75
268:408
seven enforcement response options outlined in Subsection C and the
enforcement response guide. The seven enforcement responses are
notice of violation, administrative fines, administrative orders, civil
litigation, criminal prosecution, termination of sewer service and
supplemental enforcement responses.
(1) Notice of violation.
(a) A notice of violation (NOV) is a letter to an industrial user
informing the industrial user of noncompliance with the Sewer
Use Ordinance, industrial discharge permit or pretreatment
regulations. It is used for nonsignificant violations. In the case
of significant noncompliance, an NOV may be issued as a
precursor to more severe enforcement action.
(b) The City will issue an NOV to any industrial user that violates
any of its permit limits (categorical or local limits). The NOV
will be issued for isolated and insignificant violations, failure to
submit monitoring reports, or other minor violations of the
Sewer Use Ordinance as stated in the enforcement response
guide. The NOV shall be issued within five days of detection of
a violation. The NOV will follow the standard form set forth in
Subsection E. The NOV will be hand delivered or sent via
certified mail to the industrial user. Copies of the NOV shall be
sent to the Public Works Director and placed in the industrial
user file.
(2) Administrative orders. Administrative orders (AOs) are
enforcement documents which direct industrial users to undertake
or to cease specified activities. Administrative orders are
recommended as the formal response to significant noncompliance.
Administrative orders may incorporate compliance schedules and
administrative fines. The four types of administrative orders that
are authorized by the Sewer Use Ordinance are: show-cause
orders, consent orders, cease-and-desist orders and compliance
orders.
(a) Show-cause orders. A show-cause order directs the industrial
user to appear before the Chief Operator, Public Works
Director or City Manager, explain its noncompliance, and show
cause why more severe enforcement actions against the user
should not go forward. The hearing can be either formal or
informal, but the hearings should be carefully documented.
The outcome of most show-cause hearings will be a consent
order or compliance order and an administrative fine.
(b) Consent orders.
[1] A consent order is an agreement between the City and the
industrial user that sets forth compliance schedules,
remedial actions and any administrative fines. The consent
order is negotiated by the industrial user and the City. The
§ 277-75 RAILROADS § 277-75
268:409
industrial user does not need to admit the noncompliance
in the text of the order, but the consent order prohibits
future violations and provides for corrective action on the
part of the industrial user.
[2] In determining the terms of the consent order, the City
may take extenuating circumstances into consideration.
The consent order should address every identified
deficiency in the user's compliance status at the time of
the order.
(c) Cease-and-desist orders. A cease-and-desist order orders an
industrial user in noncompliance to cease noncomplying
discharges immediately or to terminate its discharge
completely. A cease-and-desist order will be used in instances
where the industrial user's discharge could cause pass-through
or interference, or otherwise create an emergency situation.
The order should be delivered in person or by certified mail.
(d) Compliance orders. A compliance order directs the user to
achieve or restore compliance by a date specified in the order.
A compliance order does not need to be negotiated with the
industry. Compliance orders are typically used when
construction, process changes or modification of management
practices need to be undertaken. Compliance orders set
specific dates by which specified actions are to be completed.
If the specific deadlines are not met, then further enforcement
responses are initiated or specified series of penalties are
automatically set forth. Typically fines are associated with
compliance orders.
(3) Administrative fines.
(a) The Sewer Use Ordinance confers the authority to the City
Manager and the Public Works Director to assess
administrative fines on industrial users for instances of
noncompliance. The ordinance sets the administrative fines not
to exceed $20,000 per violation. Administrative fines may be
assessed prior to or subsequent to a hearing. The imposition of
fines is subject to review as provided in § 277-69 upon petition
of a user.
(b) The following schedule should be used as guidance for
assessing administrative fines:
Unpermitted discharge $5,000 for first offense;
$10,000 for second offense;
$20,000 for third offense
Failure to renew permit $1,000 for first offense;
$5,000 for second offense;
$10,000 for third offense
§ 277-75 GENEVA CODE § 277-75
268:410
Noncompliance with permit
limits
$1,000 for first offense;
$5,000 for second offense;
$10,000 for third offense
After one year of compliance
fine is reset to $1,000.
Significant noncompliance
(defined in § 277-2)
Up to $20,000 for each
offense
Reporting violation $1,000 for first offense;
$5,000 for second offense;
$10,000 for third offense
After one year of compliance
fine is reset to $1,000.
Failure to report spills $5,000 for first offense;
$10,000 for second offense;
$20,000 for third offense
Failure to monitor $5,000 for first offense;
$10,000 for second offense;
$20,000 for third offense
(c) The fines listed are for guidance only and do not list all possible
instances of penalties that could be incurred. If a fine is to be
assessed it should reflect the magnitude of the violation, the
intent of the industrial user and the past history of the
industrial user.
(4) Civil litigation. The Sewer Use Ordinance allows the City to assess
civil penalties of up to $20,000 per day for each violation by
industrial users of the pretreatment standards, the Sewer Use
Ordinance or their industrial user permit conditions. Civil litigation
is an appropriate enforcement response when enforcement efforts
based on cooperation with the industrial user have not resulted in a
return to compliance. Civil litigation might also be pursued in
emergency conditions where injunctive relief is necessary or to
impose civil penalties and recover losses incurred due to the
noncompliance. The different types of civil litigation are detailed
below. They include consent decrees, injunctions and civil penalties
and cost recovery. Litigation need not be limited to one type; a
single case may include all three types.
(a) Consent decrees. Consent decrees are agreements between
the City and the industrial user. For a consent decree to be
binding it must be signed by the City, the industrial user and
the judge. Consent decrees normally include a schedule for
return to compliance and a stipulated civil penalty. Consent
decrees are similar to consent orders, but the industrial user
acknowledges the noncompliance.
§ 277-75 RAILROADS § 277-75
268:411
(b) Injunctions. Injunctions will be used if an industrial user
refuses to comply with a previously issued cease-and-desist
order. Injunctive relief should be pursued if delays involved in
filing a suit would result in harm to the POTW or the
environment.
(c) Civil penalties and cost recovery. Civil litigation may be
necessary to recover costs associated with noncompliance and
to impose civil penalties. The City should seek to recover all
costs associated with an industrial user's noncompliance. The
costs include legal fees, increased treatment costs, fines
assessed against the City by the EPA or NYSDEC and the cost
incurred in enforcement response actions.
(5) Criminal prosecution. The Sewer Use Ordinance permits the City to
pursue criminal prosecution of individuals or organizations for
violations of the Sewer Use Ordinance. Criminal offenses are
defined as either felonies or misdemeanors. Felonies are the more
serious charges and are characterized by the Clean Water Act as
knowing violations of the Clean Water Act and knowing
endangerment of human health. Knowing violations are punishable
by fines up to $50,000 per day of violation, imprisonment of up to
15 years, or both. Fines and prison sentences under the Clean
Water Act are doubled for a second offense. Federal law defines
misdemeanors as offenses other than felonies. Misdemeanors are
punishable by fines of up to $1,000,000 or imprisonment for less
than one year. Misdemeanor offenses include tampering with
monitoring equipment, falsifying self-monitoring reports and failing
to report noncomplying discharges. Criminal prosecution would
normally be pursued when there is evidence of criminal intent,
willfulness, negligence and/or bad faith shown by the industrial
user. Criminal prosecution is the most severe enforcement
response at the City's disposal. The City Manager and the City
Attorney will decide whether criminal prosecution is pursued. The
EPA guidance document, Guidance for Developing Control
Authority Enforcement Response Plans, September 1989, should
be used as a reference.
(6) Termination of sewer service.
(a) The Sewer Use Ordinance allows the City to terminate an
industrial user's right to discharge when previous enforcement
responses have not returned the industrial user to compliance
or a discharge is causing interference, pass-through or damage
to human health, the environment or the POTW. The
enforcement response guide (Table 1.1 - 1.5) details the
instances when termination of service shall be used as an
enforcement tool.
§ 277-75 GENEVA CODE § 277-75
268:412
(b) Termination of service can be accomplished through ceaseand-
desist orders or injunctions. In the most severe case, the
service may have to be physically broken or a plug installed.
(7) Supplemental enforcement responses.
(a) The City is required by the general pretreatment regulations
[40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii)] to annually publish in the designated
official newspaper a list of industrial users that have had
significant violations during the past 12 months. More frequent
publication of violations can be used to deter industrial users
from committing pretreatment violations.
(b) The following may be of assistance in returning an industrial
user to compliance: Issue short-term permits to industrial
users that are in noncompliance. An industrial user that has
infrequent violations of permit limits may be required to
increase monitoring frequency to help ensure compliance. The
Regional Engineer from the NYSDEC can be requested to
assist in enforcement activities. Make the industrial user
aware of what effects the violations have on the POTW, the
environment and human health.
E. Standard forms. (For forms please consult the City Clerk's office or the
Department of Public Works.)
F. Any user of the POTW aggrieved by any action taken by the Director or
Chief Operator pursuant to this section may seek review of such action
by filing a petition with the Sewer Complaint Review Board. A copy of
the petition shall be filed with the City Manager, who shall schedule a
hearing before the Sewer Complaint Review Board and notify the user
of the time and place of the hearing, which shall be at least 15 days
after filing the petition. The hearing proceedings shall be governed by
the applicable provisions set forth in § 277-69.
G. Any final civil penalty and/or administrative action, fine or order issued
by the Sewer Complaint Review Board shall be reviewable pursuant to a
proceeding commenced pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules within 30 days of the final determination of the Sewer
Complaint Review Board being filed with the City Manager.
§ 277-75 RAILROADS § 277-75
268:413

ARTICLE XII
Validity
§ 277-76. Supersession of prior rule and regulations.
This chapter supersedes previous versions of this chapter promulgated
prior to April 3, 1985.
§ 277-76 RAILROADS § 277-76
268:415
Chapter 282
SATELLITE DISHES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 282-1. Intent.
The proliferation of the construction and installation within the City of
Geneva of satellite antennas, parabolic dishes and other similar equipment
and devices must be controlled so as to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Geneva, and to the maximum degree
possible, coordinate and control the same so as to preserve and protect the
aesthetic qualities of the City of Geneva and its environs. Accordingly, this
chapter is enacted to accomplish this stated purpose and intent.
§ 282-2. Permit requirement.
A. No person shall install, maintain or operate a satellite dish or similar
device without having first obtained a permit from the Director of
Building and Zoning.
B. Application for a permit shall be made to the said Director on forms
provided by his office and shall include construction drawings showing
the proposed method of installation and a site plan depicting the
structures on the property and all adjacent properties and all power
lines as well as the location of all existing power lines. The said Director
may require an applicant to submit such other and further information
as may be reasonably necessary to assist said Director in establishing
compliance with the intent of this chapter.
C. The Director of Building and Zoning may either issue a permit to an
applicant or disapprove an application. Whenever a permit is granted,
appropriate conditions and safeguards may be attached thereto so as to
guarantee that the use, location and physical appearance of a satellite
dish or similar device shall not have an unreasonable adverse effect on
neighboring properties and uses in the vicinity and shall not be
incompatible with the general intent of this chapter.
D. Any satellite receiving antenna in existence in the City of Geneva, as of
the date of adoption of this chapter, shall be allowed to remain in the
state and condition as it exists as of the date of adoption of this chapter.
However, each such antenna shall be brought into compliance with this
chapter within one year after the date of adoption of this chapter.
§ 277-76 GENEVA CODE § 282-3
282:416
§ 282-3. Restrictions.
The following restrictions and conditions apply to satellite dishes or similar
devices where allowed:
§ 282-4. Appeals.
Any decision or requirement of the Director of Building and Zoning may be
appealed within 30 days of written notice of said decision to any applicant
to the Zoning Board of Appeals, and the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have
the authority to uphold, reverse or modify any decision of the Director of
Building and Zoning.
Chapter 285
(RESERVED)
Chapter 288
SIGNS AND FIRE ESCAPES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 105. Zoning — See Ch. 350.
A. No antenna may be located in a front or side yard nor shall such
antenna be substantially visible from an adjoining street or roadway at
street level?
B. Installation on or above any building or structure.
(1) No such device shall be installed on or above any residential
building or residential structure but shall be freestanding.
(2) Excluded from Subsection B(1) above will be commercial buildings,
schools, colleges, hospitals and all government buildings.
C. Lots must be of sufficient size to allow for side line setback and setback
from existing structures equal to the height of the satellite dish
measured from the base at ground level plus five feet.
D. Maximum allowed is one per lot.
E. If any modifications are made to the structure, the Building Inspector
shall have the authority to require proof that any addition, change or
modification is in conformity with the permit and the Uniform Building
Code.
F. The erection of any satellite dish under any power lines must conform
with NYSEG rules and regulations regarding clearances.
§ 282-3 SIGNS AND FIRE ESCAPES § 282-4
288:417
§ 288-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following meaning:
BUILDING — Only a multiple dwelling which is either rented, leased, let out
or hired out, to be occupied, or is occupied as the temporary or permanent
residence or home of three or more families living independently of each
other, including but not limited to the following: a tenement, flat house,
maisonette apartment, apartment, house, apartment hotel, tourist house,
bachelor apartment, studio apartment, duplex apartment, kitchenette
apartment, hotel, lodging house, rooming house, boardinghouse, boarding
and nursery school, furnished room house, club, sorority house, fraternity
house, college and school dormitory, convalescent, old age or nursing
homes or residences. It shall also include a dwelling, two or more stories
in height, and with five or more boarders, roomers or lodgers residing with
any one family.
FIRE ESCAPE — A combination of outside balconies, stairs and/or ladders
of incombustible materials providing a means of egress from a building.
§ 288-2. Erection. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-20, eff. 7-3-1974]
No person shall erect or suspend or maintain or suffer to be erected,
suspend or maintained any fire escape, sign or other structure over a public
street within the city which shall project more than two feet from any
building adjoining a public street, or which shall be more than two feet in
height, without the written permission of the Director of Public Works.
§ 288-3. Permit. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-20, eff. 7-3-1974]
Any person desiring to procure such permit shall file with the City Clerk a
written application therefor, showing the dimensions of the proposed sign
or fire escape accompanied by a bond in the penalty of $5,000 for a sign and
in the penalty of $10,000 for a fire escape or in such larger amount as may
be fixed by the Director of Public Works, with sureties to be approved by the
Director of Public Works, as to form and manner of execution by the City
Attorney, to be given by applicant indemnifying the city against all loss, cost,
damage or expenses incurred or sustained by or recovered against the city
by reason of the construction or maintenance of such sign or fire escape.
In the case of a fire escape the application shall also be approved by the
Enforcement Officer before being filed with the City Clerk.
§ 288-4. Height above sidewalk. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-20, eff.
7-13-1974]
No permit shall be given for the erection of any sign or fire escape less than
10 feet above the sidewalk.
§ 282-4 GENEVA CODE § 288-5
288:418
§ 288-5. Revocation of permit. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-20, eff.
7-3-1974]
All such permits shall be given subject to the right of the Director of
Public Works to revoke the same in case, in his judgment, such sign or
fire escape shall be or become unsafe or insecure or unsightly or interfere
with the public use of the street and shall not be made safe, secure, sightly
and unobjectionable within five days after written notice of its unsafe,
insecure, unsightly or objectionable condition shall be given to the person
maintaining such sign or fire escape. A fire escape that is not painted and
maintained the same color as the building to which it is affixed shall be
deemed to be unsightly and objectionable.
§ 288-6. Color of fire escape.
Any fire escape located on any building in the city, which fire escape faces
any public street or public alley in the city, shall be painted so as to
correspond to the color of the walls of the building to which it is attached.
§ 288-7. Encumbering or blocking.
The owner of a building in the city shall not permit a fire escape attached to
his building to be encumbered or blocked by any person or object, nor shall
he permit it to be used for any purpose whatsoever which might in any way
encumber, block or render it temporarily or permanently unsuitable as a
means of egress from the building to which it is attached; but a tenant shall
be liable if a violation is caused by his own act, assistance or negligence or
that of any member of his family, or household or guests.
§ 288-8. Existing structures.
This chapter shall apply to signs, fire escapes and other structures already
existing and to those hereafter to be erected.
§ 288-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 291
SKATEBOARDS, IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLER BLADES AND
ROLLER SKATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 86. Use of streets — See Ch. 306, Art. III.
§ 288-5 SIGNS AND FIRE ESCAPES § 288-9
288:419
§ 291-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of skateboards, in-line
skates/roller blades and roller skates within the City of Geneva so as to
promote the general welfare and public safety.
§ 291-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IN-LINE SKATES/ROLLER BLADES — Shoes, skates or footwear with a
single row of roller wheels.
ROLLER SKATES — Shoes, skates or footwear with two or more rows of
roller wheels
SKATEBOARD — A single platform which is mounted on wheels, designed
or used in fact for riding underfoot, having no mechanism or other device
with which to steer or control the direction of movement thereof while being
used.
§ 291-3. Restrictions upon use. [Amended 9-14-2005 by Ord. No.
5-2005; 3-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2-201340]
Within the City of Geneva, skateboards, in-line skates/roller blades or roller
skate use is permitted, so long as it is not effected in a manner that creates
a risk of damage to any person or property or which impedes or interferes
with pedestrians or vehicle traffic. Users of skateboards, in-line skates/
roller blades or other roller skates when utilizing the roadway must travel
with traffic, as close to the curb or side of the road as possible, and yield
right-of-way to all motor vehicles. When passing parked or standing vehicles
on the roadway, the user shall be required to use extreme diligence and
shall at no time attempt to pass a parked or standing vehicle when being
overtaken by a moving vehicle on the roadway
§ 291-4. Precautions.
A. Every person operating a skateboard, in-line skates/roller blades or
roller skates shall operate the same in strict observance of Article 34 of
the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law relating to the operation of
bicycles and play vehicles, except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application.
B. Whenever a person shall operate a skateboard, in-line skates/roller
blades or roller skates upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield right-ofway
to any pedestrian and shall not pass or overtake any pedestrian
while riding on a skateboard and shall be required to physically walk
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 291-3, Prohibited areas, as amended,
and redesignated former §§ 291-4 through 291-7 as §§ 291-3 through 291-6, respectively.
§ 288-9 GENEVA CODE § 291-4
288:420
§ 291-5. Penalties for offenses; parental responsibility.
§ 291-6. Enforcement responsibility.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Geneva Police Department.
past the pedestrian prior to resuming skateboarding. [Amended
9-14-2005 by Ord. No. 5-2005]
C. Construction of or erection of any ramps, rails or similar apparatus for
use on any public street or sidewalk is prohibited. [Added 9-14-2005
by Ord. No. 5-2005]
D. When utilizing public streets or roadways, the rider shall not use the
skateboard in any reckless or aggressive manner and shall be
prohibited from jumping onto or from curbs, stairs, railings and
benches located on public property. [Added 9-14-2005 by Ord. No.
5-2005]
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $50. However, in lieu of the foregoing fine and in the discretion
of the City Judge, the punishment for a first violation may be a
reprimand; for the second violation a prohibition of use of the
skateboard, in-line skates/roller blades or roller skates for a period of
two weeks; and for a third violation a prohibition of use of the
skateboard, in-line skates/roller blades or roller skates for a period of
one month. [Amended 9-14-2005 by Ord. No. 5-2005]
B. In the event that a person violating any provision of this chapter shall
be under 16 years of age, it shall be the responsibility of the parent,
custodian or person having real guardianship of such person to be
certain that the child complies with the provisions of this chapter. If the
child does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, then such
parent, custodian or legal guardian shall be responsible as if that
person had violated this chapter, and the fine set forth in Subsection A
of this section shall apply to such parent, custodian, or legal guardian.
C. Aggravated violation. While sections above generally prohibit the use of
regulated devices on City sidewalks, use of such devices on sidewalks in
the Business Improvement District shall constitute an aggravated
violation. Additionally, use of skateboards for non-transportation
purposes on public property not so designated, or on private property
where not authorized by the property owner shall constitute an
aggravated violation. Aggravated violations shall carry a penalty of 40
hours of community service in addition to the fines and forfeitures
outlined in Subsection A above. Should the person violating this
provision be under 16 years of age, the parent, custodian, or legal
guardian shall either be required to perform said service or shall
compel the responsible offender to perform. [Added 3-6-2013 by Ord.
No. 2-2013]
§ 291-4 SIGNS AND FIRE ESCAPES § 291-6
288:421
Chapter 294
SMOKE ABATEMENT
§ 294-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to abate air
pollution through the emission of excessive amounts of smoke and other
noxious fumes and to provide penalties for violations thereof in order to
protect and promote public health, safety and welfare.
§ 294-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply as used in this chapter:
DENSE SMOKE — Smoke which has a density of No. 2 or greater as
established by the chart, hereinafter referred to.
OUTDOOR WOOD-BURNING FURNACE — An accessory structure,
designed and intended, through the burning of wood or other solid fuel, for
the purpose of heating the principal structure or any other site, building or
structure on the premises.[Added 10-4-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
RINGLEMANN CHART — Standard by the United States Bureau of Mines to
determine the density of smoke, with instructions for use as now published
by the United States Bureau of Mines.
§ 294-3. Emission of dense smoke prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the
emission of any smoke from any source whatever of a density equal to
or greater than that density described as No. 2 on the Ringlemann chart,
published by the United States Bureau of Mines.
§ 294-4. Exceptions; private residences; period for rekindling of
fires.
The provisions of § 294-3 of this chapter shall not be applicable:
§ 294-5. Escape of soot, noxious acids, fumes and gases prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the escape of such
quantities of soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes and gases in such place or
A. To private residences in which no more than two families are or can be
housed. To all larger dwellings of whatever type, however, this chapter
shall be fully effective and applicable.
B. When a fire box, furnace, boiler, locomotive or other fuel-consuming
device is being cleaned out and a new fire is being built therein, in
which event a smoke of a density greater than that described as No. 2 of
the Ringlemann chart shall be permitted for a period of not to exceed
six minutes in any single period of 60 minutes.
§ 291-6 GENEVA CODE § 294-5
294:422
manner as to be detrimental to any person or to the public or to endanger
the health, comfort and safety of any person or of the public, or in such
manner as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to
property or business.
§ 294-6. Use of smokeless solid fuel.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or consume
in any solid fuel-burning equipment any solid fuel which does not meet the
standards of a smokeless solid fuel as set forth in this chapter. Smokeless
fuel for the purpose of the enforcement of this chapter shall be considered
a fuel, the volatile content of which is 20% or less on a dry basis. Provided,
however, that if a fuel contains volatile matter in excess of 20% on a dry
basis it shall be acceptable under the terms of this chapter, provided that
it meets the same standards in regard to smoke production as that of a
fuel containing less than 20% volatile matter on a dry basis, and provided
further that solid fuel having a volatile content in excess of 20% on a dry
basis and not meeting the above standard for smoke production, can also
be used or consumed in heating devices equipped with appliances which
are so constructed as to ensure the complete combustion of all fuel used
and further designed to prevent any and all air pollution prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 294-7. Outdoor wood-burning furnaces prohibited. [Added
10-4-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
The construction and operation of outdoor wood-burning furnaces are
hereby prohibited within the City of Geneva.
§ 294-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-4-2006 by Ord. No.
5-2006]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation as defined in Article 10 of the New York State Penal Law
and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $250
or to imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each week's continued violations are constituted as separate
and distinct offenses.
Chapter 300
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 218. Sanitary Code — See Ch. 273.
§ 294-5 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 294-8
294:423

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 300-1. Purpose.
By the adoption of this chapter, the City Council of the City of Geneva, for
the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the City of Geneva
and its inhabitants, declares its intent to regulate collection and disposal of
refuse and bulk refuse within the City of Geneva.
§ 300-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — Any local government, county
government, or state agency responsible for administration or enforcement
of an applicable law or regulation.[Added 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012]
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — Any person designated by the
authority having jurisdiction or Code Enforcement Officer to act on his or
her behalf.[Added 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012]
CONTAINER — A rigid bodied receptacle, resistant to animals, wind and
sharp objects, with a securely fitting removable cover with a capacity of not
less than 18 gallons nor more than 30 gallons.[Added by Ord. No. 85-7,
eff. 5-1-1985]
HOLIDAYS — Christmas, New Year's Day, Thanksgiving, Memorial Day,
Independence Day and Labor Day.41
REFUSE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, corporation or legal entity
carrying on the business of receiving, collecting, transporting or disposing
of refuse for hire within the City of Geneva.
TRASH/RECYCLABLES — Nonorganic manufactured articles that have
outlived their usefulness, composed of materials such as paper, cardboard,
wood, rags, glass, metal, plastics, ceramics, cleaning compounds, and
upholstery materials.[Added 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 5-2015]
41.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “refuse,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 5-2015.
§ 300-1 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 300-2
294:425

ARTICLE II
Storage of Refuse
§ 300-3. Proper disposal required. [Amended 5-1-1985 by Ord. No.
85-7; 5-5-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93; 7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 5-2015;
5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 1-2018]
§ 300-4. Deposit on public or private property prohibited. [Amended
7-1-2015 by Ord. No. 5-2015]
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited any
trash/recyclables or organic waste in or upon any traveled portion of a
public highway, street or place, or on any property not owned or occupied
by him within the City of Geneva.
A. Residential premises and individual business places.
(1) The owner of residential and multifamily premises within the City
of Geneva, or individual places of business within the City of
Geneva, shall contract with a solid waste hauler licensed by the
City of Geneva, and be financially responsible for continuous and
regular disposal service for each residence for the trash/
recyclables and food waste that may accumulate or be used on said
premises.
(a) In order to provide ample time for owners of multifamily
residential properties to adjust and negotiate new leases with
tenants to accommodate the above provision Subsection A(1)
and to train tenants in the proper disposal of solid waste, the
above provision will not take effect until one year after the date
of the passage of the ordinance.
(2) Property owners shall ensure that solid waste and recycling
containers are procured for each property and shall be of number,
size, and construction such that all waste generated at the property
in one week's time can be securely stored in a sanitary manner.
Trash/recyclables/food waste receptacles shall be securely closed
at all times, and shall not be stored in the front yard area of any
developed parcel within the City without prior approval from the
City. Containers shall be stored on the side or rear yard areas at all
times except when they are brought to the curb on pickup day.
Once emptied, they must be returned to the side or rear yard area.
In no event shall trash/recyclables/food waste receptacles be left in
the front yard for more than a twenty-four-hour period.
B. Other type premises. Industrial, apartment and commercial
establishments shall provide for receptacles, the location and size of
which shall be approved by the Department of Public Works. Such
receptacles shall be constructed in such a way as to protect from wind
and unsightly view all containers or refuse enclosed therein.
§ 300-3 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 300-5
294:427
§ 300-5. Enforcement procedures. [Added by Ord. No. 85-7, eff.
8-1-1985; amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012]
A. Order to remove.
(1) Initial violation. The authority having jurisdiction or authorized
representative shall order the owner of any premises upon which
garbage or bulk refuse shall have accumulated or become
improperly stored, or where containers, empty or full, have become
improperly stored in violation of this chapter to remove such
garbage or bulk refuse from such premises and/or to remove
containers, empty or full, or properly store them within two days
after receipt of an initial notice of violation.
(2) Subsequent violations. The authority having jurisdiction or
authorized representative shall be authorized to take immediate
action without notice to correct subsequent violations of this
chapter or to enforce the provisions of this chapter against a
person or business who has had prior violations or is deemed to be
a persistent violator.
(3) Immediate action. Where, in the opinion of the authority having
jurisdiction, the violation represents an immediate threat to health
or safety, he shall be authorized to take what action he deems
necessary to correct the violation without the requirement for prior
notice.
B. Removal by City; assessment. If the owner shall fail or refuse to remove
such refuse or bulk refuse from said property or store refuse or
containers, empty or full in violation of this chapter, or if immediate
action is deemed necessary, the authority having jurisdiction or
authorized representative shall cause such refuse or bulk refuse to be
removed from, and/or containers to be removed or properly relocated
on, the said property. The expenses so assessed, including all
authorized administrative fees, shall constitute a lien and charge on the
real property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or
discharged, and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same
time as other City charges.
C. Other enforcement procedure. Nothing contained in this section shall
impair, prevent or prohibit the authority having jurisdiction or
authorized representative from utilizing the enforcement provisions of §
300-14 of this chapter and to pursue enforcement of this chapter
through the Geneva City Court, and either § 300-5 or 300-14 may be
used by him at his discretion.
§ 300-5 GENEVA CODE § 300-5
294:428
ARTICLE III
Licensing of Refuse Collectors
§ 300-6. License required for collecting.
No person shall engage in the business of receiving, collecting or
transporting refuse within the City of Geneva without first obtaining a
license to carry on such business from the City of Geneva and paying the
fee for such license as herein provided. Nothing herein contained, however,
shall be construed to prevent any person from transporting for the purpose
of disposal such refuse, bulk refuse, yard trimmings or brush as is normally
generated by such person on his own premises or in his own business.
§ 300-7. Licenses; terms and fees. [Amended 2-1-1991 by Ord. No.
91-2; 5-3-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017; 12-6-2017 by Ord. No. 4-2017]
§ 300-8. Insurance. [Amended 5-3-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
The licensee shall hold harmless the City of Geneva, its officers and
employees, and shall indemnify the City of Geneva, its officers and
employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which
may maintain such public liability, food products liability, and property
damage insurance as will protect the licensee, property owners, and City
from all claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death,
which may arise from operations under the license or in connection
therewith. Such insurance shall provide general liability coverage with a
combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily
injury and property damage. Such insurance shall be without prejudice to
A. The City of Geneva shall license up to four solid waste haulers for
collection of waste in the City. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be for a period of one year or less, subject, however, to the
revocation thereof as provided herein. Haulers seeking to conduct
residential hauling operations on Monday through Thursday shall pay a
fee of $250 per day. Haulers seeking to conduct residential hauling
operations on Friday shall pay $750. Licensees shall retain the right to
renew their license annually unless the license is revoked by City
Council, or they discontinue operations in the City for a period greater
than 60 days.
B. Upon the payment of the initial fee as herein provided, which may occur
after January 1, the City Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant for
the remaining period of the calendar year, and shall also issue a
nontransferable plate or sticker which shall be affixed to a conspicuous
and indispensable part of each and every such truck. The official
number of such license, together with the words "City of Geneva
Licensed Refuse Collector," shall be clearly set forth on each plate or
sticker. The fee for any license issued on or after July 1 in any year shall
be 1/2 of the above-mentioned rate. The renewal fee shall be payable on
or before January 1 of each year.
§ 300-6 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 300-8
294:429
coverage otherwise existing therein and shall name as additional insured
the City of Geneva. Such policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior
to the completion of the contract without like insurance in place prior to
cancellation or termination. Any lapse in coverage will result in immediate
suspension of the license, pending proof of current insurance. Proof of
insurance shall be provided with the application.
§ 300-9. Conditions for licensing. [Amended by Ord. No. 77-1, eff.
3-2-1977; 5-3-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017; 12-6-2017 by Ord. No.
4-2017]
Every license issued by the City Clerk pursuant to this chapter shall be
subject to the following conditions:
A. Vehicles used by licensed waste collectors in the collection and
transportation of refuse in the City of Geneva shall have a fully enclosed
carrier-body to prevent the escape of noxious odors or contents.
B. Licensees shall be allowed for dry waste collection open-body type
transportation which shall be equipped with eye hooks, cleats or other
type holdfast facilities fixed to sides and ends of the vehicle and with a
tarpaulin or other approved cover to prevent blowing off, spilling or
scattering of the same along the route of haul.
C. The vehicles used by collectors shall be subject to inspection by the
Department of Public Works, as designated by the Director, to ensure
that there is compliance with this chapter as to the type of vehicle and
the existence of a license on the vehicle.
D. All trucks must have minimum liability insurance coverage as required
by the State of New York for motor vehicle registration.
E. Residential curbside and commercial collection operations in the City of
Geneva are permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. All haulers are required to specify days of the
week for general hauling operations. In situations where pickup days
fall on a federal holiday, haulers are permitted to conduct operations
one business day prior to or following the scheduled pickup day,
provided that no residential collection may be made on Saturday or
Sunday. Special pickups are excluded from this allocation.
F. Any changes in ownership, or in an individual officer, stockholders or
directors of a corporation, where the license is not affected, must be
reported to the City Clerk within five days. Said changes must be
approved by the City Clerk.
G. Without specific written authorization by the City Manager, all
residential and commercial collections must be deposited by permit at
the Ontario County Landfill.
H. Licensees shall not mix any dangerous, harmful or deleterious
substances with ordinary ashes, rubbish or trash and shall be
§ 300-8 GENEVA CODE § 300-9
294:430
responsible for separating any such substances from their loads prior
to trucking ashes, rubbish or trash outside the City limits.
I. Licensees shall arrange their loads to the fullest extent possible so that
such loads are acceptable for disposal in the Ontario County Landfill
Site by any authority having jurisdiction over such site.
J. Licensees shall certify that they have reviewed and will maintain
compliance with all local, state, and federal laws regarding solid waste
management, explicitly stating review and compliance with this
chapter, the New York State Solid Waste Management Act, General
Municipal Law § 120-aa, and any other law deemed appropriate by the
authority having jurisdiction (AHJ):
K. All licensees must submit a dated fee schedule, which will be posted to
the City's website. Any change to the fee schedule must be submitted to
the City Clerk prior taking effect.
L. Trash/recycling containers.
(1) Licensees will provide all customers with containers for both trash
and recycling. The City will provide "Landfill" and "Recycling"
decals to trash haulers as part of the 2018 license issue. After the
date of 2018 licensure, all haulers must affix on all their existing
trash toters (containers) the "Landfill" label and on all their existing
recycling toters (containers) the "Recycling" label so that these
labels can be clearly seen from a distance.
(2) After December 31, 2018, any new trash containers provided to
customers by the hauler must be clearly marked with a "Landfill"
label, and any new recycling containers must be clearly marked
with the "Recycling" label similar in design to those provided by the
City.
M. Violation of any of the foregoing regulations or any other provision of
this chapter shall be cause for revocation of the license of any collector
holding a license hereunder. The authority having jurisdiction (AHJ)
shall have power to revoke any such license for cause shown after
public hearing thereon at which the licensee shall have an opportunity
to be heard on 10 days' written notice to the licensee, specifying the
nature of the violation, the complaint of said violation being in writing
and signed by the complainant.
§ 300-9 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 300-9
294:431

ARTICLE IV
Disposal
§ 300-10. Disposal of trash in Ontario County Landfill Site.
[Amended by Ord. No. 77-1, eff. 3-2-1977]
All ashes, rubbish and trash generated in the City of Geneva, except any
dangerous, harmful or deleterious substances which according to any
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation cannot be disposed of in the
Ontario County Landfill Site #1 shall be delivered for disposal to the Ontario
County Landfill Site #1 in the Town of Seneca.
§ 300-11. Disposal of dangerous, harmful or deleterious substances.
[Added by Ord. No. 77-1, eff. 3-2-1977]
Any dangerous, harmful or deleterious substances originating in the City
of Geneva which cannot be disposed of in the Ontario County Landfill Site
#1 shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations of the state and federal governments and any other
authority having jurisdiction over same.
§ 300-12. Exceptions. [Added by Ord. No. 77-1, eff. 3-2-1977;
amended 5-2-2018 by Ord. No. 1-2018]
§ 300-13. Presumption. [Added by Ord. No. 77-1, eff. 3-2-1977]
It shall be presumed that any ashes, rubbish and trash originating in the
City of Geneva and placed in vehicles used by licensed refuse collectors
for collection are disposable in the Ontario County Landfill Site #1 and it
shall be the burden of the person asserting that any ashes, rubbish or trash
A. Recyclable and salvageable material. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
any recyclable or salvageable material shall be collected and stored in a
clean and sanitary manner and shall be disposed of for recycling or
salvaging pursuant to all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations of the state and federal governments and any other
authority having jurisdiction over same.
B. The inspection program will be a spot inspection type of program
(initially an average of 10 inspections per month or less) and designed
to identify egregious instances where recycling and trash for the
landfills are comingled in a single container making it difficult for
efficient and sanitary pick-up by a licensed trash hauler. Prior to
initiating spot inspections, City staff will develop a City-wide education
campaign regarding proper waste disposal and recycling practices.
C. Prohibited material. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of
§ 300-10, no refuse collector shall be required to dispose of any ashes,
rubbish or trash in the Ontario County Landfill Site #1 which is
prohibited by any authority having jurisdiction over such site.
§ 300-10 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 300-13
294:433
originating in the City of Geneva are not disposable in the Ontario County
Landfill Site #1, to establish same in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 300-13 GENEVA CODE § 300-13
294:434
ARTICLE V
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 300-14. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine
not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate offense shall constitute a
separate additional violation.42
42.Editor's Note: Original Section 90.51, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted by Ord. No. 85-7, eff. 5-1-1985.
§ 300-14 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 300-14
294:435
Chapter 306
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street trees — See Ch. 327.
§ 300-14 GENEVA CODE § 300-14
294:436
ARTICLE I
Excavations, Maintenance and Use of Streets
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 44, Arts. I and VI, of the 1968 Code]
§ 306-1. Digging in street; permission required.
No person shall injure any pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk or sewer, or
dig any area, sewer or other excavation in any public street, nor remove
any earth or stone therefrom within the city without permission in writing
from the Department of Public Works, and under such conditions as said
Department may impose, and the Department of Public Works may order
any sewer or excavation constructed contrary to the provisions of this
section to be filled up or altered at the expense of the owner.
§ 306-2. Barricading street openings.
Whenever any public street within said city is in process of construction or
repair, it shall be the duty of the person performing the work to place and
maintain such sufficient guards about said construction as to secure public
safety until said street is ready for public use, and at all times during the
night to keep lighted lamps, not more than 20 feet apart, upon said guards
so as to give warning to all persons of such construction; and no person
shall ride or drive any vehicle or animal upon any such street until the same
is completed and opened to the public use.
§ 306-3. Hindrance or obstruction of repairs.
No person shall hinder or obstruct the construction or repair of any
pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, sewer or other public improvement within
said city which shall be done under or by permission of the City of Geneva,
nor hinder or obstruct any person employed by the Department of Public
Works in cleaning any public street or place.
§ 306-4. Building materials in street.
No person shall place any materials for building or any other purpose upon
any public street within said city without permission in writing from the
Director of Public Works. Such permission shall not be for a longer period
than three months, nor shall it authorize the obstruction of more than 1/
3 of the sidewalk, nor more than 1/2 of the paved or improved portion of
the street. Any person to whom permission is granted as aforesaid shall
cause all said materials to be enclosed within such sufficient guards as
to secure public safety, and at all times during the night shall keep and
maintain adequate safeguards and warning devices upon said grounds in
such a manner as to give warning to all persons of the presence of said
materials. All such building materials and all rubbish arising therefrom shall
be removed from any public street at the expiration of the time limited in
the above-mentioned permission or upon the revocation of said permission.
Any such permission may be revoked without notice by said Department of
Public Works at any time.
§ 306-1 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-5
294:437
§ 306-5. Barriers on excavations on street lines.
Any person who shall dig any cellar or other excavation adjacent to and
within four feet of the line of any public street within said city shall erect
such sufficient barriers between said street and excavation as to secure
public safety, and at all times during the night shall keep adequate warning
devices upon said barriers in such a manner as to give warning of such
excavation; and, if within 24 hours after notice from the Director of Public
Works to place such barriers and warning devices be not complied with,
then said Director may cause such barriers and warning devices to be
placed at the expense of the person so in default.
§ 306-6. Removing warning devices.
No unauthorized person shall remove or interfere in any way with any
such warning devices or any barriers erected for public safety, or any
monument placed to locate the line of any public street, sidewalk or public
improvement within said city.
§ 306-7. Cleaning, maintaining and repairing sidewalks. [Amended
by Ord. No. 80-23, eff. 9-3-1980; 3-21-1983 by Ord. No. 83-9;
12-2-1987 by Ord. No. 87-36; 10-6-1993 by Ord. No. 16-93; 5-1-2013
by Ord. No. 3-2013; 10-2-2013 by Ord. No. 5-2013; 7-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 6-2015; 9-4-2019 by Ord. No. 5-2019]
A. Removal of ice and snow from sidewalks.
(1) Duty of property owner and occupant: Every owner or occupant of
any building or owner of any vacant lot within said City that abuts
upon or is adjacent to a public street shall keep the sidewalk in the
front, side or rear of such building or vacant lot free from ice and
snow.
(2) Time limit. Snow and ice shall be removed within 24 hours after the
end of a snowfall. In addition, sidewalks in front of commercial
establishments and commercial parking lots shall be kept free of
snow and ice at all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m.
(3) Severe icing. In case snow and ice on any sidewalk shall be frozen
so hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk, it
shall, within the time specified in Subsection A(1), be strewn and
kept strewn with ashes, sand, or other suitable material, so as to be
no longer dangerous to life and limb. As soon as practical
thereafter, the sidewalk shall be completely cleared of snow, ice
and other materials strewn thereon, as provided in this section.
(4) Removal by City. Whenever the owner or occupant of a parcel of
real estate adjoining a public sidewalk fails to remove the snow and
ice from such sidewalk adjoining such property within the time
specified in this section, the Director of Public Works, shall cause
§ 306-5 GENEVA CODE § 306-7
294:438
said snow or ice to be removed from such sidewalk by city staff
or a private contractor of the City's choice and notify the City
Comptroller of the expense incurred in the form of City labor, and
equipment, materials used as well as administrative overhead of
50% or the rate paid to the private contractor plus administrative
overhead of 50%.
(5) Collection of costs for removal by City. The City Comptroller shall
promptly present to the owner or occupant of each parcel a bill for
the removal of snow and ice as certified by the Director of Public
Works. If not paid within 30 days, the cost thereof shall be assessed
against the property added to their tax bill and become a lien
thereon, collectible in the same manner as delinquent City taxes.
(6) Placing of ice and snow on another's property or city street. No
person, firm, corporation, property owner or occupant shall remove
ice or snow from any parcel of real estate and place it upon another
parcel of real estate or upon a city street without the express
permission of the owner of the parcel of real estate upon which the
ice or snow is to be placed.
B. Removal of grass, weeds, rubbish or other obstructions.
(1) Duty of property owner and occupant. It shall be the duty of the
owner and occupant, jointly, of every parcel of real estate adjoining
a public sidewalk, whether the parcel of real estate is occupied by a
structure or not, to keep such sidewalks adjoining such property
free from grass, weeds, rubbish or other obstructions for the full
paved width of such sidewalk.
(2) Time limit. Grass, weeds, rubbish or other obstructions shall be
removed no later than the seventh calendar day after date of notice
from the City.
(3) Removal by City. Whenever the owner or occupant of a parcel of
real estate adjoining a public sidewalk fails to remove grass, weeds,
rubbish or other obstructions from such sidewalk adjoining such
property within the time specified in this section, the Director of
Public Works, shall cause said grass, weeds, rubbish or other
obstructions to be removed from such sidewalk by City staff or a
private contractor of the City's choice and notify the City
Comptroller of the expense incurred in the form of City labor, and
equipment, materials used as well as administrative overhead of
50% or the rate paid to the private contractor plus administrative
overhead of 50%.
(4) Collection of costs for removal by City. The City Comptroller shall
promptly present to the owner or occupant of each parcel a bill for
the removal of grass, weeds, rubbish or other obstructions as
certified by the Director of Public Works. If not paid within 30 days,
the cost thereof shall be assessed against the property added to
§ 306-7 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-7
294:439
their tax bill and become a lien thereon, collectible in the same
manner as delinquent City taxes.
(5) Placing grass, weeds, rubbish or other obstructions on another's
property or City street. No person, firm, corporation, property
owner or occupant shall remove grass, weeds, rubbish or other
obstructions from any parcel of real estate and place it upon
another parcel of real estate or upon a City street without the
express permission of the owner of the parcel of real estate upon
which the grass, weeds, rubbish or other obstructions is to be
placed.
C. Sidewalk materials; repairing sidewalks.
(1) Duty of property owner and occupant. It shall be the duty of the
owner and occupant, jointly, of every parcel of real estate adjoining
a public sidewalk, whether the parcel of real estate is occupied by a
structure or not, at all times to keep said sidewalk in a good state of
repair.
(2) All sidewalks in the City of Geneva should be 4,000 pound concrete
and reinforced wire mesh in driveway areas. Property owners or
their agent shall obtain a sidewalk permit from the Engineering
Department that outlines all construction material and details.
(3) Sidewalks extending through driveway areas shall be concrete.
Asphalt, stone or other driveway materials shall not be placed over
concrete. All existing driveways that do not have concrete
sidewalks extending through them shall be exempt until such time
as a new driveway is installed and such installation requires
removal of subsurface materials.
(4) Property owners with existing sidewalks constructed of historic
materials may make application to the Historic Districts
Commission to replace or repair said sidewalks with a like material.
On issuing a finding that the referenced sidewalk is constructed of
historic materials, the Historic Districts Commission shall make a
recommendation to the Director of Public Works to permit a likefor-
like replacement utilizing original, or near original materials,
provided that the owner can demonstrate that said materials meet
all local, state, and federal access standards for disabled users.
D. Prior to engaging in any marketing of property for sale, whether by
realtor through a multiple listing service, for sale by owner, or any other
means of sale or other transfer, the property owner shall notify the
Department of Public Works who will schedule an inspection of
sidewalks abutting the property. The Department shall issue an
inspection report to the property owner citing immediate dangers and
any other deficiencies in abutting sidewalks.
(1) Any deficiencies that are considered a danger to the public via
tripping hazards or other public safety concerns shall be repaired
§ 306-7 GENEVA CODE § 306-7
294:440
§ 306-8. Outdoor dining in the City Business Improvement District.
[Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4; 5-5-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004;
9-4-2019 by Ord. No. 5-2019]
within 60 days. Such repairs not completed shall be subject to the
repair process in Subsection A above.
(2) All other deficiencies must be completed prior to sale of the
property. If repairs are not executed as directed by the Director of
Public Works, the City shall address necessary repairs; the cost of
which plus an administrative fee of 50% will be billed to the
property owner.
E. In addition to the above provisions, any violation of this section by any
property owner, agent or contractor may also be punishable as provided
in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions," of this Code, and
shall subject the violator to the issuance of an appearance ticket and a
mandatory, minimum fine of $25.
A. Outdoor dining shall be permitted on any sidewalk within the Business
Improvement District between April 1 and November 15 of each year.
Said activity shall allow a minimum of six feet for unencumbered
pedestrian use. Prior to utilizing said sidewalk for the above permitted
use, application for an annual permit must be obtained from the
Director of Public Works after submission of a plan to scale showing
design, color scheme and layout of outdoor activities to be used and the
months, days and hours of planned operation. Items of personal
property placed on the sidewalk shall not be permanently attached.
(1) If alcohol is to be served outdoors, the establishment must comply
with all applicable New York State Alcohol Beverage Control Law.
(2) All plans will also be subject to the review and approval of a Design
Review Team (DRT) of the City of Geneva which shall consist of the
City Engineer, Director of Planning and Development and Director
of the Business Improvement District.
(3) The proprietor of the sidewalk operation must be the owner of the
abutting business, and the sidewalk operation must be limited to
the area directly in front of the business and limited to a like
operation of the business. When the business owner is not the
property owner, permission of the property owner shall be obtained
by the business owner.
(4) The applicant must furnish to the city a hold-harmless agreement
indemnifying the city against loss, including costs and expenses,
resulting from injury to person or property as a direct or indirect
result of the operation of the sidewalk enterprise or for injury to
person or property occurring on the premises occupied by the
applicant.
§ 306-7 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-8
294:441
§ 306-9. Trap doors in sidewalks.
No trap door or grate in any of the sidewalks within said city shall be kept
open at any time except during the receiving and delivering of goods, and
during such time the same shall be surrounded by such sufficient barriers
as to secure public safety.
§ 306-10. Awnings.
Cloth awnings may be constructed in front of any store or building within
said city, to project over the sidewalk not to exceed 10 feet, provided that
such awnings be supported by a metal framework securely attached to said
buildings in such a manner as to be at all times safe and self-supporting,
and provided that the metal framework of such awnings shall be at least
seven feet from the surface of the sidewalk, and provided also that every
other part of such awnings shall be at least six feet and four inches from
the surface of the sidewalk. Every owner or occupant of any building within
said city shall at all times keep the awnings in front of such building free
from snow, ice, dirt or other obstructions. No person shall suspend from any
awning over any sidewalk merchandise or article of any kind. No wooden
awnings shall be permitted.43
§ 306-11. Rubbish and ashes.
No person shall scatter ashes, wastepaper, handbills or circulars, or rubbish
or other materials in any public street or place within said city, except by
(5) The area encompassed within a sidewalk operation authorized
pursuant to this article shall be considered duly licensed for sale
and consumption of alcoholic beverages and shall not be subject to
§ 69-4 of the Code of the City of Geneva, provided that the applicant
has a state liquor license that will allow or can be amended to allow
him/her to serve alcoholic beverages in the confines of a sidewalk
operation.
(6) The proprietor of the sidewalk operation must also provide a
receptacle for trash deposits and separate receptacle for smoking
products.
(7) The Director of Public Works reserves the right to revoke outdoor
dining permits at any time.
B. All other streets and sidewalks within the city shall be kept clear and
unobstructed for the use of the public for a space of at least six feet,
measuring from the outside of the walk. No person shall place or suffer
to remain any barrel, crate, article or other obstruction, so as to
obstruct the free passage of the public, except while actually engaged
in loading and unloading goods.
43.Editor's Note: Former § 44-11, entitled "Signs and banners," was repealed by Ord. No.
74-20, eff. 7-3-1974. See Ch. 350, Zoning, for regulations for signs and banners. Former
§ 44-12, entitled "Fence gates," was repealed 7-3-1974 by Ord. No. 74-18.
§ 306-8 GENEVA CODE § 306-11
294:442
permission in writing from the Director of Public Works. No person shall
carry or transport water or ice mixed with salt or containing salt on any
paved street in the city except in a watertight container which prevents
dripping on the pavement.
§ 306-12. Rubbish to be transported in covered containers.
No person shall carry or transport in any vehicle of any type any ashes,
wastepapers, cans, materials of liquid consistency or any rubbish in or upon
any streets, avenues or highways of the city unless covered with a properly
secured fireproof canvas or in covered containers.
§ 306-13. Use of sidewalks. [Amended 9-3-1986 by Ord. No. 86-6]
§ 306-14. Limited use of street right-of-way for parking purposes.
[Added 9-3-1986 by Ord. No. 86-6; amended 2-4-1987 by Ord. No.
87-3; 10-21-1987 by Ord. No. 87-33; 4-6-1988 by Ord. No. 88-3;
10-18-2000 by Ord. No. 7-2000]
A. No person shall drive any vehicle or lead, ride or drive any animal,
except a leashed dog, along or upon any sidewalk intended for the use
of pedestrians, nor drive any vehicle or lead, drive or ride any animal,
except a leashed dog, along or upon any sidepath constructed and
intended for the use of bicycles within the city, except that baby
carriages, invalids' chairs and children's toys may be propelled on
sidewalks and except as permitted by Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1225-a.
[Amended 2-4-1987 by Ord. No. 87-3, eff. 7-1-1987]
B. No person shall park any vehicle so it protrudes over any sidewalk.
C. Display and sale of retail goods shall be permitted on any sidewalk
within the Business Improvement District between the dates of April 1
and October 31. Said activities shall allow a minimum of six feet for
unencumbered pedestrian use. Prior to utilizing said sidewalk for the
above permitted purpose, approval must be obtained from the Director
of Public Works after submission of a plan to scale showing design and
layout of outdoor activities to be used and the months, days and hours
of planned operation. Items of personal property placed on the sidewalk
shall not be permanently attached. [Added 11-18-1997 by Ord. No.
97-11; amended 5-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2-2004]
A. Legislative intent. It is the purpose of this section to alleviate the
limited number of parking spaces available in the City of Geneva, to
maintain the aesthetic appearance of neighborhood residential areas
and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Parking between curb and sidewalk or in the front yard area.
(1) Permit required.
(a) No person shall make, maintain or use any space for parking
between the sidewalk and the curb or curbline or in the front
§ 306-11 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-14
294:443
yard area of any property in any residential district in the City
of Geneva that is zoned AR, R1, R2 or MR as established in
Chapter 350, Zoning, of this Municipal Code, unless a permit
is obtained and is in effect.
(b) The Director of Public Works will grant permits for the
following reasons only:
[1] The property owner established a need for the parking
space through hardship such as age or physical handicap.
[2] The property owner established a need for the parking
space because of the unavailability of alternate or offstreet
parking.
(c) Parking in circular driveways through the front yard area is
permitted unless the Director of Public Works or his designee
determines the aesthetics of the residential area is
compromised by such action.
C. Parking in B-1 District. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
Municipal Code, where there is no adequate room for off-street parking
in the B-1 District as established in Chapter 350, Zoning, of this
Municipal Code, a permit may be granted subject to all other provisions
of this section for the installation of parking areas for vehicles between
the sidewalk and the curb or curbline in front of the premises in such
number as may be appropriate, provided that there is a minimum of 18
feet between the sidewalk and the curb or curbline and further
provided that the character of the neighborhood will not be adversely
affected thereby.
D. Application for permit. Any person desiring to provide for a parking
space as provided in Subsection B or C above of this section shall apply
to the Director of Public Works for a permit and shall provide the
following information:
(1) The applicant is the owner of the premises immediately adjacent to
the proposed parking space.
(2) That there is no driveway, separate or joint, that may be legally or
practically used for the parking of vehicles for two or more vehicles
for the subject premises.
(3) That there is a minimum space of 18 feet between the curb and
sidewalk.
(4) A sketch plan of the proposed parking space.
(5) That the applicant will comply with all applicable laws and
ordinances of the City of Geneva and made and maintain all
necessary improvements as set forth in this article and as may be
reasonably required.
§ 306-14 GENEVA CODE § 306-14
294:444
E. Procedure for issuance of permit.
(1) Upon filing an application for a permit, the applicant shall pay a
nonrefundable fee of $25.
(2) The Director of Public Works shall review the application and the
proposed location of the parking space.
(3) The Director of Public Works shall inspect the proposed parking
space and consider its relationship to adjacent properties, the
neighborhood, the topography, the location of and effect upon
existing facilities such as utility poles, trees, fire hydrants and
underground utilities and the sight clearance for any intersecting
streets in the area.
(4) The Director of Public Works may require any changes that may in
his or her opinion be necessary to conform to the purposes of this
section.
(5) If in the opinion of the Director of Public Works the proposed use
meets all the requirements of this section, he or she may grant a
permit; otherwise he or she shall deny such application.
F. Restrictions on permits and use.
(1) The use of the residential (AR, R1, R2 or MR) parking areas shall be
restricted for use in conjunction with residential purposes only. The
use of such parking area for business, commercial or industrial
purposes is prohibited.
(2) The minimum length of the parking area shall be 18 feet.
(3) The minimum width shall be 10 feet and the maximum width shall
be 12 feet for one vehicle and a maximum for two vehicles shall be
22 feet.
(4) All vehicles shall be parked perpendicular to the street right-ofway.
(5) No more than two parking spaces shall be permitted under this
section for any parcel as set forth on the Tax Maps of the City of
Geneva.
(6) No more than one vehicle or motorcycle shall be parked in each
parking space at any one time.
(7) No vehicle shall be parked so that any portion of the vehicle
overhangs the curb or curbline or the sidewalk adjacent thereto.
(8) The parking of any boat, trailer or similar object in the parking
space is prohibited.
(9) Except as above provided, no vehicle, motorcycle, boat, trailer or
similar object shall be parked in any residential district, as above
§ 306-14 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-14
294:445
enumerated, between the sidewalk and curb or in this front yard
area in the City of Geneva.
G. Required improvements.
(1) Any parking space permitted under this section shall be
appropriately covered with a minimum of four inches of asphalt on
a six-inch stone subbase and maintained and kept in a good state of
repair at all times.
(2) No parking space shall be used until the required improvements
are made.
H. Compliance with other regulations. Nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to waive any other requirements of this Municipal
Code, or any state laws, rules or regulations, and in particular the
securing of a permit from the Department of Public Works for
performing any work in the public streets.
I. Terms of permit; revocation.
(1) Any permit issued under this section shall be permanent.
(2) Since the use of a public street by the public is paramount to any
private use by any individual, any permit issued hereunder is
subject to revocation at any time with cause or in the best interest
of the public health, safety or welfare.
(3) Upon the termination of a permit under this section, the owner of
the property shall restore within a time period set by the Director
of Public Works, the parking area by removal of any improvements
and properly filling in same and seeding with grass. In case of
failure to restore the premises by the owner, the city may restore
the premises and shall charge the cost thereof to the property
owner; and in case of failure to pay same, the costs thereof, upon
certification by the Director of Public Works, shall be assessed,
levied, collected and enforced in the same manner and at the same
time as provided by law for the collection and enforcement of city
taxes.
J. Enforcement.
(1) The Director of Public Works, any parking attendant as well as any
police officer may issue a parking ticket for any violation of this
section and may authorize any vehicle parked in violation of this
section to be towed away.
(2) The Director of Public Works, any parking attendant as well as any
police officer shall also be empowered, in addition to the issuance
of a parking ticket, to issue an appearance ticket for any violation
of this section pursuant to Criminal Procedure Law § 150.20 and
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, and may authorize any vehicle
parked in violation of this section to be towed away.
§ 306-14 GENEVA CODE § 306-14
294:446
§ 306-15. Obstructing entrance to public places.
No person or assemblage of persons shall occupy any sidewalk, bridge or
entrance to any church or public hall within said city in such manner as to
obstruct the free passage of the public.
§ 306-16. Moving buildings.
No building or part thereof shall be moved upon or along any public street
or place within the city without permission in writing from the Director
of Public Works, which consent shall specify the course of removal and
may require an undertaking first to be given, signed by the applicant and
one responsible surety approved by said Director and the City Manager,
conditioned that the applicant will, in all respects, comply with the terms
and conditions of such permit and indemnify the city against any damage or
loss occasioned by reason of such removal.
§ 306-17. Encroachment of buildings in the streets.
The construction of any building, projection or addition to any structure or
building over, into or upon any of the streets or sidewalks within the said
city is hereby prohibited.
§ 306-18. Street numbers.
If the owner of any building within the city shall omit to cause said building
to be numbered or renumbered according to the engineer's map now on file
after 10 days notice from the Department of Public Works, the Department
of Public Works shall number or renumber such building at the owner's
expense which shall be a lien upon the property.
§ 306-19. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
K. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall
be punished by a fine of $25 for a first offense, $50 for a second offense
and $100 for each further violation. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate violation.
§ 306-14 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-19
294:447

ARTICLE II
Bonds
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 44, Arts. IV and VI, of the 1968 Code]
§ 306-20. Bonds required.
All applications to the Department of Public Works for permission or
consent to perform any of the following acts or works in or upon any public
street or place within the city shall be accompanied by a bond as hereinafter
provided:
§ 306-21. Contents and approval of bond.
§ 306-22. Right to revoke permit reserved.
All consents or permits for the making of any excavation, the construction
or maintenance of any areaway, the planting, trimming, cutting or removal
of any tree, the placing of any obstruction or the doing of any other act
shall be given subject to the right of the Director of Public Works to revoke
the same at any time prior to the expiration thereof, either absolutely or to
continue the same upon such terms and conditions as he deems advisable;
and all bonds given pursuant to the provisions of this article as a condition
precedent to the granting of any permit aforesaid shall contain a stipulation
to that effect.
A. Excavation for purpose of making sewer, water or gas pipe connections
therein.
B. Construct and maintain an areaway under the sidewalk or under any
public street or place.
C. Plant, trim, cut or remove any tree or part of any tree.
D. Use of a public street or place for any other purpose if the Director of
Public Works determines that such use might constitute a hazard to the
public.
A. The bond with sufficient sureties shall contain an indemnification
clause indemnifying the city against all loss, cost, damage or expense
sustained or recovered on account of any negligence, omission or act of
the applicant for a permit as provided in § 306-22 or any of his servants
or agents, arising or resulting, directly or indirectly, by reason of such
permit or consent, or of any excavation, construction, obstruction,
cutting, removal or act done, made or permitted under authority of any
such permit or consent.
B. Any bond given under this article is subject to approval by the
Superintendent of Public Works as to sufficiency and by the City
Attorney as to form and manner of execution.
§ 306-20 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-23
294:449
§ 306-23. Penal sum of bond.
In all cases where application is made to the Department of Public Works
for consent or permission to perform any of the acts or works specified in
this article, the penal sum of the bond shall not be less than $5,000.
§ 306-24. General bond.
§ 306-25. Insurance in lieu of bond.
§ 306-26. Agreements in lieu of bond.
The provisions of §§ 306-20, 306-21, 306-22 and 306-23 of this article shall
not apply to applications by owners or occupants for consents or permits
A. Licensed plumbers, contractors and all persons or firms or corporations
engaged within the city in the telephone business, gas and electric
business, compressed air cleaning business or any other business, the
nature of which would require or result in frequent applications for
permits to make obstructions or excavations in the streets and
highways of the city, shall not, however, be required to furnish a
separate bond for each permit, as a condition precedent to the granting
of the same; but in all such cases a general bond shall be given before
the granting of any permit indemnifying the city from any and all loss,
cost or damage as aforesaid, resulting or arising directly or indirectly at
any time from any act done or permitted in pursuance of any such
permit or consent thereafter granted, in the penal sum of not less than
$5,000, and in the manner and form, and to be approved as herein
before provided.
B. The Director of Public Works shall have the right to require a new bond
to be filed by any person, firm or corporation engaged in any or either of
the classes of business above specified, whenever from time to time it
shall deem a new bond necessary in order to protect the interests of the
city.
A. Any person or corporation required to give a bond under the provisions
of this article may in lieu thereof, file written evidence that there is in
force and effect a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the State of New York,
indemnifying the city against the same loss or damage which would be
required to be covered by a bond if a bond had been given. The
certificate of insurance shall also contain a clause that the insurance
policy shall not be canceled except that at least 10 days' notice in
writing shall be given to the Director of Public Works.
B. Such insurance policy and evidence thereof shall be in such form as
shall meet the approval of the Director of Public Works and the City
Attorney. No such insurance policy in which the liability of the
insurance company thereunder is limited to an amount less than $5,000
shall be accepted.
§ 306-23 GENEVA CODE § 306-26
294:450
for the placing of gravel for construction, repair or improvement purposes,
or for the placing of ashes, refuse or other article in the streets temporarily
and for such time, not exceeding one week, as shall be designated in such
permit and along the sides of the driveways in such place or places in front
of the premises occupied by the owner or applicant as shall be designated in
the permit and so as not to obstruct the passage of pedestrians or vehicles,
nor to the planting, trimming, cutting or removal of trees, if the Director of
Public Works shall so determine; provided, however, that the applicant shall
in all such cases accompany such application with an agreement in writing
executed by him, with or without a surety or sureties, as the Director of
Public Works may in his discretion require, indemnifying the city against
any loss, cost or damage by reason of the granting of any such permit or the
placing by the applicant of any such gravel, ashes or refuse aforesaid or the
doing by him of any act in pursuance of such permit.
§ 306-27. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
§ 306-26 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-27
294:451

ARTICLE III
Use of Streets
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 65, §§ 65.5, 65.10 and 65.100A, of the
1968 Code]
§ 306-28. Interference.
No person shall throw any snowball, stone or other missile in, upon or
across any street or raise or fly a kite or balloon or play any game with a
ball or any other item or object where the same is kicked, tossed, thrown or
struck, or play or engage in any other game, amusement or exercise in or
upon any street which interferes with the free, safe and convenient use of
such street or sidewalk by any person or vehicle passing in or along same.
§ 306-29. Skating and sliding.
No person shall skate over any sidewalk within the city in such a manner
as to hinder or endanger pedestrians. No person shall skate in any public
street in the city except upon the sidewalk.
§ 306-30. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 306-28 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-30
294:453

ARTICLE IV
Safeguards During Construction
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 65, Art. VI and § 65.100A, of the 1968
Code]
§ 306-31. Safeguards.
§ 306-32. Use of sidewalks.
No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course of building operations without
a special permit from the Director of Public Works.
§ 306-33. Use of streets.
The use of streets for the storage of materials in the process of construction
or alteration of a building is prohibited except that the Director of Public
Works may grant a special permit when the same will not unduly interfere
with traffic and a bond with sufficient sureties approved by the Director
of Public Works and the City Attorney is furnished to indemnify the city
for any loss or damage which may be incurred by reason of such use and
occupation.
§ 306-34. Night operations.
No construction or alteration operations shall be carried on at the nighttime
if the same are accompanied by loud or annoying noises.
§ 306-35. Minimum standards for temporary roofs over sidewalks.
Whenever temporary roofs over sidewalks are necessary for the protection
of pedestrians, the following minimum standards shall apply:
A. It shall be the duty of a person doing any construction, alteration or
wrecking to do the same with proper care for the safety of persons and
property.
B. Warning barricades and lights shall be maintained whenever necessary
for the protection of pedestrians or traffic; and temporary roofs over
sidewalks shall be constructed whenever there is danger from falling
articles or materials to pedestrians.
A. The roof shall be of sufficient strength and stability to sustain safely the
weight of materials, equipment and personnel that may be placed
thereon but not less than 300 pounds per square foot of surface, and to
withstand the shocks incident to the handling of such materials and
equipment or their preparation for use and accidental jars from trucks
passing or delivering materials.
B. When the roof is used for storage of material or for the performance of
work of any kind, substantial railings not less than three feet high and
§ 306-31 SMOKE ABATEMENT § 306-35
294:455
§ 306-36. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 81-27, eff.
9-2-1981]
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
solid toe boards not less than six inches high shall be placed along the
open sides and ends of the roof.
C. Such roof and supporting members shall be constructed to afford
unobstructed walkway for pedestrians, not less than eight feet high and
five feet wide.
D. Such roof shall remain in place until the building is enclosed, or, in case
of a demolition, until the building has been reduced to 10 feet in height.
If such is impracticable for any reason, waiver shall be requested and
obtained from the Director of Public Works subject to such conditions
as he shall establish.
§ 306-35 GENEVA CODE § 306-36
294:456
Chapter 310
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 147.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 177.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 310-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable regulations for the
orderly development of subdivisions in the City so as to promote the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and its inhabitants.
§ 310-2. Definitions.
In interpreting this chapter, certain terms or words herein shall be defined
as follows:
MASTER PLAN — The comprehensive plan prepared under or by direction
of the Planning Board indicating the general locations recommended for
the major thoroughfares, streets, parks, public buildings and other public
improvements.
OFFICIAL MAP OF THE CITY OF GENEVA — The map established by
the City Council under § 29 of the General City Law showing the streets,
highways and parks theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law
and amendments thereto adopted by the City Council or additions thereto
resulting from approval of subdivision plats by the Planning Board and the
subsequent filing of such approval plans.
PLAT — The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of
subdivision is presented to the Planning Board for approval, and which, if
approved, will be submitted to the County Clerk for recording.
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT — The preliminary drawing indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board
for its consideration.
STREET, MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — A street used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic designated as a main highway or arterial street, or other
equivalent term, identifying it as part of the basic pattern or street plan.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A minor street which is parallel to and
adjacent to a main highway or arterial street; and which provides access to
abutting property and protection from through traffic.
STREET, MINOR — A street designed primarily to serve the local needs of a
neighborhood.
§ 306-36 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 310-2
310:457
STREET, SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE — A street which carries traffic
from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and main
highways, including a principal entrance street of a residential development
and a street which serves as the principal trafficway between separated
areas or districts.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or his authorized agent.
SUBDIVISION[Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 10-95] — The division
of any parcel of land into two or more lots, plots, sites, or other division
of land, for immediate or future sales, and/or for building development,
whether or not new streets are created.
§ 310-3. Procedure.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made and before any
contract for the sale of, or any offer to sell such subdivision, or any part
thereof is made, and before any permit for the erection of a structure shall
be granted, the subdivider shall apply in writing to the Planning Board
for preliminary and final approval and acceptance of such subdivision. The
application of the subdivider to the Planning Board shall conform to the
procedure and specifications as hereinafter set forth.
§ 310-4. Compliance with General City Law.
The preliminary layout, street profiles and formal subdivision plat and all
procedure relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance with
the provisions of the General City Law and in particular §§ 32 and 33
thereof.
§ 310-5. Submission of preapplication plan.
Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary layout
for the subdivision of land into five or more lots, the subdivider shall
submit to the Planning Board a preapplication plan and data showing
his ideas and intentions in the platting of the proposed subdivision. No
preapplication sketch is required for a subdivision containing less than five
lots. However, subdivisions of less than five lots shall conform to all other
regulations of this chapter excepting as hereafter modified within 15 days of
the submission of the preapplication plan, the subdivider shall be informed
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision other than a minor
subdivision.
A.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision that does not involve the
creation of more than two lots from any one parcel. In addition, such
a minor subdivision shall not involve the creation of any new public
streets; the extension of any public street, water or sewer line; or the
installation of any drainage improvements through one or more lots to
serve one or more other lots. A resubdivision, which is to say the minor
alteration of lot lines where no new lots are created, shall be considered
a minor subdivision.
B.
§ 310-2 GENEVA CODE § 310-5
310:458
by the Planning Board whether such plans and the data submitted meet
the objectives of these regulations. If the Planning Board finds the plans
and data do not meet the objectives of these regulations, it shall express
its reasons therefor. The tentative approval of the preapplication sketch by
the Planning Board shall not constitute as acceptance of the plan of the
subdivision.
§ 310-6. Application in writing; meeting; written report.
§ 310-7. Submission of original drawings of final plat.
The subdivider, after official notification by the Planning Board with respect
to the preliminary layout and the changes, if any, to be made therein, shall
within six months thereafter file with the Planning Board for acceptance and
approval original drawings of the final plat for record of either the whole or
a portion of the subdivision in conformance with the provisions hereinafter
set forth.
A. After reaching preliminary approval regarding the proposed
subdivisions as provided in § 310-5, the subdivider shall prepare and
submit an application in writing to the Planning Board for the approval
of plan, plats or description, showing the layout of highways or streets
on private property or of building lots in connection with or in relation
to such highways or streets or to existing streets. Such application shall
be accompanied by three copies of a preliminary layout in conformance
with the provisions of § 310-5 of these regulations and which shall first
be approved by such Planning Board before submission of a final plat.
Such preliminary layout shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to
the inch and such submission shall be filed at least 10 days prior to a
meeting of the Planning Board at which consideration is requested.
B. After arriving at tentative conclusions, the Planning Board shall discuss
the preliminary layout with the subdivider or his agents at a regular
meeting of the Planning Board.
C. After such discussion the Planning Board shall communicate in writing
within 30 days to the developer:
(1) The specific changes which it will require in the preliminary layout.
(2) The character and extent of the required public improvements for
which waivers may have been requested and which in its opinion
may be waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare.
(3) The amount of construction or improvement or the amount of the
performance bond therefor which it will require as a prerequisite to
the approval of the formal subdivision plat to be submitted
subsequently.
§ 310-5 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 310-8
310:459
§ 310-8. Design standards.
The subdivider shall observe the following general requirements and
principles of land subdivisions:
A. In general, the proposed subdivision shall conform to the Official Map
of the City of Geneva, New York, Chapter 350 entitled "Zoning" of the
Municipal Code and the Master Plan.
B. The arrangements of streets in a new subdivision shall in general
provide for the continuation of the principal existing or planned streets
in adjoining property or for their proper projection when adjoining
property is not subdivided.
C. Street right-of-way widths shall be not less than as follows:
Street Type
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Pavement Widths
(feet)
Major thoroughfare 100 60
Secondary
thoroughfare
66 40
Minor street 50 30
Marginal access
street
50 30
D. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following with
due allowance for vertical curves:
Street Type Percent Grade
Major thoroughfare 3%
Secondary thoroughfare 5%
Minor street 7%
Marginal access street 7%
No street grade shall be less than 1.0%.
E. Classification of streets into major and secondary thoroughfares and
minor streets shall be as determined by the Planning Board.
F. In general, street lines within a block deflecting from each other at any
one point more than 10° shall be connected with a curve, the radius of
which for the inner street lines shall be not less than 500 feet on major
thoroughfares, 250 feet on secondary thoroughfares and 100 feet on
minor streets.
G. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the Planning Board may require marginal access streets reverse
frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation
§ 310-8 GENEVA CODE § 310-8
310:460
along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such
other treatments as may be necessary for adequate protection of traffic.
H. All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a
minimum length equivalent to 15 times the algebraic difference in the
rate of grade for major thoroughfares, secondary thoroughfares, and 1/
2 of this minimum for all minor streets and marginal access streets. In
no case shall vertical curves be less than 50 feet in length.
I. Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets shall not in general exceed 450 feet in
length, and shall be terminated with a turnaround roadway with a
minimum radius of 40 feet for the outside curb at the closed end.
J. Block lengths generally shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length.
K. Each normal block shall be planned to provide two rows of lots, but
irregularly shaped blocks indented by cul-de-sac streets and containing
interior parks will be acceptable when properly designed and covered
by agreements as to maintenance of interior parks.
L. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as
may be considered most suitable for their prospective use, including
adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries.
M. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of
10 feet, or of a greater radius where the Planning Board may deem it
necessary. The Planning Board may permit comparable cutoffs or
chords in place of rounded corners.
N. Corner lots shall be increased in size whenever necessary so as to
provide that any structure to be placed thereon shall conform to the
building line of each street.
O. The Planning Board may require adequate, convenient and suitable
areas for parks and playgrounds, or other recreational purposes, to be
reserved on the plat, but in no case more than 10% of the gross area of
any subdivision. The area shall be shown and marked on the plat
"Reserved for Park or Playground Purposes." If the Planning Board
determines that a suitable park or parks of adequate size cannot be
properly located in any such plot or is otherwise not practical, the
Board may require as a condition to approval of any such plat a
payment to the City in the amount of 10% of the appraised market value
of the land to be subdivided. Such money shall be used by the City for
park and recreation purposes, including the acquisition of property.
P. No plat or subdivision shall be approved unless the land shown on such
plats shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes
without danger to health, life or property due to poor drainage, floods
or unsanitary conditions. Septic tanks, cesspools or other disposal
systems are prohibited unless the design and use thereof are approved
by the Health Officer and any other authority having jurisdiction.
§ 310-8 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 310-8
310:461
§ 310-9. Preapplication sketch.
The subdivider shall outline and describe the existing conditions of the site
and the proposed development as necessary to supplement the required
drawings which shall include:
§ 310-10. Preliminary layout.
Subdividers shall present to the Planning Board a preliminary layout. Three
copies shall be filed at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, one of
which shall be on tracing cloth, showing or accompanied by the following
information:
Q. Easements for the installation of utilities shall be provided where
necessary along the rear or side lot lines in residential subdivisions and
shall be at least 20 feet wide.
R. Variations of the general requirements above outlined may be
permitted by the Planning Board on application when in their judgment
special factors warrant such a variation and are also approved by the
Director of Public Works.
A. The location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision
to existing community facilities which serve or influence it;
development name and location; major thoroughfares; public
transportation lines; shopping centers; elementary and high schools,
parks and playgrounds and other community features such as churches.
B. The sketch plan on topography survey shall show in simple sketch form
the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to
existing utilities and other conditions. The sketch plan may be a
freehand pencil sketch and shall contain such additional data as the
Planning Board determines is necessary for its consideration of the
proposed subdivision. It shall show the name of the subdivision, scale,
north point and date.
A. The title, which shall be the same as that under which the proposed
subdivision is to be recorded, with the names of the owner and the
designer of the preliminary layout.
B. The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and/or the names of
owners of record of adjacent acreage.
C. Location of property lines, existing easements, buildings, watercourses
and other existing features.
D. Location, names and present widths of existing and officially proposed
streets, highways, pavements and sidewalks, easements, building lines,
alleys, parks and other public open spaces within the area to be
subdivided and within the property immediately adjacent or opposite
thereto.
§ 310-8 GENEVA CODE § 310-10
310:462
E. The location, size and grade of any existing sewers and water mains,
culverts and drains on the property to be subdivided and on the
property immediately adjacent or opposite thereto.
F. A contour map showing contour intervals of not more than two feet
based on a field survey certified as to accuracy by an engineer or a
licensed land surveyor.
G. Map of survey of tract boundary made and certified by a licensed land
surveyor. The location and coordinates of all monuments, each
coordinate to be referenced to the nearest approved control point as
directed by the Director of Public Works. In the absence of such a
control point 1,000 feet from the proposed subdivision, method of
referencing to be as designated by the Director of Public Works.
H. The proposed street layout, location of water mains, sanitary sewers
and storm drains and the size and types thereof, the character, width
and depth of pavement and sub-base, the location of manholes and
basins and underground conduits, the location and type of sidewalks,
curbs, gutters, streetlighting standards and species of street trees
permitted by City ordinance.
I. The locations, names and widths of all proposed streets, pavements,
sidewalks, easements, building lines, alleys, parks and other open
spaces.
J. The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions.
K. Proposed street grades and street profiles.
L. Proposed water supply system.
M. Proposed sanitary sewer system.
N. Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage.
O. Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be required.
P. The use district or districts in which the land to be subdivided is located
according to Chapter 350 entitled "Zoning" of the Municipal Code.
Q. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to the public use and the
conditions of such dedication.
R. Date, north point and scale.
S. Additional following information on profiles and grades drawn at a scale
one inch equals four feet vertical and one inch equals 40 feet horizontal
may be required by the Planning Board with the preliminary
submission: Street center line and both property line elevations or
profiles, the proposed curb grades, and the points of intersection (PI),
points of curvature (PC) and points of tangency (PT), and the break of
grade stationing and elevations for the designated pavement width; the
proposed sewer drain and water main grades and elevations; the
§ 310-10 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 310-10
310:463
§ 310-11. Minor subdivisions. [Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No.
10-95]
§ 310-12. Statement to be filed with preliminary layout.
The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board with the preliminary
layout a statement signed by him specifying:
stationing, elevation and other relative information of all existing
monuments, drains, sewers, culverts, hydrants and manholes (both rim
and invert). The stationing shall show accurate, center line distances.
The elevations of the present ground surfaces shall be to the nearest 1/
10 of a foot while all fixed points shall be shown to the nearest 1/100
of a foot in elevation. City datum to be used. The tracings of the profile
drawings noted above may be executed in pencil and two black and
white copies shall be submitted for criticism, suggestions or approval
before the final plans are made.
A. The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove minor subdivisions in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. If and only if a minor subdivision is proposed which does not involve any
new construction or development, the application needs to include the
following information: existing topography of the site and adjacent
properties, as revealed by contours or key elevations; proposed final
grades; existing and proposed stormwater drainage facilities,
sidewalks, curbs and curb cuts; existing and proposed landscaping and
fences; existing and proposed outdoor lighting, signs, telephone and
electric utility poles; type, size and locations of all dumpsters, waste
compactors and other outdoor mechanical equipment, including
screening; and descriptions of building elevations and exterior building
materials. If any changes are proposed which would affect any of the
above information, said information shall be provided as part of the
application. The Planning Board may require a series of submittals
conforming to those for major subdivisions, but may waive data
requirements for good cause.
C. The construction of any improvements or the provision of guaranties for
such improvements shall be in accord with the procedures and
requirements specified herein for major subdivisions. In the case of
minor subdivisions abutting on streets where improvement conditions
are well defined, the Planning Board may exempt the subdivider from
complying with some of the requirements enumerated in §§ 310-8 and
310-13.
D. After Planning Board approval, a proposed change or revision either to
the site or to the exterior of any structure on it shall be resubmitted for
further review.
A. The nature and extent of the street improvements which he proposes to
install.
§ 310-10 GENEVA CODE § 310-12
310:464
§ 310-13. Required improvements.
All materials, design and workmanship must meet the specifications
established by the Director of Public Works. All pavement widths,
structures, manholes, pipe sizes, depths and grades must be approved by
the Director of Public Works. The following are considered to be basic
required improvements, subject to the determination of the Director of
Public Works, unless specifically waived by the Planning Board:
B. The nature and extent of any recreational facilities, parks or
playgrounds to be provided, if any, and whether or not and under what
conditions they are to be dedicated to the city.
C. That he is able and willing and will proceed forthwith to file the final
map or plat of his subdivision or such part thereof as he may wish to put
on the market in the Ontario County Clerk's office, and will install all
monuments in such sections shown on said final plat in such manner as
the Planning Board may designate.
A. Streets shall be graded from property line to property line to approved
grade and cross section.
B. Curbs shall be sixteen-inch granite or concrete.
C. Sidewalks, where required, shall be concrete at least four feet in width
and at least four inches in thickness laid on a compacted bed of
approval cinders or gravel, at least three inches in depth. Sidewalks not
to be placed until after street grade is established and in place.
D. Pavements shall be bituminous concrete surfacing on a macadam base,
or reinforced concrete.
E. Water mains shall be not less than six-inch cast iron except that larger
sized pipe may be specified by the Director of Public Works where
needed to provide an adequate distribution system. The top of the pipe
to be at 4 1/2 feet below top of pavement or other ground. Hydrants and
valves shall be the same as approved by the city.
F. Sewers shall be vitrified tile or cast iron pipe laid at such depth below
finished grade of pavement or other ground, as to provide adequate
sewerage facilities to every dwelling structure, including basement
thereof, in proposed subdivision. The minimum size shall be eight
inches and the grade shall meet minimum design requirements of the
Director of Public Works.
G. Storm drains must provide adequate pavement and land drainage.
Catch basin connections shall be not less than reinforced concrete pipe
masonry concrete brick or equal. No cross gutters shall be allowed.
Types of catch basins shall be determined by the Director of Public
Works.
§ 310-12 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 310-13
310:465
§ 310-14. Final plan.
After the approval of the preliminary layout, the subdivider shall submit a
final subdivision plat for final approval by the Planning Board. This plan
shall contain mapped data and descriptive information in conformance with
the following requirements:
H. Gas mains shall be laid at the depth and location approved by the utility
and Director of Public Works. Gas mains shall be laid in a separate
trench from any other underground conduit.
I. Streetlighting, including poles, brackets and lights, shall be of
approved type and size and located as directed by the utility lighting
engineer.
J. Street name signs shall be furnished and installed by the subdivider.
The number, type, size and location of signs to be as specified by the
Director of Public Works.
K. Street trees shall be of approved species and size and their location and
manner of planting approved by the Department of Public Works.
L. Insurance shall be furnished by the contractor and/or subdivider to the
City with property damage and public liability insurance in amounts to
be determined by the Department of Public Works.
M. Testing and inspection of construction materials shall be provided by
the subdivider as required by the Director of Public Works.
A. The final plat shall be drawn upon tracing cloth to a scale of not more
than 100 feet to an inch unless otherwise directed by the Planning
Board.
B. All final plans shall bear an identifying title and the name of the City of
Geneva and the County of Ontario in which the subdivision is located,
the name and address of record owner and subdivider, name, license
number and seal of the licensed professional engineer or land surveyor.
C. The final plans shall show the boundaries of the property, the lines of all
proposed streets and parks and also all lines of all adjoining streets with
their names and exact survey locations.
D. A north point shall be shown.
E. Maps to be not larger than 32 inches by 42 inches over all.
F. Three tracings on linen shall be filed with the Planning Board at the
time of the filing of the final plan.
G. The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent, or if not a
subdivision, the names of the property owners shall be given.
H. Length of all straight lines, deflection angles, radii, arcs and central
angles of all curves shall be given along the property line of each street.
§ 310-13 GENEVA CODE § 310-14
310:466
§ 310-15. Abstract of title and deed of dedication to accompany
final plan.
The final plans shall be accompanied by an abstract of title showing the
ownership of all property and easements to be dedicated to the city, and by
a deed of dedication conveying such property or easements to the City free
and clear of all encumbrances.
§ 310-16. Certificate of engineer or surveyor.
Before approving the final plan, the Planning Board shall request a
certificate from the engineer or surveyor that all the technical requirements
of the plan itself have been met and that the plat is in accordance with the
laws of the State of New York, these regulations and all other local law,
ordinances, rules and regulations of the City.
§ 310-17. Public hearing before approval of final plan.
Before approving the final plan, the Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing. The Planning Board will set the time and place for the public
hearing on the proposed subdivision.
§ 310-18. Certificate of completion of improvements or furnishing
of bond before final approval.
All dimensions along the lines of each lot with the angles of intersection
which they make with each other shall also be given. If more
convenient, bearings may be used instead of angles.
I. Lots and blocks within a subdivision shall be numbered and the lot
areas shall be shown.
J. All dimensions, angles, bearings, and so forth, given on the map shall be
referred to at least two permanent monuments in each block not less
than 300 feet apart, which shall be indicated on the map. All dimensions
shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot. The error of closure shall
not exceed one in 5,000.
K. The final plans shall provide space so that approval by the Planning
Board and the Director of Public Works may be endorsed thereon.
L. Monuments shall be set at all block corners and angle points of the
boundaries of the original tract to be subdivided; and at all street
intersections, angle points in street lines, points of curve and such
intermediate points as shall be required by the Director of Public
Works. The location of the monuments shall be indicated on the final
plan.
A. Before approving the final plan, the Planning Board shall obtain a
certificate from the Director of Public Works that all the improvement
requirements of § 310-13 have been met, or in lieu thereof an estimate
of the probable cost of such omitted improvements.
§ 310-14 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS § 310-18
310:467
§ 310-19. Designation of City Clerk to file certificate of
authorization of Planning Board to approve plats.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to file with the Ontario County Clerk a
certificate showing that the Planning Board has been authorized to approve
plats and shall specify therein that the Chairman of the Planning Board
shall issue on behalf of the City a certificate of failure to take action on the
approval of plats as provided in § 32 of the General City Law.
§ 310-20. Changes in zoning regulations. [Added by Ord. No. 77-6,
eff. 7-6-1977]
The Planning Board shall have the authority before approving the final
plan to confirm the plan with the zoning regulations of the City Municipal
Code or make any reasonable change therein with regard to the zoning
regulations and the final plan. The Planning Board shall consider such final
plan and zoning regulation in accordance with § 37 of the General City Law.
§ 310-21. Application fees. [Added 6-19-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
A fee of $150 shall be due and payable at the time the application for
approval of the subdivision is made. If the application is for approval of a
minor subdivision for no more than two lots, the fee shall be $50. In the
event that applications for approval of a subdivision and site plan review are
made at the same time, the greater of the two fees shall be charged, and
the lesser fee shall be waived.
Chapter 314
TANKS, UNDERGROUND
§ 314-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ABANDONED CONTAINER — Any container holding or containing or
capable of holding or containing any dangerous article which has been or is
unused for a period of 60 days.
COMPRESSED GAS — Any material or mixture having in the container
either an absolute pressure exceeding 40 pounds per square inch at 70°
F., or an absolute pressure exceeding 104 pounds per square inch at 130°
B. In case the improvements have not been completed, the subdivider
shall furnish a performance bond by a bonding or surety company
approved as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution by the City
Attorney and in an amount of not less than the estimate of the Director
of Public Works before final approval shall be given by the Planning
Board.
§ 310-18 GENEVA CODE § 314-1
314:468
F., or both, or any liquid flammable material having a Reid vapor pressure
exceeding 40 pounds per square inch absolute at 100° F.
CONTAINER — Any tank, cylinder, barrel or other object of every kind or
nature capable of holding or containing dangerous articles.
CORROSIVE LIQUIDS — Those acids, alkaline caustic liquids and other
corrosive liquids, which when in contact with living tissue, will cause severe
damage of such tissue by chemical action; or in case of leakage, will
materially damage or destroy other substance by chemical action; or are
liable to cause fire when in substance with organic matter or with certain
chemicals.
DANGEROUS ARTICLE — Any inflammable liquids, flammable solids,
oxidizing materials, corrosive liquids, compressed gases, poisonous
substances and radioactive materials as hereinafter defined.
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS — Any liquid which has a flash point of 200° F., or
less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device.
FLAMMABLE SOLIDS — Any solid substance which is liable to cause fires
through friction, through absorption of moisture, through spontaneous
chemical changes, or as a result of retained heat from the manufacturing or
processing.
OXIDIZING MATERIALS — Any substance such as a chlorate,
permanganate, peroxide or a nitrate that yields oxygen readily to stimulate
the combustion of organic matter.
POISONOUS SUBSTANCES — Liquids and gases of such nature that a
very small amount of the gas or vapor of the liquid mixed with air is
dangerous to life; or such liquid or solid substance as upon contact with fire
or when exposed to air gives off dangerous or intensely irritating fumes or
substances which are chiefly dangerous by external contact with the body
or by being taken internally.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS — Any material or combination of materials
that spontaneously emits ionizing radiation.
§ 314-2. Permission required for storage of dangerous article
underground.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or store beneath the
surface of the earth any dangerous article without the permission in writing
from the Fire Commission of the city and under such condition as said Fire
Commission may impose for the protection of the safety and health of the
residents of the city.
§ 314-3. Abandonment and removal of underground containers.
A. Methods. Underground containers taken out of service shall be
safeguarded or disposed of by either of the following means:
§ 314-1 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 314-3
314:469
§ 314-4. Containers rendered temporarily out of service.
With containers rendered temporarily out of service:
§ 314-5. Removed containers.
When underground containers are removed:
§ 314-6. Containers that are junked.
If a container is to be disposed of as junk, it shall be retested for flammable
vapors or other harmful substances, and, if necessary, rendered gas free
or otherwise safe. After junking and before releasing to a junk dealer, a
sufficient number of holes or openings shall be made in it to render it unfit
for further use.
(1) Placed in a "temporarily out of service" condition. Containers shall
be rendered temporarily out of service only if they are to be
returned to active service within 90 days at the location or pending
removal within 90 days.
(2) Removed.
B. Records. In cases where containers are either rendered temporarily out
of service or permanently abandoned, records shall be kept of container
size, location, date of abandonment and method used for placing the
abandoned container in a safe condition. With either of the methods
described in Subsection A herein, no cutting torch or other flame or
spark producing equipment shall be used until the container has been
completely purged or otherwise rendered safe. In each case, the steps
given shall be carried out successively.
A. The fill line, gage opening and pump suction shall be capped and
secured against tampering.
B. The vent line shall be left open (if not in conflict with proper safety
standards).
A. All flammable liquids, solids, oxidizing materials, corrosive liquids,
compressed gas, poisonous substances or radioactive materials stored
in the container and connecting lines shall be removed.
B. Wherever applicable:
(1) The suction, inlet, gage and vent lines shall be disconnected.
Sections of connecting lines which are not to be used shall be
removed. Inlets, outlets and leaks, if any, shall be capped or
plugged.
(2) After removal, the container shall be gas freed; on the premises if it
can be done safely at that location, or transported to an area not
accessible to the public and the tank gas freed at that location.
§ 314-3 GENEVA CODE § 314-7
314:470
§ 314-7. Containers that are reused.
Used containers which are to be reused for flammable or combustible liquid
service shall meet the provisions of Article 16 of the Fire Prevention Code
for the installation of underground tanks.
§ 314-8. Emergency provisions.
Abandoned containers of dangerous articles are deemed to be a nuisance
and a menace to the health and safety of the residents of the city. In cases
of emergencies, where the owner of said container or property owner shall
fail to remove said abandoned container, and said failure would result in
probable loss of life or property, the Fire Chief shall have the power to
proceed at once upon the property wherein any such container may be
found, and cause the same to be removed.
§ 314-9. Expense of removal; surcharge; collection.
§ 314-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
Chapter 318
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments — See Ch. 10.
A. The actual expense of making such removal, together with a service
charge of 50% thereon to cover costs of administration and supervision
by the city, shall be charged to the owner of said property.
B. If such owner shall fail to pay the same within 10 days thereafter, the
Fire Chief shall file a certificate of the actual expense incurred,
together with a service charge to cover costs of administration and
supervision by the city with the City Comptroller who shall cause the
same to be collected and enforced in the same manner, by the same
proceedings, at the same time, under the same penalties, and having
the same lien upon the property assessed as the general city tax.
§ 314-7 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 314-10
314:471

ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 6-28-1940 by L.L. No. 4-1940; amended by L.L. No.
2-1949]
§ 318-1. Imposition. [Last amended by L.L. No. 1-1950]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 20-b of the General City Law of the
State of New York, an annual tax equal to 1% of its gross income for the
period from July 1, 1950, to June 30, 1951, and to continue thereafter for a
similar period each year until otherwise changed by law, is hereby imposed
upon every utility doing business in the City of Geneva which is subject to
the supervision of the State Department of Public Service which has a gross
income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500, except motor
carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Article 3-b of the
Public Service Law,44 and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income is
hereby imposed for the same period upon every other utility doing business
in the City of Geneva which has a gross income for the 12 months ending
May 31 in excess of $500, which taxes shall have application only within the
territorial limits of the City of Geneva, and shall be in addition to any and
all other taxes and fees imposed by any other provision of the law for the
same period. Such taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating
or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the City of Geneva,
notwithstanding that some acts be necessarily performed with respect to
such transactions within such limits.
§ 318-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in
gross income), made or service rendered to any person or persons for
ultimate consumption or use by them or the purchaser in the City of Geneva,
including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature (whether or
not such sale is made or such service is rendered for profit) without any
deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of
the materials used, labor or services or other cost, interest or discount paid
or any other expense whatsoever; also profits from the sale of securities;
also profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership or
use of or interest in such property; also profit from the sale of personal
property (other than property of a kind which would properly be included in
the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which
a return is made); also receipts from interests, dividends and royalties,
derived from sources within the City of Geneva, other than such as are
44.Editor's Note: Article 3-b of the Public Service Law was repealed by L.1970, c. 267, § 5; see
now Transportation Law § 240 et seq.
§ 318-1 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-2
314:473
received from a corporation a majority of whose voting stock is owned by
the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any expenses
whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof, and also profits
from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within the City of
Geneva whatsoever.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Receipts received in or by reason of any
sale, conditional or otherwise, made to any person or persons for ultimate
consumption or used by them or the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, or in or by reason of the
furnishing to such person or persons for such consumption or use of gas,
electric, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraph service in the
City of Geneva, including cash credits and property of any kind or nature,
without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property
sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interests or
discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of either
division of the State Department of Public Service, except persons engaged
in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars
or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway
and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not such
person is subject to such supervision) who shall engage in the business of
selling gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy,
delivered through mains, pipes or wires, or of furnishing gas, electric,
steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service, by means of
mains, pipes or wires.
§ 318-3. Utilities subject to tax required to keep records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the City Comptroller may require, and such
records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the City
Comptroller may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 318-4. Dates for filing returns. [Last amended by L.L. No. 1-1950]
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before September
25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for the three calendar
months preceding each such return date, including any period for which
the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective, each of
which returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income for
the period covered by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the City
§ 318-2 GENEVA CODE § 318-4
314:474
Comptroller on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall
contain such other data, information or matter as the City Comptroller shall
require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this section, any utility whose average gross income or average gross
operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid three months'
period is less than $1,500 may file its return for such periods on June 25
of each year. The City Comptroller may require at any time a further or
supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified by
the City Comptroller. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit
of the head of the utility making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner
thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation if such business be
conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements contained
therein are true.
§ 318-5. Tax payable at time of filing return.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the City Comptroller the tax imposed by this article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 318-6. Procedures when insufficient return is filed.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the City Comptroller and if a corrected or sufficient return
is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from the City
Comptroller, or if no return is made for any period, the City Comptroller
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is
able to obtain, and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. The City Comptroller shall give notice of
such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom
it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to the City Comptroller for a hearing or unless the City
Comptroller of his own motion shall reduce the same. After such hearing,
the City Comptroller shall give notice of his decision to the person liable for
the tax. The decision of the City Comptroller may be reviewed by certiorari,
if application therefor is made within 30 days after giving of notice of such
decision. An order of certiorari shall not be granted unless the amount of
any tax sought to be reviewed, with penalties thereon, if any, shall be first
deposited with the City Comptroller and an undertaking filed with him, in
such amount and with such sureties as a justice of the Supreme Court shall
approve, to the effect that if such order be dismissed or the tax confirmed,
the applicant for the order will pay all costs and charges which may accrue
in the prosecution of the certiorari proceeding, or at the option of the
applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax
penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall
not be required to pay such tax and penalties as a condition precedent to
the granting of such order.
§ 318-4 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-7
314:475
§ 318-7. Mailing of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice, shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 318-8. Penalty for failing to file return; exceptions.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax
or any portion thereof within the time required by this article shall be
subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax
for each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after
such return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the City
Comptroller, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any
portion of such penalty.
§ 318-9. Refunds.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the City Comptroller or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the City Comptroller shall refund
the amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a
refund may be so made on the initiative of the City Comptroller. However, no
refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of
the City Comptroller as hereinbefore provided unless the City Comptroller
after a hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his own motion, shall have
reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a certiorari
proceeding that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds
shall be made out of moneys collected under this article. Any application for
a refund made as hereinbefore provided shall be deemed an application for
the revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the City Comptroller
may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his
determination, the City Comptroller shall give notice thereof to the person
interested, and shall be entitled to a certiorari order to review such
determination, subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained relating to
the granting of such an order.
§ 318-10. Tax to constitute part of operating cost.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 318-7 GENEVA CODE § 318-11
314:476
§ 318-11. Failure to pay tax or penalty.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the City Attorney shall, upon the request of the City Comptroller,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the City Comptroller.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 318-12. Power of Comptroller to enforce rules and regulations.
In the administration of this article, the City Comptroller shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law,
as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 318-13. Confidentiality; penalty for violation.
A. Except in accordance with the proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the City Comptroller or any
agent, clerk or employee of the City of Geneva to divulge or make
known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating
income, or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this
article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
required to produce any of them, or evidence of anything contained in
them, in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the
City of Geneva in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this
article, or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New
York, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events
the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so
much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to
the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized
representative, of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of
delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay
their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this article,
together with any relevant information which in the opinion of the City
Comptroller may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or the
inspection by the City Attorney, or other legal representatives, of the
City of Geneva of the return of any person who shall bring action to set
§ 318-11 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-13
314:477
§ 318-14. Disposition of moneys. [Last amended by L.L. No. 2-1949]
All taxes and penalties received by the City Comptroller for taxes heretofore
or hereinafter imposed under this article shall be credited to and deposited
by him in the general city fund.
aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action has
been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this action.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the City of Geneva, he shall be dismissed from
office and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in the
City of Geneva for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the City Comptroller may
exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any other city in the State of
New York information contained in returns filed under this article,
provided that such other city grants similar privileges to the City of
Geneva and provided that such information is to be used for tax
purposes only and the City Comptroller shall, upon request, furnish the
State Tax Commission with any information contained in such returns.
§ 318-13 GENEVA CODE § 318-14
314:478
ARTICLE II
Sales and Use Tax
[Adopted by resolution eff. 9-1-1967]
§ 318-15. Definitions.
A. When used in this article, the term "person" includes an individual,
partnership, society, association, joint-stock company, corporation,
estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee and any other person acting
in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court
or otherwise, and any combination of the foregoing.
B. When used in this article for the purposes of the taxes imposed by
Subsections A, B, C and D of § 318-16 and by § 318-18, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
PURCHASE AT RETAIL — A purchase by any person for any purpose
other than those set forth in Subsection (1) of the definition of "retail
sale," below.
PURCHASER — A person who purchases property or to whom are
rendered services, the receipts from which are taxable under this
article.
RECEIPT — The amount of the sale price of any property and the
charge for any service taxable under this article, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including any amount for
which credit is allowed by the vendor to the purchaser, without any
deduction for expenses or early payment discounts, but excluding any
credit for tangible personal property accepted in part payment and
intended for resale and excluding the cost of transportation of tangible
personal property sold at retail where such cost is separately stated in
the written contract, if any, and on the bill rendered to the purchaser.
For special rules governing computation of receipts, see § 318-19.
RETAIL SALE —
A sale of tangible personal property to any person for any purpose,
other than for resale as such or as a physical component part of
tangible personal property, or for use by that person in performing
the services subject to tax under Subsection C(1), (2), (3) and (5) of
§ 318-16 where the property so sold becomes a physical component
part of the property upon which the services are performed or
where the property so sold is later actually transferred to the
purchaser of the service in conjunction with the performance of the
service subject to tax. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions
of this subsection, a sale of any tangible personal property to a
contractor, subcontractor or repairman for use or consumption
in erecting structures or buildings, or building on, or otherwise
adding to, altering, improving, maintaining, servicing or repairing
real property, property or land, as the terms "real property,"
"property" or "land" are defined in the Real Property Tax Law,
(1)
§ 318-15 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-15
314:479
SALE, SELLING OR PURCHASE — Any transfer of title or possession,
or both, exchange or barter, rental, lease or license to use or consume,
conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever
for a consideration, or any agreement therefor, including the rendering
of any service, taxable under this article for a consideration or any
agreement therefor.
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY — Corporeal personal property of
any nature. However, except for purposes of the tax imposed by
§ 318-16B, such term shall not include gas, electricity, refrigeration and
steam.
USE — The exercise of any right or power over tangible personal
property by the purchaser thereof and includes, but is not limited to,
the receiving, storage or any keeping or retention for any length of
time, withdrawal from storage, any installation, any affixation to real or
personal property, or any consumption of such property.
VENDOR —
is deemed to be a retail sale regardless of whether the tangible
personal property is to be resold as such before it is so used or
consumed. [Amended 7-7-1971]
The term "retail sale" does not include:
The transfer of tangible personal property to a corporation,
solely in consideration for the issuance of its stock, pursuant to
a merger or consolidation effected under the law of New York
or any other jurisdiction.
(a)
The distribution of property by a corporation to its
stockholders as a liquidating dividend.
(b)
The distribution of property by a partnership to its partners in
whole or partial liquidation.
(c)
The transfer of property to a corporation upon its organization
in consideration for the issuance of its stock.
(d)
The contribution of property to a partnership in consideration
for a partnership interest therein.
(e)
(2)
The term "vendor" includes:
A person making sales of tangible personal property or
services, the receipts from which are taxed by this article;
(a)
A person maintaining a place of business in the State and
making sales, whether at such place of business or elsewhere,
to persons within the City of tangible personal property or
services, the use of which is taxed by this article.
(b)
A person who solicits business either by employees,
independent contractors, agents or other representatives or
(c)
(1)
§ 318-15 GENEVA CODE § 318-15
314:480
by distribution of catalogs or other advertising matter and
by reason thereof makes sales to persons within the City of
tangible personal property or services, the use of which is
taxed by this article;
Any other person making sales to persons within the City
of tangible personal property or services, the use of which
is taxed by this article, who may be authorized by the Tax
Commission to collect such tax; and
(d)
The State of New York, any of its agencies, instrumentalities,
public corporations (including a public corporation created
pursuant to agreements or compact with another state or
Canada) or political subdivisions when such entity sells
services or property of a kind ordinarily sold by private
persons.
(e)
Any salesman, representative, peddler or canvasser who is treated
by the Tax Commission as a vendor, pursuant to the provisions of
§ 1101, Subdivision (b)(8)(ii), of the Tax Law.
(2)
C. When used in this article for the purposes of the tax imposed under
§ 318-16E, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
HOTEL — A building or portion of it which is regularly used and kept
open as such for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an
apartment hotel, a motel, boardinghouse or club, whether or not meals
are served.
OCCUPANCY — The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any room in a hotel.
OCCUPANT — A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or
has the right to use or possess, any room in a hotel under any lease,
concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement,
or otherwise.
OPERATOR — Any person operating a hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — Any occupant of any room or rooms in a
hotel for at least 90 consecutive days shall be considered a permanent
resident with regard to the period of such occupancy.
RENT — The consideration received for occupancy valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise.
ROOM — Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a
hotel, which is available for or let out for any purpose other than a place
of assembly.
D. When used in this article for purposes of the tax imposed under
§ 318-16F, the following terms shall mean:
ACTIVE ANNUAL MEMBER — A member who is not a life member
but who enjoys full club privileges as distinguished from the privileges
§ 318-15 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-15
314:481
enjoyed by a person holding a nonresident membership, an associate
membership or other partial or restricted membership.
ADMISSION CHARGE — The amount paid for admission, including any
service charge and any charge for entertainment or amusement or for
the use of facilities therefor.
AMUSEMENT CHARGE — Any admission charge, dues or charge of
roof garden, cabaret or other similar place.
CHARGE OF A ROOF GARDEN, CABARET OR OTHER SIMILAR PLACE
— Any charge made for admission, refreshment, service or merchandise
at a roof garden, cabaret or other similar place.
DRAMATIC OR MUSICAL ARTS ADMISSION CHARGE — Any
admission charge paid for admission to a theater, opera house, concert
hall or other hall or place of assembly for a live dramatic, choreographic
or musical performance.
DUES — Any dues or membership fee, including any assessment,
irrespective of the purpose for which made, and any charges for social
or sports privileges or facilities. Dues of a life member shall be an
annual equivalent to the amount paid as dues, within this definition, by
an active annual member, whether or not the life member paid for his
life membership prior to the imposition of the tax by this article.
INITIATION FEE — Any payment, contribution or loan required as
a condition precedent to membership, whether or not such payment,
contribution or loan is evidenced by a certificate of interest or
indebtedness or share of stock, and irrespective of the person or
organization to whom paid, contributed or loaned.
LESSOR — Any person who is the owner, licensee or lessee of any place
of amusement or roof garden, cabaret or other similar place which he
leases, subleases or grants a license to use to other persons who make
amusement charges or admission charges.
PATRON — Any person who pays an amusement charge or who is
otherwise required to pay the tax imposed under such § 318-16F.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place where any facilities for
entertainment, amusement or sports are provided.
RECIPIENT — Any person who collects or receives or is under a duty to
collect an amusement charge.
ROOF GARDEN, CABARET OR OTHER SIMILAR PLACE — Any roof
garden, cabaret or other similar place which furnishes a public
performance for profit.
SOCIAL OR ATHLETIC CLUB — Any club or organization of which a
material purpose or activity is social or athletic.
§ 318-15 GENEVA CODE § 318-16
314:482
§ 318-16. Imposition of sales tax.
On and after September 1, 1967, through and including February 29, 1968,
there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of 1% upon the
receipts, rents and charges hereinafter specified, and on and after March 1,
1968, there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of 1 1/2% upon
such receipts, rents and charges:
A. The receipts from every retail sale of tangible personal property, except
as otherwise provided in this article.
B. The receipts from every sale, other than sales for resale, of gas,
electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric, refrigeration and
steam service of whatever nature, and from every sale, other than sales
for resale, of telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph
service of whatever nature except interstate and international
telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph service.
C. The receipts from every sale, except for resale, of the following
services:
(1) The furnishing of information by printed, mimeographed or
nultigraphed matter or by duplicating written or printed matter in
any other manner, including the services of collecting, compiling or
analyzing information of any kind or nature and furnishing reports
thereof to other persons, but excluding the furnishing of
information which is personal or individual in nature and which is
not or may not be substantially incorporated in reports furnished to
other persons, and excluding the services of advertising or other
agents, or other persons acting in a representative capacity, and
information services used by newspapers, radio broadcasters and
television broadcasters in the collection and dissemination of news.
(2) Producing, fabricating, processing, printing or imprinting tangible
personal property, performed for a person who directly or
indirectly furnishes the tangible personal property, not purchased
by him for resale, upon which such services are performed.
(3) Installing tangible personal property, or maintaining, servicing,
repairing tangible personal property not held for sale in the regular
course of business, whether or not the services are performed
directly or by means of coin-operated equipment or by any other
means, and whether or not any tangible personal property is
transferred in conjunction therewith, except such services
rendered by an individual who is engaged directly by a private
home owner or lessee in or about his residence and who is not in a
regular trade or business offering his services to the public, and
except any receipts from laundering, dry cleaning, tailoring,
weaving, pressing, shoe repairing and shoe shining, and except for
installing property which, when installed, will constitute an
addition or capital improvement to real property, property or land,
as the terms "real property," "property" or "land" are defined in the
§ 318-16 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-16
314:483
Real Property Tax Law, and except such services rendered with
respect to commercial vessels primarily engaged in interstate or
foreign commerce and property used by or purchased for the use of
such vessels for fuel, provisions, supplies, maintenance and repairs
(other than with respect to articles purchased for the original
equipping of a new ship); provided, however, that nothing
contained in this subsection shall be construed to exclude from tax
under this subsection or under Subsection B of this section any
charge, made by a person furnishing service subject to tax under
Subsection B of this section, for installing property at the premises
of a purchaser of such a taxable service for use in connection with
such service.
(4) Storing all tangible personal property not held for sale in the
regular course of business and the rental of safe deposit boxes of
similar space.
(5) Maintaining, servicing or repairing real property, property or land,
as such terms are defined in the Real Property Tax Law, whether
the services are performed in or outside of a building, as
distinguished from adding to or improving such real property,
property or land, by a capital improvement, but excluding services
rendered by an individual who is not in a regular trade or business
offering his services to the public, and excluding interior cleaning
and maintenance services performed on a regular contractual basis
for a term of not less than 30 days, other than window cleaning,
rodent and pest control and trash removal from buildings.
(6) Wages, salaries and other compensation paid by an employer to an
employee for performing as an employee the services described in
Subsection C(1) through (5) of this section are not receipts subject
to the taxes imposed under such subdivision.
D. Alcoholic beverages and food and drink of any nature.
(1) The receipts from every sale of beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverages or any other drink of any nature, or from every sale of
food and drink of any nature or of food alone, when sold in or by
restaurants, taverns or other establishments in this city, or by
caterers, including in the amount of such receipts any cover,
minimum, entertainment or other charge made to patrons or
customers (except those receipts taxed pursuant to Subsection F of
this section): [Amended 7-7-1971]
(a) In all instances where the sale is for consumption on the
premises where sold;
(b) In those instances where the vendor or any person whose
services are arranged for by the vendor, after the delivery of
the food or drink by or on behalf of the vendor for consumption
off the premises of the vendor, serves or assists in serving,
§ 318-16 GENEVA CODE § 318-16
314:484
cooks, heats or provides other services with respect to the food
or drink; and
(c) In those instances where the sale is for consumption off the
premises of the vendor, except where food (other than
sandwiches) or drink or both are sold in an unheated state and
are of a type commonly sold for consumption off the premises
and in the same form and condition, quantities and packaging,
in establishments which are food stores other than those
principally engaged in selling foods prepared and ready to be
eaten.
(2) The tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply to:
(a) Food or drink which is sold to an airline for consumption while
in flight.
(b) Food or drink sold to a student of a nursery school,
kindergarten, elementary or secondary school, at a restaurant
or cafeteria located on the premises of such a school, or food or
drink, other than beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages, sold
at a restaurant, tavern or other establishment located on the
premises of a college, university or a school (other than a
nursery school, kindergarten, elementary or secondary school)
to a student enrolled therein who purchases such food or drink
under a contractual arrangement whereby the student does
not pay cash at the time he is served, provided the school,
college or university described in this subsection is operated
by an exempt organization described in Subdivision (a) of
§ 1116 of the Tax Law, or is created, incorporated, registered
or licensed by the State Legislature or pursuant to the
Education Law or the regulations of the Commissioner of
Education, or is incorporated by the Regents of the University
of the State of New York or with their consent or the consent of
the Commissioner of Education as provided in § 216 of the
Education Law. [Added 4-2-1969]
E. The rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel in this city,
except that the tax shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A permanent resident; or
(2) Where the rent is not more than at the rate of $2 per day.
F. Admission charges.
(1) Any admission charge where such admission charge is in excess of
$0.10 to or for the use of any place of amusement in the city, except
charges for admission to race tracks, boxing, sparring or wrestling
matches or exhibitions which charges are taxed under the laws of
this state except taxes imposed by Article 28 of the Tax Law of the
State of New York, or dramatic or musical arts performances, or
§ 318-16 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-16
314:485
§ 318-17. Transitional provisions.
motion picture theaters, and except charges to a patron for
admission to, or use of, facilities for sporting activities in which
such person is to be a participant, such as bowling alleys and
swimming pools. For any person having the permanent use or
possession of a box or seat or a lease or a license, other than a
season ticket, for the use of a box or seat at a place of amusement,
the tax shall be upon the amount for which a similar box or seat is
sold for each performance or exhibition at which the box or seat is
used or reserved by the holder, licensee or lessee, and shall be paid
by the holder, licensee or lessee.
(2) The dues paid to any social or athletic club in this city if the dues of
an active annual member, exclusive of the initiation fee, are in
excess of $10 per year, and on the initiation fee alone, regardless of
the amount of dues, if such initiation fee is in excess of $10, except
that the tax shall not apply to a fraternal society, order or
association operating under the lodge system or any fraternal
association of students of a college or university. Where the tax on
dues applies to any such social or athletic club, the tax shall be paid
by all members thereof regardless of the amount of their dues, and
shall be paid on all dues or initiation fees for a period commencing
on or after September 1, 1967. In the case of a life membership, the
tax shall be upon the annual amount paid by active annual
members as dues, whether or not the life member paid for or was
admitted to such membership prior to the imposition of the tax
under this article, and shall be paid annually by the person holding
such life membership at the time for payment of dues by active
annual members.
(3) The amount paid as charges of a roof garden, cabaret or other
similar place in the state.
A. The taxes imposed under Subsections A, C and D of § 318-16 shall be
paid upon all sales made and services rendered on or after September
1, 1967, although made on or rendered under a prior contract, except
as provided in § 318-26, and except that a delivery or transfer of
possession of tangible personal property made after said date pursuant
to an agreement for the sale of said property made before May 1, 1967,
shall not be subject to tax if:
(1) Such agreement for the sale of said property was made in writing;
(2) The particular item or items of property so sold or agreed to be sold
were segregated, before May 1, 1967, from any other similar
property in the possession of the vendor and identified as having
been appropriated to such sale or agreement of sale; and
(3) The purchaser, before September 1, 1967, shall have paid to the
vendor not less than 10% of the sale price of said property.
§ 318-16 GENEVA CODE § 318-17
314:486
B. The tax imposed under § 318-16B shall be paid with respect to receipts
for property or services sold on or after September 1, 1967, although
made under a prior contract. Where property or service is sold on a
monthly, quarterly or other term basis and the bills for such property or
service are based on meter readings, the amount received on each bill
for such property or service for a month or other term shall be a receipt
subject to the tax, but such tax shall be applicable to all bills based on
meters read on or after September 1, 1967, only where more than 1/2 of
the number of days included in the month or other period billed are
days subsequent to August 31, 1967; provided, however, that where
such bills are for telephone or telegraph service the tax shall apply to all
receipts on such bills dated on or after September 1, 1967, for which no
previous bill was rendered, excepting, however, charges for services
furnished before the date of the first of such bills.
C. The tax imposed under § 318-16E shall be paid upon any occupancy on
and after September 1, 1967, although such occupancy is pursuant to a
prior contract, lease or other arrangement. Where rent is paid on a
weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent shall be subject to the tax
imposed under such Subsection E to the extent that it covers any period
on and after September 1, 1967, and such rent shall be apportioned on
the basis of the ratio of the number of days falling within said period to
the total number of days covered thereby.
D. Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the tax imposed under
§ 318-16F shall be applicable to any admission to or the use of facilities
of a place of amusement occurring on or after September 1, 1967,
whether or not the admission charge has been paid prior to such date,
unless the tickets were actually sold and delivered (other than for
resale) prior to September 1, 1967, to a person attending the
performance occurring on or after such date.
E. A refund or credit equal to the amount of the sales or compensating use
tax paid on the sale or use of tangible personal property, under a local
law, ordinance or resolution imposed pursuant to the authority of
Chapter 873 of the Laws of 1934, as amended, or Chapter 278 of the
Laws of 1947, as amended, shall be allowed, upon application to the Tax
Commission as provided for herein, where such property has been used
by the purchaser or user in performing the services subject to tax under
§ 318-16C(1), (2), (3) and (5) and such property has become a physical
component part of the property upon which the services are performed
or has been transferred to the purchaser of the service in conjunction
with the performance of the service subject to tax, except that such
refund or credit may not exceed the combined state and local taxes, if
any, paid, pursuant to Article 28 of the Tax Law and under the tax
imposed by this article, on the sale or use of the service in connection
with which such property was used.
F. With respect to the additional tax of 1/2% imposed effective March 1,
1968, the provisions of Subsections A, B, C, D and E of this section
apply except that for the purposes of this section, all references in said
§ 318-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-17
314:487
§ 318-18. Imposition of compensating use tax. [Amended 7-7-1971]
Subsections A, B, C and D to September 1, 1967, shall be read as
referring to March 1, 1968, all references in said Subsection A to
May 1, 1967, shall be read as referring to November 1, 1937, and
the reference in said Subsection B to August 31, 1967, shall be read
as referring to February 29, 1968. Nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to exempt from tax at the rate in effect prior to March 1, 1968,
any transaction which may not be subject to the additional tax imposed
effective on that date.
A. Except to the extent that property or services have already been or will
be subject to the sales tax under this article, there is hereby imposed on
every person a use tax for the use within this city on and after
September 1, 1967, except as otherwise exempted under this article:
(1) Of any tangible personal property purchased at retail;
(2) Of any tangible personal property manufactured, processed or
assembled by the user if items of the same kind of tangible personal
property are offered for sale by him in the regular course of
business;
(3) Of any of the services described in § 318-16C(1); and
(4) Of any tangible personal property, however acquired, where not
acquired for purposes of resale, upon which any of the services
described under § 318-16C(2) and (3) have been performed.
B. For purposes of Subsection A(1) of this section, the tax shall be at the
rate of 1 1/2% of the consideration given or contracted to be given for
such property, or for the use of such property, but excluding any credit
for tangible personal property accepted in part payment and intended
for resale, plus the cost of transportation except where such cost is
separately stated in the written contract, if any, and on the bill rendered
to the purchaser. For purposes of Subsection A(2) of this section, the tax
shall be at the rate of 1 1/2% of the price at which items of the same
kind of tangible personal property are offered for sale by the user, and
the mere storage, keeping, retention or withdrawal from storage of
tangible personal property by the person who manufactured, processed
or assembled such property shall not be deemed a taxable use by him.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of Subsection A(2) of this
section, there shall be no tax on any portion of such price which
represents the value added by the user to tangible personal property
which he fabricates and installs to the specifications of an addition or
capital improvement to real property, property or land, as the terms
"real property," "property" or "land" are defined in the Real Property
Tax Law, over and above the prevailing normal purchase price prior to
such fabrication of such tangible personal property which a
manufacturer, producer or assembler would charge an unrelated
contractor who similarly fabricated and installed such tangible personal
§ 318-17 GENEVA CODE § 318-18
314:488
§ 318-19. Special rules for computing receipts and consideration.
property to the specifications of an addition or capital improvement to
such real property, property or land. For purposes of Subsection A(3)
and (4) of this section, the tax shall be at the rate of 1 1/2% of the
consideration given or contracted to be given for the service, including
the consideration for any tangible personal property transferred in
conjunction with the performance of the service, plus the cost of
transportation of property so transferred and of the tangible personal
property upon which the service was performed, except where such
cost is separately stated in the written contract, if any, and on the bill
rendered to the purchaser.
A. The retail sales tax imposed under § 318-16A and the compensating use
tax imposed under § 318-18, when computed in respect to tangible
personal property whenever manufactured, processed or assembled
and used by such manufacturer, producer or assembler in the regular
course of business within this city, shall be based on the price at which
items of the same kind of tangible personal property are offered for sale
by him, except to the extent otherwise provided in § 318-18 hereof.
[Amended 7-7-1971]
B. Tangible personal property, which has been purchased by a resident of
this city outside of this city for use outside of this city and subsequently
becomes subject to the compensating use tax imposed under this article
shall be taxed on the basis of the purchase price of such property;
provided, however:
(1) That where a taxpayer affirmatively shows that the property was
used outside this city by him for more than six months prior to its
use within this city such property shall be taxed on the basis of
current market value of the property at the time of its first use
within this city. The value of such property, for compensating use
tax purposes, may not exceed its cost.
(2) That the compensating use tax on such tangible personal property
brought into this city (other than for complete consumption or for
incorporation into real property located in this city) and used in the
performance of a contract or subcontract within this city by a
purchaser or user for a period of less than six months may be
based, at the option of the taxpayer, on the fair rental value of such
property for the period of use within this city.
C. With respect to property leased, or sold under a contract deferring
payments, tax shall be payable at such times and in such amounts as
may be prescribed by the State Tax Commission as provided in § 1132
of the Tax Law.
D. If the State Tax Commission has prescribed or shall prescribe schedules
of the amount of tax to be collected upon each gallon of motor fuel and
diesel motor fuel sold at retail service stations, and upon each pack of
§ 318-18 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-19
314:489
§ 318-20. Exemptions from sales and use taxes.
cigarettes, as provided in § 1111 of the Tax Law, the tax thereon shall
be collected as prescribed in such schedules.
A. Receipts from the following shall be exempt from the tax on retail sales
imposed under § 318-16A and the compensating use tax imposed under
§ 318-18:
(1) Food, food products, beverages, dietary foods and health
supplements, sold for human consumption but not including candy
and confectionery, fruit drinks which contain less than 70% of
natural fruit juice, soft drinks, sodas and beverages such as are
ordinarily dispensed at soda fountains or in connection therewith
(other than coffee, tea and cocoa) and beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverages, all of which shall be subject to the retail sales and
compensating use taxes, whether or not the item is sold in liquid
form. Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting food or drink
from the tax imposed under § 318-16D.
(2) Water, when delivered to the consumer through mains or pipes.
(3) Drugs and medicines intended for use, internally or externally, in
the cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of illnesses or
diseases in human beings and products consumed by humans for
the preservation of health but not including medical equipment and
supplies other than such drugs and medicines, or cosmetics or
toilet articles notwithstanding the presence of medicinal
ingredients therein.
(4) Prosthetic aids, hearing aids or eyeglasses and artificial devices
designed for the use of a particular individual to correct or alleviate
physical incapacity.
(5) Newspapers and periodicals.
(6) Tangible personal property, except property incorporated in a
building or structure, for use or consumption directly and
exclusively in the production for sale of tangible personal property
by farming, including stock, dairy, poultry, fruit, fur bearing animal,
and truck farming. The term "farming" shall also include ranching,
operating nurseries, greenhouses or other similar structures used
primarily for the raising of agricultural, horticultural or
floricultural commodities, and operating orchards. [Amended
4-2-1969]
(7) Tangible personal property sold by a mortician, undertaker or
funeral director. However, all tangible personal property sold to a
mortician, undertaker or funeral director for use in the conducting
of funerals shall not be deemed a sale for resale within the meaning
of "retail sale" in § 318-15 of this article and shall not be exempt
from the retail sales tax.
§ 318-19 GENEVA CODE § 318-20
314:490
(8) Commercial vessels primarily engaged in interstate or foreign
commerce and property used by or purchased for the use of such
vessels for fuel, provisions, supplies, maintenance and repairs
(other than articles purchased for the original equipping of a new
ship).
(9) Fuel sold to an airline for use in its airplanes.
(10) Tangible personal property purchased for use or consumption
directly and exclusively in research and development in the
experimental or laboratory sense. Such research and development
shall not be deemed to include the ordinary testing or inspection of
materials or products for quality control, efficiency surveys,
management studies, consumer surveys, advertising, promotions
or research in connection with literary, historical or similar
projects.
(11) The flags of the United States of America and the State of New
York.
(12) Tangible personal property sold through coin-operated vending
machines at $0.10 or less, provided the retailer is primarily
engaged in making such sales and maintains records satisfactory to
the State Tax Commission.
(13) Motor vehicles, as such term is defined in § 125 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law, sold by a husband or wife to his or her spouse.
Provided, however, this exemption shall not apply if the vendor is a
dealer as defined in § 415 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law. [Added
7-7-1971]
(14) Tangible personal property sold to a contractor, subcontractor or
repairman for use in erecting a structure or building of an
organization described in § 318-21A, or adding to, altering or
improving real property, property or land of such an organization,
as the terms "real property," "property" or "land" are defined in the
Real Property Tax Law; provided, however, that no exemption shall
exist under this subsection unless such tangible personal property
is to become an integral component part of such structure, building
or real property, and is to be resold to such organization as tangible
personal property before it has become a part of such structure,
building or real property. [Added 7-7-1971]
(15) Tangible personal property sold to a contractor, subcontractor or
repairman for use in maintaining, servicing or repairing real
property, property or land of an organization described in
§ 318-21A, as the terms "real property," "property" or "land" are
defined in the Real Property Tax Law. [Added 7-7-1971]
(16) Tangible personal property sold by a contractor, subcontractor or
repairman to a person other than an organization described in
§ 318-21A, for whom he is adding to, or improving real property,
§ 318-20 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-20
314:491
property or land by a capital improvement, or for whom he is about
to do any of the foregoing, if such tangible personal property is to
become an integral component part of such structure, building or
real property; provided, however, that if such sale is made pursuant
to a contract irrevocably entered into before September 1, 1969,
no exemption shall exist under this subsection. [Added 7-7-1971]
B. Telephone and telegraph service; gas, electricity, etc.
(1) Telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph service
used by newspapers, radio broadcasters and television
broadcasters in the collection or dissemination of news shall be
exempt from the tax imposed under § 318-16B if the charge for
such services is a toll charge or a charge for mileage services,
including the associated station terminal equipment.
(2) Gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric,
refrigeration and steam service of whatever nature for use or
consumption directly and exclusively in research and development
in the experimental or laboratory sense shall be exempt from the
tax imposed under § 318-16B. Such research and development
shall not be deemed to include the ordinary testing or inspection of
materials or products for quality control, efficiency surveys,
management studies, consumer surveys, advertising, promotions
or research in connection with literary, historical or similar
projects.
C. All sales of tangible personal property for use or consumption directly
and exclusively in the production of tangible personal property, gas,
electricity, refrigeration or steam, for sale, by manufacturing,
processing, generating, assembling, refining, mining, extracting,
farming, agriculture, horticulture or floriculture, and all sales of
telephone central office equipment and station apparatus or
comparable telegraph equipment for use directly and exclusively in
receiving at destination or in initiating and switching telephone or
telegraph communication shall be exempt from the taxes imposed
under § 318-16A and B. [Amended 4-2-1969]
D. Services otherwise taxable under § 318-16C(1), (2) or (3) herein shall
be exempt from tax under this article if the tangible personal property
upon which services were performed is delivered to the purchaser
outside the city for use outside the city.
E. Telephone and telegraph service paid for by inserting coins in coinoperated
telephones where the charge is $0.10 or less shall be exempt
from the tax imposed under § 318-16B.
F. Services rendered by a veterinarian licensed and registered as required
by the Education Law which constitute the practice of veterinary
medicine as defined in said law, including hospitalization for which no
separate boarding charge is made, shall not be subject to tax under
§ 318-20 GENEVA CODE § 318-20
314:492
§ 318-21. Exempt organizations.
§ 318-16C(3), but the exemption allowed by this subsection shall not
apply to other services provided by a veterinarian to pets and other
animals, including, but not limited to, boarding, grooming and clipping.
Articles of tangible personal property designed for use in some manner
relating to domestic animals or poultry, when sold by such a
veterinarian, shall not be subject to tax under § 318-16A or under
§ 318-18. However, the sale of any such articles of tangible personal
property to a veterinarian shall not be deemed a sale for resale within
the meaning of "retail sale" in § 318-15 and shall not be exempt from
retail sales tax.
G. Services otherwise taxable under § 318-16C(3) shall be exempt from tax
if performed upon prosthetic aids, hearing aids or eyeglasses and
artificial devices designed for the use of a particular individual to
correct or alleviate physical incapacity. [Added 7-7-1971]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any sale or amusement
charge by or to any of the following or any use or occupancy by any of
the following shall not be subject to the sales and compensating use
taxes imposed under this article.
(1) The State of New York, or any of its agencies, instrumentalities,
public corporations (including a public corporation created
pursuant to agreement or compact with another state or Canada)
or political subdivisions where it is the purchaser, user or
consumer, or where it is a vendor of services or property of a kind
not ordinarily sold by private persons;
(2) The United States of America, and any of its agencies and
instrumentalities, insofar as it is immune from taxation where it is
the purchaser, user or consumer, or where it sells services or
property of a kind not ordinarily sold by private persons;
(3) The United Nations or any international organization of which the
United States of America is a member where it is the purchaser,
user, or consumer, or where it sells services or property of a kind
not ordinarily sold by private persons; and
(4) Any corporation, association, trust, or community chest, fund or
foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary or
educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or
animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of
any private shareholder or individual, no substantial part of the
activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
attempting to influence legislation, and which does not participate
in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of
statements), any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for
public office.
§ 318-20 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-21
314:493
B. Nothing in this section shall exempt:
(1) Retail sales of tangible personal property by any shop or store
operated by an organization described in Subsection A(4) of this
section; or
(2) Sales of food or drink in or by a restaurant, tavern or other
establishment operated by an organization described in Subsection
A(1) or (4) of this section, other than sales exempt under
§ 318-16D(2). [Amended 4-2-1969]
C. Where any organization described in Subsection A(4) of this section
carries on its activities in furtherance of the purposes for which it was
organized, in premises in which, as part of said activities, it operates a
hotel, occupancy of rooms in the premises and rents therefrom received
by such corporation or association shall not be subject to tax hereunder.
D. Admission charges.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection D(2), any admissions all of the
proceeds of which inure exclusively to the benefit of the following
organizations shall not be subject to any of the taxes imposed under
§ 318-16F:
(a) An organization described in Subsection A(4) of this section;
(b) A society or organization conducted for the sole purpose of
maintaining symphony orchestras or operas and receiving
substantial support from voluntary contributions;
(c) National guard organizations, posts or organizations of war
veterans, or auxiliary units or societies of any such posts or
organizations, if such posts, organizations, units or societies
are organized in this state, and if no part of their net earnings
inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual;
or
(d) A police or fire department of a political subdivision of the
state, or a voluntary fire or ambulance company or exclusively
to a retirement, pension or disability fund for the sole benefit of
members of a police or fire department or to a fund for the
heirs of such members.
(2) The exemption provided under Subsection D(1) shall not apply in
the case of admissions to:
(a) Any athletic game or exhibition unless the proceeds shall inure
exclusively to the benefit of elementary or secondary schools
or unless in the case of an athletic game between two
elementary or secondary schools, the entire gross proceeds
from such game shall inure to the benefit of one or more
organizations described in Subsection A(4) of this section; or
§ 318-21 GENEVA CODE § 318-21
314:494
§ 318-22. Deliveries outside the city; deliveries within the city of
property sold or serviced elsewhere.
(b) Carnivals, rodeos or circuses in which any professional
performer or operator participates for compensation.
(3) Admission charges for admission to the following places or events
shall not be subject to any of the taxes imposed under § 318-16F:
(a) Any admission to agricultural fairs if no part of the net
earnings thereof inures to the benefit of any stockholders or
members of the association conducting the same; provided the
proceeds therefrom are used exclusively for the improvement,
maintenance and operation of such agricultural fairs.
(b) Any admission to a home or garden which is temporarily open
to the general public as a part of a program conducted by a
society or organization to permit the inspection of historical
homes and gardens; provided no part of the net earnings
thereof inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or
individual.
(c) Any admissions to historic sites, houses and shrines, and
museums conducted in connection therewith, maintained and
operated by a society or organization devoted to the
preservation and maintenance of said historic sites, houses,
shrines and museums; provided no part of the net earnings
thereof inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or
individual.
A. Where a sale of tangible personal property or services other than those
described in § 318-16B, including an agreement therefor, is made in this
city, but the property sold or the property upon which the services were
performed is or will be delivered to the purchaser elsewhere, such sale
shall not be subject to tax under this article. However, if delivery occurs
or will occur in a city, county or school district imposing a tax on the
sale or use of such property, pursuant to the authority of Article 29 of
the Tax Law, the vendor shall be required to collect from the purchaser,
as provided in § 1254 of the Tax Law of the State of New York, the
aggregate sales or compensating use taxes imposed by the city, if any,
county and school district in which delivery occurs or will occur, for
distribution by the State Tax Commission to such taxing jurisdiction or
jurisdictions.
B. Where a sale of tangible personal property or services other than those
described in § 318-16B, including an agreement therefor, is made
outside this city, but the property sold or the property upon which the
services were performed is or will be delivered to the purchaser in this
city, such sale and use of such property or services shall be subject to
tax under this article, and the vendor shall be required to collect from
the purchaser, as provided in § 1254 of the Tax Law of the State of New
§ 318-21 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-22
314:495
§ 318-23. Certain sales of motor vehicles; proof required for
registration of vehicles.
§ 318-24. Territorial limitations.
Any tax imposed under the authority of this article shall apply only within
the territorial limits of this City except that any establishment located
partially within this City and partially within a town or towns and receiving
York the sale or use tax imposed by this article, for distribution by the
State Tax Commission to this city.
C. For the purposes of this section, delivery shall be deemed to include
transfer of possession to the purchaser and the receiving of the
property by the purchaser.
A. Where a sale of a motor vehicle, including an agreement therefor, is
made in this city to a nonresident thereof, such sale shall not be subject
to tax under this article, despite the fact that such motor vehicle is
delivered to the purchaser within this city, provided that the purchaser
furnishes to the vendor, prior to taking delivery, proof satisfactory to the
Tax Commission that the purchaser:
(1) Is a nonresident of this city.
(2) Has no permanent place of abode within this city.
(3) Is not engaged in carrying on in this city any employment, trade,
business or profession in which the motor vehicle will be used in
this city, and such other proof as the Tax Commission may require
to ensure proper administration of the taxes imposed under
§ 318-16A. However, if the purchaser resides in a city, county or
school district imposing a tax on the use of such motor vehicle, the
vendor shall be required to collect from the purchaser, as provided
in § 1254 of the Tax Law of the State of New York, the aggregate
compensating use taxes imposed by the city, if any, county and
school district in which the purchaser resides, for distribution by
the State Tax Commission to such taxing jurisdiction or
jurisdictions.
B. A vendor shall not be liable for failure to collect tax on such sale of a
motor vehicle, provided that the proof furnished to him by the
purchaser pursuant to Subsection A of this section shows that the
purchaser's residence is not in any city, county or school district which
imposes a tax on the use of such motor vehicle, and provided that the
vendor keeps such proof available for inspection by the Tax Commission
and further provided that such proof is not known by the vendor, prior
to making physical delivery of the motor vehicle, to be false.
C. For purposes of this section, the term "motor vehicle" shall include a
motor vehicle as defined in § 125 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, and a trailer as defined in § 156 of such law.
§ 318-22 GENEVA CODE § 318-24
314:496
any services or utilities provided by this City shall be deemed to be wholly
within the City for the purposes of the taxes imposed by § 318-16B and C.
§ 318-25. Exemptions from use tax.
The following uses of property shall not be subject to the compensating use
tax imposed under this article:
A. In respect to the use of property used by the purchaser in this city prior
to September 1, 1967.
B. In respect to the use of property purchased by the user while a
nonresident of this city, except in the case of tangible personal property
which the user, in the performance of a contract, incorporates into real
property located in the city. A person while engaged in any manner in
carrying on in this city any employment, trade, business or profession,
shall not be deemed a nonresident with respect to the use in this city of
property in such employment, trade, business or profession.
C. In respect to the use of property or services upon the sale of which the
purchaser would be expressly exempt from the taxes imposed under
§ 318-16A, B or C.
D. In respect to the use of property which is converted into or becomes a
component part of a product produced for sale by the purchaser.
E. In respect to the use of paper in the publication of newspapers and
periodicals.
F. Tax paid to any municipal corporation or other jurisdiction.
(1) In respect to the use of property or services to the extent that a
retail sales tax or a compensating use tax was legally due and paid
thereon, without any right to a refund or credit thereof to any
municipal corporation in this state or any other state or jurisdiction
within any other state, but only when it is shown that such other
jurisdiction allows a corresponding exemption with respect to the
sale or use of tangible personal property or of any of the services
upon which such a sale or compensating use tax was paid to this
state and any of its municipal corporations, except as provided in
Subsection F(2). [Amended 4-2-1969]
(2) To the extent that a compensating use tax imposed by this article
and the compensating use tax imposed by Article 28 of the Tax Law
are at a higher aggregate rate than the rate of tax imposed in any
other state or jurisdiction within any other state, the exemption
provided in Subsection F(1) of this section shall be inapplicable and
the taxes imposed by this article and by Article 28 shall apply to the
extent of the difference between such aggregate rate and the rate
paid in such other state or jurisdiction. Where a retail sales tax or a
compensating use tax was legally due and paid to any municipal
corporation in this state, without any right to a refund or credit
§ 318-24 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-25
314:497
§ 318-26. Refunds or credits based on proof of certain uses.
thereof, with respect to the sale or use of tangible personal
property or any of the services subject to sales or compensating
use tax, if the use of such property or services is then subject to
the compensating use tax imposed by this article and such tax is
at a higher rate than the rate of tax imposed by the first municipal
corporation, the tax imposed by this article shall also apply but only
to the extent of the difference in such rates. [Amended 4-2-1969]
(3) For the purposes of this subsection a payment to the State Tax
Commission of a tax imposed by a municipal corporation shall be
deemed a payment to such municipal corporation. [Added
4-2-1969]
A. Conditions and limitations. [Amended 4-2-1969]
(1) Subject to the conditions and limitations provided for herein a
refund or credit shall be allowed for a tax paid pursuant to
§ 318-16A or § 318-18:
(a) On the sale or use within this county of tangible personal
property if the purchaser or user in the performance of a
contract later incorporates that tangible personal property into
real property located outside this county;
(b) On the sale or use of tangible personal property purchased in
bulk, or any portion thereof, which is stored and not used by
the purchaser or user within this county if that property is
subsequently reshipped by such purchaser or user to a point
outside this county for use outside this county;
(c) On the sale to or use by a contractor or subcontractor of
tangible personal property if that property is used by him
solely in the performance of a preexisting lump sum or unit
price construction contract; or
(d) On the sale or use within this county of tangible personal
property, not purchased for resale, if the use of such property
in this county is restricted to fabricating such property
(including incorporating it into or assembling it with other
tangible personal property), processing, printing or imprinting
such property and such property is then shipped to a point
outside this county for use outside this county.
(2) For the purposes of Subsection A(1)(c) the term "preexisting lump
sum or unit price construction contract" shall mean a contract for
the construction of improvements to real property under which the
amount payable to the contractor or subcontractor is fixed without
regard to the costs incurred by him in the performance thereof, and
which: was irrevocably entered into prior to the date of the
enactment of this article or the enactment of a law increasing the
§ 318-25 GENEVA CODE § 318-26
314:498
rate of tax imposed under this article; or resulted from the
acceptance by a governmental agency of a bid accompanied by
a bond or other performance guaranty which was irrevocably
submitted prior to such date. Where the tax on the sale or use of
such tangible personal property has been paid to the vendor, to
qualify for such refund or credit, such tangible personal property
must be incorporated into real property as required in Subsection
A(1)(a) above, reshipped as required in Subsection A(1)(b) above
or used in the manner described in Subsection A(1)(c) or (d) above
within three years after the date such tax was payable to the State
Tax Commission by the vendor pursuant to § 1137 of the Tax Law.
Where the tax on the sale or use of such tangible personal property
was paid by the applicant for the credit or refund directly to the
State Tax Commission to qualify for such refund or credit such
tangible personal property must be incorporated into real property
as required in Subsection A(1)(a) above, reshipped as required
in Subsection A(1)(b) above or used in the manner described in
Subsection A(1)(c) or (d) above within three years after the date
such tax was payable to the State Tax Commission by such
applicant pursuant to Article 28 of the Tax Law. With respect to
a sale or use described in Subsection A(1)(c) above the purchaser
or user shall be entitled to a refund or credit of the amount of
the taxes imposed by this article if enacted later than the date of
such contract or bid, or of the amount reflecting an increase in the
rate of tax enacted later than said date, as the case may be, but
only to the extent that all such sales and use taxes paid on such
sale or use under the aggregate statewide and local taxes imposed
under Article 28 and by authority of Article 29 exceeded an amount
computed by applying against such sale or use the aggregate of
the rates of statewide and local sales and use taxes that were in
effect at the time such contract was entered into or such bid was
submitted.
B. A refund or credit equal to the amount of sales or compensating use tax
imposed by Article 28 of the Tax Law and under this article, and paid on
the sale or use of tangible personal property, shall be allowed the
purchaser where such property is later used by the purchaser in
performing a service subject to tax under § 318-16C(1), (2), (3) or (5) or
under § 318-18 and such property has become a physical component
part of the property upon which the service is performed or has been
transferred to the purchaser of the service in conjunction with the
performance of the service subject to tax or if a contractor,
subcontractor or repairman purchases tangible personal property and
later makes a retail sale of such tangible personal property, the
acquisition of which would not have been a sale at retail to him but for
the last sentence of Subsection (1) of the definition of "retail sale" in
§ 318-15. An application for the refund or credit provided for herein
must be filed with the Tax Commission within the time provided by
Subdivision (a) of § 1139 of the Tax Law. Such application shall be in
such form as the Tax Commission may prescribe. Where an application
§ 318-26 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-26
314:499
§ 318-27. Administration and collection. [Amended 7-7-1971]
The taxes imposed by this article under the authority of Article 29 of the
Tax Law shall be administered and collected by the State Tax Commission
in the same manner as the taxes imposed under Article 28 of the Tax Law
are administered and collected by such Commission. All of the provisions of
said Article 28 relating to or applicable to the administration and collection
of the taxes imposed by that article shall apply to the taxes imposed by this
article, including §§ 1101, 1106, Subdivision (e), 1111, 1118, Subdivision
(b), 1119 and 1131 through 1147, together with any amendment thereto,
with the same force and effect as if those provisions had been incorporated
in full into this article except as otherwise provided in § 1250 of the Tax Law.
§ 318-28. Disposition of revenues.
Net collections distributed to this city by the State Tax Commission
pursuant to § 1261 of the Tax Law of the State of New York shall be paid into
the treasury of the city, shall be credited to and deposited in the general
fund thereof, and shall be available for any city purpose. Expenditures from
the proceeds of the taxes imposed by this article shall not be considered
as part of the cost of government within the meaning of any limitation on
expenditures contained in any general, special or local law applicable to this
city. As used in this section, net collections shall mean the moneys collected
from the taxes imposed pursuant to this article, after deducting therefrom
expenses of administration and collection and amounts refunded or to be
refunded.
§ 318-29. Construal of provisions; enforcement.
This article shall be construed and enforced in conformity with Articles 28
and 29 of the Tax Law of the State of New York pursuant to which the same
is enacted.
§ 318-30. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on the first day of September, 1967, except
that certificates of registration may be filed with the State Tax Commission
and certificates of authority to collect tax may be issued by the State Tax
Commission prior to said date.
for credit has been filed, the applicant may immediately take such
credit on the return which is due coincident with or immediately
subsequent to the time that he files his application for credit. However,
the taking of the credit on the return shall be deemed to be part of
the application for credit. The procedure for granting or denying such
applications for refund or credit and review of such determinations
shall be as provided in Subdivision (e) of § 1139 of the Tax Law.
[Amended 7-7-1971]
§ 318-26 GENEVA CODE § 318-30
314:500
ARTICLE III
Exemption for Senior Citizens
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 81, Art. I, of the 1968 Code]
§ 318-31. Exemption established; conditions.
Pursuant to § 467 of the New York Real Property Tax Law, real property
owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over,
shall be exempt from taxation by the City of Geneva to the extent of 50% of
the assessed valuation thereof; subject to the following conditions:
A. Application; income; exemption.
(1) The owner or all of the owners must file an application annually in
the Assessor's Office on or before the appropriate taxable status
date or at such other time as may hereafter be fixed by law. The
income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property must not exceed the sum of $12,500 for the calendar year
immediately preceding the date of making application for
exemption. Where title is vested in either the husband or wife, their
combined income may not exceed the sum. Such income shall
include social security and retirement benefits, interest, dividends,
rental income, salary or earnings and income from self
employment, but shall not include gifts or inheritance. [Amended
5-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2-2007]
(2) A sliding scale exemption pursuant to § 467, Subdivision 1(b)(1), of
the New York State Real Property Tax Law shall be provided to
certain persons 65 years of age or over. [Amended by Ord. No.
25-1972; Ord. No. 4-1975; Ord. No. 29-1978; 4-6-1983 by
Ord. No. 10-1983; 1-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1-1987; 1-1-1989 by
Ord. No. 3-1989; 3-1-1990 by Ord. No. 5-1909; 3-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 5-1995]
B. Title to the property must be vested in the owner or all of the owners of
the property for at least 24 consecutive months prior to the date of
making application for exemption. [Amended 12-6-1978 by Ord. No.
29-1978]
C. The property must be used exclusively for residential purposes, be
occupied in whole or in part by the owners and constitute the legal
residence of the owners.
§ 318-31 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-31
314:501

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)45
§ 318-32. through § 318-33. (Reserved)
45.Editor’s Note: Former Art. IV, Collection of Real Property Taxes, adopted 6-6-1994 by L.L.
No. 2-1994, was repealed 12-1-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010, which local law also directed the
City Manager to administer Real Property Tax Law, Art. 11, for disposition of outstanding
property tax amounts.
§ 318-32 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-32
314:503

ARTICLE V
Capital Improvements Exemption
[Adopted 7-16-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 318-34. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to § 421-f of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law, as most recently amended by Chapter 590 of the Laws of
1994, with respect to City taxes on real property.
§ 318-35. Exemption established; exception.
Pursuant to § 421-f of the New York State Real Property Tax Law, capital
improvements made to residential property shall be exempted from City
taxes, except that as provided in Subdivision 7(a)(ii) of § 421-f of the New
York State Real Property Tax Law, no exemption shall be granted on capital
improvements for the conversion of single-family to two-family occupancy.
§ 318-36. Applicability of statutory provisions.
All other provisions of § 421-f of the New York State Real Property Tax Law,
as most recently amended by Chapter 590 of the Laws of 1994, shall apply
with respect to capital improvements to residential property in the City of
Geneva, commenced subsequent to the effective date of this article.
§ 318-34 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-36
314:505

ARTICLE VI
Exemption for Persons With Disabilities and Limited Incomes
[Adopted 1-6-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
§ 318-37. Title.
A local law entitled "Partial Tax Exemption of Real Property Owned by
Persons with Disabilities and Limited Incomes."
§ 318-38. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to § 459-c of the New York State Real Property Tax Law, real
property owned by one or more persons with disabilities, or real property
owned by a husband, wife, or both, or by siblings, at least one of whom has a
disability, and whose income, as hereinafter defined, is limited by reason of
disability, shall be exempt from taxation by the City of Geneva to the extent
of 50% of the assessed valuation thereof, subject to the following conditions:
§ 318-39. Application; income; exemption.
§ 318-40. Definitions.
The definition of disabled, disabilities, siblings and income, and statutes,
shall be that as prescribed in § 459-c of the New York State Real Property
Tax Law, and all other mandatory provisions of said law shall apply to this
article.
A. The owner or all of the owners must file an application annually in the
Assessor's office on or before the appropriate taxable status date or
such other time as may hereafter be fixed by law. The income of the
owner, or the combined income of the owners, or the combined income
of the owners of the property and their respective spouses, except as
noted in Subdivision 5(a) of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law, must
not exceed the sum of $9,500 for the calendar year immediately
preceding the date for making application for exemption. Such income
shall include gross social security and retirement benefits, interest,
dividends, net capital gains of assets within the same calendar year, net
rental income, salary or earnings, and net income from selfemployment,
but shall not include return of capital, gifts or inheritances
or moneys earned through employment in the federal foster
grandparent program.
B. A sliding scale exemption pursuant to § 459-c, Subdivision 1(b), of the
Real Property Tax Law, in decrements of 5%, from 45 to five, based on
increments of defined income(s) over $9,500, to a maximum of $17,899,
shall be provided to property owners with disabilities.
C. The property must be used exclusively for residential purposes, be
occupied in whole or in part by the disabled person and constitute the
legal residence of the disabled person, except as noted in Subdivision
5(b) and (c) of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 318-37 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-41
314:507
§ 318-41. Effective date.
The effective date of this article shall be the first taxable status date
following the passage of this law thereof.
§ 318-41 GENEVA CODE § 318-41
314:508
ARTICLE VII
Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 8-7-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 318-42. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Geneva Room Occupancy Tax."
§ 318-43. Intent.
The intent of this article shall be to promote tourism and enhance the
general economy of the City of Geneva.
§ 318-44. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Geneva.
CITY COMPTROLLER — The Comptroller of the City of Geneva.
OCCUPANCY — The use or possession or the right to the use or possession
of any room in a tourist home, inn, hotel or motel.
OCCUPANT — A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has
the right to use or possess any room in a tourist home, inn, hotel or motel
under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other
agreement or otherwise.
OPERATOR — Any person operating a tourist home, inn, motel or hotel with
four or more rentable units in the City of Geneva, including but not limited
to the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee
in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such tourist
home, inn, hotel or motel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — Any occupant of any room or rooms in a tourist
home, inn, hotel or motel for at least 30 consecutive days shall be
considered a permanent resident with regard to the period of such
occupancy.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, society, association, joint-stock
company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee and any
other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether
appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of the foregoing.
RENT — The consideration received for occupancy valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise.
RETURN — Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
ROOM — Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a tourist
home, inn, hotel or motel which are available for or let out for any purpose
other than as a place of assembly.
§ 318-42 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-44
314:509
TOURIST HOME, INN, HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or portion of it
which is regularly used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests; the
terms "tourist home," "inn," "bed-and-breakfast," "hotel" or "motel," "motor
court" or similar hotel- or motel-type of accommodations, by whatever name
designated.
§ 318-45. Imposition of tax.
On and after the first day of January, 2008, there is hereby imposed and
there shall be paid a tax of 3% upon the rent for every occupancy of a room
or rooms in a tourist home, inn, hotel or motel in this City, except that the
tax shall not be imposed upon a permanent resident.
§ 318-46. Exempt organizations.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any use or occupancy by any of
the following shall not be subject to the tax imposed by this article:
A. The State of New York or any of its agencies, instrumentalities, public
corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to
agreement or compact with another state or Canada), improvement
districts or political subdivisions of the state.
B. The United States of America or any of its agencies and
instrumentalities, insofar as it is immune from taxation.
C. Any corporation, association, trust or community chest, fund or
foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable
or educational purposes or for the prevention of cruelty to children or
animals and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of
any private shareholder or individual and no substantial part of the
activities of which is carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting
to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in this
subsection shall include an organization operated for the primary
purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit, whether or not all
of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in this
subsection. Notwithstanding this exemption, or that set out in
Subsection D below, any revenues generated from uses not directly
related to the purpose for which the exempted organization received
said exemption are subject to the provisions of this section. [Amended
12-3-2014 by L.L. No. 3-201446]
D. Where any organization described in Subsection C of this section
carries on its activities in furtherance of the purposes for which it was
organized on premises in which, as part of said activities, it operates a
tourist home, inn, hotel or motel, occupancy of rooms in the premises
and rents therefrom received by such corporation or association shall
not be subject to tax hereunder. Notwithstanding this exemption, or
that set out in Subsection C above, any revenues generated from uses
46.Editor’s Note: This local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2015.
§ 318-44 GENEVA CODE § 318-46
314:510
§ 318-47. Territorial limitations.
The tax imposed by this article shall apply only within the territorial limits
of the City of Geneva.
§ 318-48. Registration.
Within 10 days after the effective date of this article or, in the case of
operators commencing business after such effective date, within three days
after such commencement or opening, every operator shall file with the
City Comptroller a certificate of registration in a form prescribed by the
City Comptroller. The City Comptroller shall, within five days after such
registration, issue, without charge to each operator, a certificate of
authority empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant
and a duplicate thereof for each additional tourist home, inn, hotel or motel
of such operator. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the tourist home,
inn, hotel or motel to which it is applicable. Such certificates of authority
shall be prominently displayed by the operator in such manner that they
may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking
occupancy. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable
and shall be surrendered immediately to the City Comptroller upon the
cessation of business at the tourist home, inn, hotel or motel named or upon
its sale or transfer.
§ 318-49. Administration and collection.
not directly related to the purpose for which the exempted organization
received said exemption are subject to the provisions of this section.
[Amended 12-3-2014 by L.L. No. 3-201447]
E. A tourist home, inn, hotel or motel having fewer than three rentable
units. [Amended 12-3-2014 by L.L. No. 3-201448]
A. The tax imposed by this article shall be administered and collected by
the City Comptroller of the City of Geneva by such means and in such
manner as are other taxes which are now collected and administered or
as otherwise are provided by this article.
B. The tax to be collected shall be stated and charged separately from the
rent and shown separately on any record thereof at the time when the
occupancy is arranged or contracted for and charged for and upon
every evidence of occupancy or any bill or statement or charge made
for said occupancy issued or delivered by the operator, and the tax shall
be paid by the occupant to the operator as trustee for and on account of
the City, and the operator shall be liable for the collection thereof and
for the tax. The operator and any officer of any corporate operator shall
be personally liable for the tax collected or required to be collected
under this article, and the operator shall have the same right in respect
47.Editor’s Note: This local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2015.
48.Editor’s Note: This local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2015.
§ 318-46 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-49
314:511
§ 318-50. Records.
Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid,
charged or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in such form as
the City Comptroller may, by regulation, require. Such records shall be
available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the
City Comptroller or his duly authorized agent or employee and shall be
preserved for a period of three years, except that the City Comptroller may
consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be
kept longer.
§ 318-51. Returns.
to collecting the tax from the occupant or in respect to nonpayment
of the tax by the occupant as if the tax were part of the rent for
the occupancy payable at the time such tax shall become due and
owing, including all rights of eviction, dispossession, repossession and
enforcement of any innkeeper's lien that he may have in the event of
nonpayment of rent by the occupant; provided, however, that the City
Comptroller/the City of Geneva employees or agents duly designated by
her shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought by
the operator to collect or enforce collection of the tax.
C. The City Comptroller may, wherever deemed necessary for the proper
enforcement of this article, provide by regulation that the occupant
shall file returns and pay directly to the City Comptroller the tax herein
imposed at such times as returns are required to be filed and payment
over made by the operator.
D. For the purpose of the proper administration of this article and to
prevent evasion of the tax hereby imposed, it shall be presumed that all
rents are subject to tax until the contrary is established, and the burden
of proving that a rent for occupancy is not taxable hereunder shall be
upon the operator or occupant. Where an occupant claims exemptions
from the tax under the provisions of § 318-46 of this article, the rent
shall be deemed taxable hereunder unless the operator shall receive
from the occupant claiming such exemption a copy of a certificate
issued by the City Comptroller certifying that the corporation or
association therein named is exempt from the tax under § 318-46 of this
article, together with a certificate duly executed by the corporation or
association named in the certificate of the City Comptroller certifying
that the occupant is its agent, representative or employee and that his
occupancy is paid or is to be paid by and is necessary or required in the
course of or in connection with the affairs of said corporation or
association.
A. Every operator shall file with the City Comptroller a return of
occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon quarterly. The
returns required by this article shall be filed for the quarterly periods
§ 318-49 GENEVA CODE § 318-51
314:512
§ 318-52. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator
shall pay to the City Comptroller the taxes imposed by this article upon
the rents required to be included in such return, as well as all other
moneys collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the
provisions of this article, even though it be judicially determined that the
tax collected is invalidly required to be filed, that shall be due from the
operator and payable to the City Comptroller on the date limited for the
filing of the return for such period, without regard to whether a return is
filed or whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of
rents and taxes due thereon. Where the City Comptroller, in his discretion,
deems it necessary to protect revenues to be obtained by this article, be
may require any operator required to collect the tax imposed by this article
to file with him a bond, issued by a surety company authorized to transact
business in this state and approved by the Superintendent of Insurance
of this state as to solvency and responsibility, in such amount as the City
Comptroller may fix to secure the payment of any tax and/or penalties and
interest due or which may become due from such operator. In the event
that the City Comptroller determines that an operator is to file such bond,
he shall give notice to such operator to that effect, specifying the amount
of the bond required. The operator shall file such bond within five days
after the giving of such notice unless, within such five days, the operator
shall request, in writing, a hearing before the City Comptroller at which
the necessity, propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the
City Comptroller. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied
with within 15 days after the giving of notices thereof. In lieu of such bond,
securities approved by the City Comptroller or cash in such amount as he
may prescribe may be deposited, which shall be kept in the custody of the
City Comptroller, who may at any time, without notice of the depositor,
apply them to any tax and/or interest or penalties due, and for that purpose,
the securities may be sold by him at public or private sale without notice to
the depositors thereof.
ending the last day of March, June, September and December of each
year.
B. The form of returns shall be prescribed by the City Comptroller and
shall contain such information as he may deem necessary for the proper
administration of this article. The City Comptroller may require
amended returns to be filed within 20 days after notice and to contain
the information specified in the notice.
C. If a return required by this article is not filed or if a return, when filed,
is incorrect or insufficient on its face, the City Comptroller shall take
the necessary steps to enforce the filing of such a return or of a
corrected return.
§ 318-51 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-53
314:513
§ 318-53. Determination of tax.
If a return required by this article is not filed or if a return, when filed,
is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be determined by
the City Comptroller from such information as may be obtainable, and,
if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indexes
such as the number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents,
type of accommodations and service, number of employees and/or other
factors. Notice of such determination shall be given to the person liable
for the collection and/or payment of the tax. Such determination shall
finally and irrevocably fix the tax unless the person against whom it is
assessed, within 30 days after giving notice of such determination, shall
apply to the City Comptroller for a hearing or unless the City Comptroller,
of his own motion, shall redetermine the same. After such hearing, the City
Comptroller shall give notice of his determination to the person against
whom the tax is assessed. The determination of the City Comptroller shall
be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any other reason
whatsoever by proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules if application therefor is made to the Supreme Court within 30 days
after the giving of the notice of such determination. A proceeding under
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules shall not be instituted unless
the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with penalties and interest
thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the City Comptroller and there
shall be filed with the City Comptroller an undertaking issued by a surety
company authorized to transact business in this state and approved by the
Superintendent of Insurance of this state as to solvency and responsibility,
in such amount as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect
that if such proceedings are dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner
will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of the
proceeding or, at the option of the applicant, such undertaking filed with the
City Comptroller may be in a sum sufficient to cover the taxes, penalties and
interest thereon stated in such determination, plus the costs and charges
which may accrue against it in the prosecution of the proceedings, in which
event the applicant shall not be required to deposit such taxes, penalties
and interest as a condition precedent to the application.
§ 318-54. Disposition of revenues.
All moneys received by the Comptroller under this article shall be paid into
the treasury of the City and shall be credited to and deposited in the general
fund thereof or as otherwise directed by resolution of the City Council;
provided, however, that the City of Geneva shall be authorized to retain up
to a maximum of 10% of such revenue to defer the necessary expenses of
the City in administering this tax.
§ 318-55. Refunds.
A. In the manner provided in this article, the City Comptroller shall refund
or credit, without interest, any tax, penalty or interest erroneously,
illegally or unconstitutionally collected or paid if application to the City
§ 318-53 GENEVA CODE § 318-55
314:514
§ 318-56. Reserves.
In cases where the occupant or operator has applied for a refund and has
instituted a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules
to review a determination adverse to him on his application for refund, the
Comptroller for such refund shall be made within one year from the
payment thereof. Whenever a refund is made by the City Comptroller,
he shall state his reason therefor in writing. Such application may
be made by the occupant, operator or other person who has actually
paid the tax. Such application may also be made by an operator who
has collected and paid over such tax to the City Comptroller, provided
that the application is made within one year of the payment by the
occupant to the operator, but no actual refund of moneys shall be made
to such operator until he shall first establish to the satisfaction of the
City Comptroller, under such regulations as the City Comptroller may
prescribe, that he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the
application for refund is made. The City Comptroller may, in lieu of any
refund required to be made, allow credit therefor on payments due from
the applicant.
B. An application for a refund or credit made as herein provided shall be
deemed an application for a revision of any tax, penalty or interest
complained of, and the City Comptroller may receive evidence with
respect thereto. After making his determination, the City Comptroller
shall give notice thereof to the applicant who shall be entitled to review
such determination by a proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules, provided that such proceeding is instituted
within 30 days after the giving of the notice of such determination, and
provided that a final determination of tax due was not previously made.
Such a proceeding shall not be instituted unless an undertaking is filed
with the City Comptroller in such amount and with such sureties as a
Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that if such
proceedings be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such
proceeding.
C. A person shall not be entitled to a revision, refund or credit under this
article of a tax, interest or penalty which had been determined to be due
pursuant to the provisions of this section where he has a hearing or an
opportunity for a hearing, as provided in said section, or has failed to
avail himself of the remedies therein provided. No refund or credit shall
be made of a tax, interest or penalty paid after a determination by the
City Comptroller made pursuant to § 318-53 of this article unless it is
found that such determination was erroneous, illegal or
unconstitutional or otherwise improper by the City Comptroller after a
hearing or of his own motion or in a proceeding under Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules, pursuant to the provisions of said section,
in which event a refund or credit without interest shall be made of the
tax, interest or penalty found to have been overpaid.
§ 318-55 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-56
314:515
City Comptroller shall set up appropriate reserves to meet any decision
adverse to the City.
§ 318-57. Remedies exclusive.
The remedies provided by §§ 318-53 and 318-55 shall be exclusive remedies
available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed by this article,
and no determination or proposed determination of tax or determination on
any application for refund shall be enjoined or reviewed by an action for
declaratory judgment, an action for money had and received or by an action
or proceeding other than a proceeding in a nature of a certiorari proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules; provided, however,
that a taxpayer may proceed by declaratory judgment if he institutes suit
within 30 days after a deficiency assessment is made and pays the amount
of the deficiency assessment to the City Comptroller prior to the institution
of such suit and posts a bond for costs as provided in § 318-53.
§ 318-58. Proceedings for recovery of tax.
A. Whenever any operator or any occupant or other person shall fail to
collect and pay over any tax or to pay any tax, penalty or interest
imposed by this article as therein provided, the Corporation Counsel
shall, upon the request of the Comptroller, bring an action to enforce
the payment of the same. If, however, the Comptroller believes that any
such operator, occupant or other person subject to the provisions of this
article is about to cease business, leave the state or remove or dissipate
assets, or for any other similar reason he deems it necessary in order to
prevent revenues under this article, he may declare such tax or penalty
to be immediately due and payable and may issue a warrant
immediately.
B. As an additional or alternate remedy, where the tax upon rents included
in a return is not paid at the time of filing such return or an assessment
of tax made is not paid within 10 days from the date of the notice of
such assessment or where the Comptroller believes that any operator,
occupant or other person subject to the provisions of this article is
about to cease business, leave the state or remove or dissipate assets,
or for any other similar reason he deems it necessary in order to protect
revenues under this article, he may issue a warrant directed to a
constable of the City Court of the City of Geneva commanding him to
levy upon and sell the real and personal property of the operator or
occupant or other person liable for the tax which may be found within
the City for the payment of the amount thereof, with any penalties and
interest and the cost of executing the warrant, and to return such
warrant to the Comptroller and to pay to him the money collected by
virtue thereof within 60 days after the receipt of such warrant. The
constable shall, within five days after the receipt of the warrant, file
with the Clerk a copy thereof, and thereupon such Clerk shall enter in
the judgment docket the name of the person mentioned in the warrant
and the amount of the tax, penalties and interest for which the warrant
§ 318-56 GENEVA CODE § 318-58
314:516
§ 318-59. General powers of City Comptroller.
In addition to the powers granted to the City Comptroller by the County Law
and this article, he is hereby authorized and empowered to:
is issued and the date when such copy is filed. Thereupon, the amount
of such warrant so docketed shall become a lien upon the title to and
interest in real and personal property of the person against whom the
warrant is issued. The constable shall then proceed upon the warrant
in the same manner and with like effect as that provided by law in
respect to executions issued against property upon judgments of a
court of record, and for services in executing the warrant, he shall be
entitled to the same fees which he may collect in the same manner. In
the discretion of the Comptroller, a warrant of like terms, force and
effect may be issued and directed to any officer or employee of the
City, and in the execution thereof such officer or employee shall have
all the powers conferred by law upon constables but shall be entitled
to no fee or compensation in excess of the actual expenses paid in the
performance of such duty. If a warrant is returned not satisfied in full,
the Comptroller may, from time to time, issue new warrants and shall
also have the same remedies to enforce the amount due thereunder as
if the City had recovered judgment therefor and execution thereon had
been returned unsatisfied.
A. Make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of this article and the purposes thereof.
B. Extend, for cause shown, the time of filing any return for a period not
exceeding 30 days; and, for cause shown, to remit penalties, but not
interest, computed at the rate of 6% per annum; and to compromise
disputed claims in connection with the taxes hereby imposed.
C. Request information from the Tax Commission of the State of New York
or the Treasury Department of the United States relative to any person
and to afford information to such Tax Commission or such Treasury
Department relative to any person, any other provision of this article to
the contrary notwithstanding.
D. Delegate his functions hereunder to any employee or employees of the
City Comptroller.
E. Prescribe methods for determining the rents for occupancy and to
determine the taxable and nontaxable rents.
F. Require any operator within the City to keep detailed records of the
nature and type of tourist home, inn, hotel or motel maintained, the
nature and type of service rendered, the rooms available and rooms
occupied daily, the leases or occupancy contracts or arrangements, the
rents received, charged and accrued and the names and addresses of
the occupants, whether or not any occupancy is claimed to be subject to
§ 318-58 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-59
314:517
§ 318-60. Administration of oaths; compelling testimony.
§ 318-61. Reference to tax.
Wherever reference is made in placards or advertisements or in any other
publications to this tax, such reference shall be substantially in the
following form: "Tax on occupancy of tourist home, inn, hotel or motel
rooms," except that in any bill, receipt, statement or other evidence or
memorandum of occupancy or rent charge issued or employed by the
operator, the word "tax" will suffice.
§ 318-62. Penalties and interest.
the tax imposed by this article, and to furnish such information upon
request to the City Comptroller.
G. Assess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed under this
article.
A. The City Comptroller or his employees or agents duly designated and
authorized by him shall have the power to administer oaths and take
affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of his
powers and duties under this article. The City Comptroller shall have
the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, papers and documents to secure information
pertinent to the performance of his duties hereunder and the
enforcement of this article and to examine them in relation thereto and
to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses who are out of
the state or unable to attend before him or excused from attendance.
B. A Justice of the Supreme Court, either in court or at chambers, shall
have power summarily to enforce by proper proceedings the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production and
examination of books, papers and documents called for by the subpoena
of the City Comptroller under this article.
C. Any person who shall refuse to testify or to produce books or records or
who shall testify falsely in any material matter pending before the City
Comptroller under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishment for which shall be a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
D. The officers who serve the summons or subpoena of the City
Comptroller and witnesses attending in response thereto shall be
entitled to the same fees as are allowed to officers and witnesses in civil
cases in courts of record, except as herein otherwise provided. Such
officers shall be the Chief of Police and his designated officers or
employees of the City Comptroller designated to serve such process.
§ 318-59 GENEVA CODE § 318-62
314:518
§ 318-63. Confidentiality of returns; penalties for offenses.
A. Any person failing to file a return or to pay or pay over any tax to the
City Comptroller within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus interest at the rate of
1% of such tax for each month of delay, excepting the first month, after
such return was required to be filed or such tax became due, but the
City Comptroller, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all
or any part of such penalty, but not interest, at the rate of 6% per year.
Such penalties and interest shall be paid and disposed of in the same
manner as other revenues from this article. Unpaid penalties and
interest may be enforced in the same manner as the tax imposed by this
article.
B. Any operator or occupant and any officer of a corporate operator or
occupant failing to file a return required by this article, or filing or
causing to be filed or making or causing to be made or giving or causing
to be given any return, certificate, affidavit, representation,
information, testimony or statement required or authorized by this
article which is willfully false, and any operator and any officer of a
corporate operator willfully failing to file a bond required to be filed
pursuant to § 318-53 of this article or failing to file a registration
certificate and such data in connection therewith as the City
Comptroller may, by regulation or otherwise, require or to display or
surrender the certificate of authority as required by this article or
assigning or transferring such certificate of authority; and any operator
and any officer of a corporate operator willfully failing to charge
separately from the rent the tax herein imposed or willfully failing to
state such tax separately on any evidence of occupancy and on any bill
or statement or receipt of rent issue or employed by the operator or
willfully failing or refusing to collect such tax from the occupant, and
any operator and any officer of a corporate operator who shall refer or
cause reference to be made to this tax in a form or manner other than
that required by this article; and any operator failing to keep the
records required by § 318-50 of this article shall, in addition to the
penalties herein or elsewhere prescribed, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishment for which shall be a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Officers of a corporate operator shall be personally
liable for the tax collected or required to be collected by such
corporation under this article and subject to the penalties hereinabove
imposed.
C. The certificate of the City Comptroller to the effect that a tax has not
been paid or that a return, bond or registration certificate has not been
filed or that information has not been supplied pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be presumptive evidence thereof.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the City Comptroller or any
§ 318-62 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-63
314:519
§ 318-64. Notices and time limits.
employee of the City Comptroller to divulge or make known in any
manner the rents or other information relating to the business of a
taxpayer contained in any return required under this article. The
officers charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required
to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in
any action or proceeding in any court except on behalf of the City
Comptroller in any action or proceeding under the provisions of this
article or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events
the court may require the production of and may admit in evidence so
much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent
to the action or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or his duly authorized
representative of a certified copy of any return filed in connection with
his tax nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to
prevent the identification of particular returns and items thereof or the
inspection by the County Attorney or other legal representatives of the
county or by the District Attorney of any county of the return of any
taxpayer who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based
thereon or against whom an action or proceeding has been instituted
for the collection of a tax or penalty. Returns shall be preserved for
three years and thereafter until the City Comptroller permits them to
be destroyed.
B. Any violation of Subsection A of this section shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year,
or both, in the discretion of the court, and if the offender is an officer or
employee of the county, he shall be dismissed from office and be
incapable of holding any public office for a period of five years
thereafter.
A. Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article
may be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended
in a postpaid envelope addressed to such person at the address given in
the last return filed by him pursuant to the provisions of this article or
in any application made by him or, if no return has been filed or
application made, then to such address as may be obtainable. The
mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of
the same by the person to whom addressed. Any period of time which is
determined according to the provisions of this article by the giving of
notice shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
B. The provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules or any other law
relative to limitations of time for the enforcement of a civil remedy shall
not apply to any proceeding or action taken by the county to levy,
appraise, assess, determine or enforce the collection of any tax or
penalty provided by this article. However, except in the case of a
§ 318-63 GENEVA CODE § 318-64
314:520
§ 318-65. Effectiveness of article.
This article shall remain in full force and effect for a period no longer than
three years from the date of its enactment; nothing in this section, however,
shall prohibit the adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the
provisions of this section, upon the expiration of any other local law adopted
pursuant to this section.
willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, no
assessment of additional tax shall be made after the expiration of more
than three years from the date of the filing of a return; provided,
however, that where no return has been filed as provided by law, the tax
may be assessed at any time.
C. Where, before expiration of the period prescribed herein for the
assessment of an additional tax, a taxpayer has consented, in writing,
that such period be extended, the amount of such additional tax due
may be determined at any time within such extended period. The period
so extended may be further, extended by subsequent consents, in
writing, made before the expiration of the extended period.
§ 318-64 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 318-65
314:521
Chapter 321
TAXICABS
§ 321-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the words and phrases stated below have the
following meanings:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the City of Geneva or his
designee.
HACK PLATE — A permit issued by the License Clerk allowing a person to
operate a taxicab in the City of Geneva.
HOLDER — The person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
MANIFEST — A written record or log of the use of a vehicle as a taxicab.
OPERATE — To own, drive, hold a hack plate or have control of a taxicab,
or to engage in the business of operating a taxicab upon the streets of the
City.
OPERATOR — A taxicab driver, owner, hack plate holder or other person
controlling the use of a taxicab in the City. When the operator is not the
driver of the taxicab, the operator as well as the driver shall be responsible
for the acts of the driver and for assuring compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
PARTY — Two or more passengers, not exceeding the capacity of the cab,
who have agreed in advance among themselves to hire a taxicab to furnish
their required service.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, nonprofit corporation,
partnership, association or other type of firm or business enterprise;
excluding, however, governmental entities, agencies or subdivisions.
RATE CARD — A card containing authorized taxicab tariff rates.
SENIOR CITIZEN — Person age 62 or older.[Added 5-7-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
TAXICAB — A motor vehicle which is used for the purpose of carrying
passengers within the City of Geneva, which does not operate on a fixed
route and is used for the purpose of transporting passengers for
compensations, including livery vehicles as defined in § 121-e of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, excluding stretch limousines
used for occasional hire for weddings, proms and special events.[Amended
8-3-1988 by Ord. No. 88-6]
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any individual who drives a taxicab.
TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE — A license permitting an individual to drive
a taxicab within the City.
§ 318-65 GENEVA CODE § 321-1
314:522
TAXICAB LIVERY — An establishment maintained for the purpose of
receiving calls and dispatching taxicabs to transport passengers.
TAXICAB STAND — Any place along the curb or upon the street or a public
place which is designated by the City for the use of taxicabs, and which shall
include a working taxicab stand and/or a taxicab parking zone.
TIME CALL — A request made at least one hour before service is required
for a taxicab to be at a particular place at or before a particular time.
§ 321-2. Hack plates required.
§ 321-3. Application for hack plates.
A. No person shall operate a vehicle as a taxicab within the City unless a
hack plate, issued pursuant to this chapter, is properly attached to such
vehicle; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent any
taxicab not having a hack plate attached from terminating a fare within
the City when such fare commenced outside the City or from answering
a prearranged call in the City, as long as such taxicab has a valid hack
plate.
B. A hack plate may be issued by the City Clerk after compliance with the
provisions set forth in this chapter, upon payment of the required
license fee and upon approval by the Chief of Police.
C. A hack plate shall expire on the 30th day of June after its issuance,
unless revoked, surrendered or abandoned at an earlier time.
[Amended 9-2-1987 by Ord. No. 87-24]
A. A person desiring to secure a hack plate shall register his or her name
for such purpose with the City Clerk and shall pay a registration fee of
$150 for each taxicab. [Amended 6-16-1993 by Ord. No. 6-93]
B. An applicant for a hack plate shall notify the City Clerk of any change of
address. The offering of a hack plate will be forwarded by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the address listed with the City Clerk.
C. No person shall have his name appear on the hack plate registration list
more than once at any given time.
D. When a hack plate becomes available, due to abandonment or
revocation, such hack plate may be issued to the next registered
person. The City Clerk shall notify the first person whose name appears
on the hack plate registration list, in the order of date of registration,
that a hack plate has become available. Such person must make
application for the hack plate within 20 days from the date of mailing of
such notice and must further comply with the provisions of this chapter
in order to secure the hack plate.
E. If the person so notified fails to complete an application and to secure a
hack plate within the time permitted, the City Clerk shall notify the next
§ 321-1 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 321-3
314:523
§ 321-4. Number of hack plates per business or individual.
[Amended 6-16-1993 by Ord. No. 6-93]
Hack plates shall be issued annually by the City, however, in no event shall
more than 12 hack plates be issued to any individual or business.
§ 321-5. Hack plate fee and license fee.
§ 321-6. Vehicle inspections.
No person shall operate a taxicab within the City unless said vehicle has
passed a standard New York State motor vehicle inspection during the
preceding six months and has a properly affixed and current inspection
sticker, and is in good physical repair and in a safe condition for the
transportation of passengers. The Chief of Police may make or cause to be
made at any time a further inspection of any vehicle used as a taxicab in
the City, and if said vehicle is found to be unsafe, unclean, unhealthful or
unsuited for public patronage, he may order the discontinuance of the use
of said vehicle as a taxicab. Inspection and maintenance of the vehicle shall
be guided by the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
person whose name appears on the list and who is eligible for a hack
plate of the availability of a hack plate.
F. The application for a hack plate shall contain the name and address of
the applicant and such other information as the Chief of Police may
require. An applicant shall certify that the hack plate will be used only
on a vehicle that is in good mechanical condition and which meets all of
the requirements for taxicabs as set forth in this chapter.
G. The Police Department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant
for a hack plate, and the report of said investigation and a copy of the
traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the
application for the consideration of the Police Chief.
A. The fee for hack plates shall be $50 annually, and the operator's license
shall be $30 annually, and such fees shall be paid at time the plate is
issued. [Amended 6-16-1993 by Ord. No. 6-93; 9-3-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-8]
B. Upon issuance of a hack plate and license, the City Clerk shall also
issue a taxicab license certificate in a form prescribed by the Chief of
Police.
C. The City Clerk shall keep a record of each hack plate issued, of the
holder, of the location of the office or place of business of the holder and
of the hack plate number assigned to the holder.
D. The holder shall notify the Chief of Police of any change in business
address within 10 days of such change.
§ 321-3 GENEVA CODE § 321-7
314:524
§ 321-7. Rates. [Amended 1-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3; 1-9-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-2; 12-5-2001 by Ord. No. 8-2001; 6-2-2004 by Ord. No.
5-2004; 6-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2-2008]
§ 321-8. Party fares.
No driver of a taxicab shall carry any person other than the passenger first
employing the taxicab without the consent of such passenger. In no event
shall the driver pick up or carry any other person after such driver has
begun to transport the passenger first employing the taxicab unless such
passenger directs the driver to pick up the other person or persons.
§ 321-9. Taxicab regulations.
§ 321-10. Application for taxicab driver's license.
The Police Department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for
a taxicab driver's license, and the report of this investigation and a copy of
the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the
application for consideration by the Chief of Police.
§ 321-11. Renewal of license.
The holder of a taxicab driver's license shall be permitted to renew the
license annually, provided that he complies with all provisions of this
chapter. The application for such renewal must be filed with the City Clerk
not later than the 31st day of December of each successive year. If the
A. The rate for senior citizens (age 62 or older) shall be $4.25 for one or
two senior citizens;
B. For more than two passengers, there shall be added to the rate of $4.25,
as set forth in Subsection A above, the sum of $1.00 for each additional
passenger.
A. All taxicabs shall be equipped with a roof light which shall be
illuminated when the taxicab is vacant or is for hire and shall be kept
unlighted when the taxicab is occupied by paying passengers.
B. All taxicabs shall have a rate card enclosed in a frame affixed inside said
taxicab so as to be clearly visible to all passengers at all times. The rate
card shall set forth the rate being charged by the taxicab for distance,
waiting time, baggage and special rates, and in no event shall said rates
exceed the maximum rates permitted by this section. Such rate card
shall be in a form designated by the Chief of Police and shall contain
such additional information as he may direct.
C. All taxicabs shall be designed and constructed so as to seat five persons
or fewer, not including the driver, and shall have no less than four doors
with a step height of 16 inches maximum. Any station wagon used as a
taxicab shall not use the rear entrance for seating of passengers.
§ 321-7 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 321-11
314:525
application for renewal is not made within this time, the holder will be
deemed to have abandoned the license.
§ 321-12. Renewal of license. [Added 9-7-1988 by Ord. No. 88-8;
amended 9-30-1997 by Ord. No. 97-9]
No person shall drive and operate a taxicab within the City without first
possessing a valid New York State operator's license Class A, B, C or D
and possessing a Class E license as provided by Subdivision 2, § 501 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law and a valid taxicab license issued by the City.
§ 321-13. Taxicab driver regulations.
A. No taxicab driver shall induce any person to be carried by any taxicab
by willful misrepresentation.
B. Each taxicab driver shall keep the interior and exterior of his taxicab in
a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Each taxicab shall at all
times be neat and clean in appearance.
C. No taxicab shall seek employment by persistently driving a taxicab past
any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, railroad station or terminal or
other place of public gathering, nor shall any taxicab driver solicit
employment by driving at such slow speed as to interfere with or
impede traffic. Taxicab drivers shall obey police officers who may from
time to time give instructions in order to relieve traffic congestion and
to preserve the safety and convenience of the public.
D. No person shall drive a taxicab while intoxicated, nor shall any taxicab
driver drink an alcoholic beverage while on duty, nor drive while his
ability is impaired by use of a controlled substance as defined in § 3306
of the Public Health Law.
E. No taxicab driver shall fasten or lock the doors on a cab so that it is
impossible for a passenger to open them from the inside.
F. Each taxicab driver shall search the interior of the taxicab at least once
each day for articles left in the cab. The driver shall immediately take
such property to his supervisor for safekeeping and proper disposition.
G. No taxicab driver shall permit any other person to use his taxicab
driver's license.
H. No taxicab driver shall drive any taxicab for more than a period of 12
continuous hours in any twenty-four-hour period.
I. Each taxicab driver shall display his own taxicab driver's license in a
frame placed inside the taxicab so as to be visible to passengers at all
times and shall include a picture.
J. Each taxicab driver waiting for public employment in any established
working taxi zone shall remain within the sight of his taxicab and shall
at all times be prepared to move the taxicab.
§ 321-11 GENEVA CODE § 321-13
314:526
§ 321-14. Penalties and enforcement.
K. A taxicab driver or operator shall immediately report a refusal to pay a
fare to the Police Department, either in person or by telephone.
L. No taxicab driver shall permit any person or persons in the vehicle
other than a paying customer.
M. A two-year maintenance program record shall be kept on file for each
vehicle used as a taxicab.
N. Any accident involving personal injury or property damage and the
operation of a taxicab must be reported to the Chief of Police within 24
hours.
A. Denial of license application. The Chief of Police may deny a license to
any person who, in his judgment, is undesirable, unfit or incapable of
performing as a holder of a license, who does not comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Chief of Police pursuant to this chapter or who makes a material
misrepresentation on an application. The Chief of Police may also deny
a license to any applicant for a violation by the applicant, or by any
partner, agent, officer or employee of the applicant, of any federal, state
or local law or ordinance.
B. The Chief of Police shall notify an applicant in writing of the reasons for
the denial of a license and shall give the applicant 10 days in which to
request a hearing on the denial.
C. Suspension or revocation of licenses. The Chief of Police or any person
may bring charges against the holder of a license granted under this
chapter alleging a violation by the holder, or any partner, agent, officer
or employee of the holder, of any federal, state or local law or ordinance
or any rules or regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police pursuant
to this chapter. The Chief of Police shall investigate such charges, and,
if he believes the charges are warranted, he shall notify the holder of
the charges and of the possible penalties if the holder is found guilty of
such charges. The holder shall be given 10 days to request a hearing on
such charges. A holder's failure to request a hearing shall be deemed an
admission of the charges.
D. If a holder is found guilty of the charges after a hearing or if the holder
fails to request a hearing or to appear at a scheduled hearing, the Chief
of Police may suspend the holder's license for a period not to exceed 90
days, may revoke the holder's license or may fine the holder a sum not
to exceed $250.
E. Hearing. When a person entitled to a hearing under this chapter makes
a timely request for a hearing, the Chief of Police shall schedule such
hearing within 10 days after the request. The Chief of Police shall hear
and determine the charges. The holder or applicant shall be permitted
to be represented by counsel at the hearing, to submit evidence and
§ 321-13 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 321-14
314:527
Chapter 327
TREES
summons witnesses on his behalf, to inspect documents and to crossexamine
opposing witnesses. The burden of proving the charges shall
be upon the person alleging the same. Compliance with the technical
rules of evidence shall not be required.
F. Factors to consider concerning violations. In determining whether a
license should be denied to an applicant or whether a penalty should be
imposed upon the holder for a violation of a law or ordinance, the Chief
of Police shall consider the following factors:
(1) The nature of the violation.
(2) The specific duties and responsibilities of a holder of a license and
the relationship between the violation and a holder's fitness or
ability to perform such duties or responsibilities.
(3) The time which has elapsed since the violation and the age of the
person at the time of the violation.
(4) The public safety interest in protecting property and the health,
safety and welfare of specific individuals or the general public.
(5) Any mitigating circumstances or information concerning the
rehabilitation or good conduct of a person.
(6) Such other factors as the Chief of Police may deem relevant or as
may be mandated in the Correction Law or other law.
G. Penalties for offenses. In addition to any other penalty which may be
provided in this chapter, a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $150 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, or by a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500 to
be recovered by the City in a civil action. Every day of such violation
may be held to constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above
penalties, the Chief of Police shall be specifically empowered to order a
person charged with any violation of this chapter to take such
corrective action as may be required to bring such violation into
compliance with the intent and provisions of this chapter.
§ 321-14 GENEVA CODE § 321-14
314:528
ARTICLE I
Shade Trees
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 44, Arts. III, of the 1968 Code]
§ 327-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK TREES — Park trees are herein defined as trees found in public parks
having individual names and in all areas owned by the city to which the
public has free access, including cemeteries.
STREET TREES — Street trees are herein defined as trees on land lying
between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within
the city.
§ 327-2. Creation and establishment of Shade Tree Committee.
A Shade Tree Committee for the City of Geneva, New York is hereby
established. The Committee shall consist of six to nine members, appointed
by the City Manager and approved by the City Council. Members should
be drawn from a variety of backgrounds, including tree professionals;
scientists; homeowners; the City Engineer in his capacity as Director of
Public Works; and city government. The services of consultants may be
sought from time to time.
§ 327-3. Term of office.
The term of office shall be three years, staggered, with eligibility for
reappointment. In the event of a vacancy during the term of an
appointment, a successor shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term and
shall be eligible for a full three-year appointment thereafter.
§ 327-4. Compensation of members.
Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation. The
Committee will have no budget.
§ 327-5. Duties and responsibilities of Committee.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to study, investigate,
develop and administer a written plan for the care, preservation,
pruning, planting, replanting and removal of trees in city parks, along
streets and in all public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to
the City Council and upon acceptance shall constitute the official city
tree plan.
B. The Shade Tree Committee shall promote the establishment of an
inventory of street and park trees, to be updated at least triennially.
§ 327-1 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 327-5
314:529
§ 327-6. Operation of Committee.
The Committee shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations, and keep a record of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. Meetings will
be scheduled as activity warrants.
§ 327-7. Species selection. [Amended 5-1-2019 by Ord. No. 3-2019]
The Shade Tree Committee and the Director of Public Works will maintain
lists of desirable and undesirable trees for planting on City property. Efforts
will be made to assure a wide diversity of tree species, with no one species
constituting more than 10% of the total urban forest.
§ 327-8. Spacing of street trees. [Amended 5-1-2019 by Ord. No.
3-2019]
The spacing of street trees will be based on tree sizes as follows: small trees
- 15 feet; medium trees - 25 feet; large trees - 35 feet. Exceptions may be
special plantings approved by the Committee. Tree lawns (the grassy area
between curb and sidewalk) must be at least four feet wide for small tree
planting, and at least six feet for medium and large trees.
§ 327-9. Planting distances.
§ 327-10. Public tree care.
C. The Committee will foster community education via news media,
special occasions such as Arbor Day, and workshops from time to time.
D. The Committee will assist the City Manager in preparing the annual
tree budget.
E. The Committee serves in an advisory capacity to the Director of Public
Works, having no enforcement powers per se.
A. No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of a street corner.
B. No street tree shall be planted within 10 feet of a fire plug or utility
pole.
C. No street tree other than those species listed as small shall be planted
under or within 10 horizontal feet of an overhead utility wire.
A. The city shall have the right, upon written notification of the adjacent
property owner at least 48 hours in advance, to plant, prune, maintain
and remove trees within the lines of all streets, public ways and public
grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve and
enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
B. The Shade Tree Committee may remove or cause to be removed any
tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason
§ 327-5 GENEVA CODE § 327-10
314:530
§ 327-11. Tree topping. [Amended 5-1-2019 by Ord. No. 3-2019]
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or City
department to top any tree on public property. "Topping" is defined as
the severe cutting back of limbs within the tree's crown to such a degree
as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Crown reduction
by a qualified expert may be substituted, as appropriate. (Trees severely
damaged by storms or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions
where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this
rule as the determination of the Director of Public Works with consultation
with the City Arborist.)
§ 327-12. Pruning and corner clearance. [Amended 5-1-2019 by
Ord. No. 3-2019]
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
City of Geneva shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not
severely obstruct the light from street lamps or obstruct the view of any
intersection, and so that the lowest branches are at least 13 feet above
the street surface and at least eight feet above the sidewalk surface. Said
owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or
decayed limbs which constitute a menace to public safety. The City shall
have the right to prune any tree on private property which interferes
with the proper illumination by street lamps, or interferes with visibility
of any traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections. Tree
limbs that grow near high voltage lines shall be maintained clear of such
conductors by the electric utility in compliance with applicable franchise
agreements. The utility tree pruning policy must be reviewed by the utility
and the Director of Public Works prior to any pruning by the utility.
§ 327-13. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed at least six inches
below the surface.
§ 327-14. Protection of trees.
In order to maintain the overall urban forest, all reasonable efforts shall be
made to replace trees that are removed and to protect quality trees that are
endangered. Removed trees shall be replaced, insofar as possible, on a onefor-
one basis within one year. Location, species and planting technique shall
be determined by the committee. Street trees shall be protected as much
as possible from damage during construction, sidewalk repair, utilities work
above and below ground and other similar activities. The zone of protection
of its nature is injurious to electric power lines, gas lines, water lines
or other public utilities; or is affected by any injurious fungus, insect or
other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by
adjacent property owners, provided that the selection and location of
said trees be in accordance with §§ 327-7 through 327-9 of this article.
§ 327-10 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 327-14
314:531
shall include the ground beneath the tree canopy. In-ground tree planters in
sidewalks shall be at least six feet square and covered with bricks or pavers
as appropriate.
§ 327-15. Risk management policy.
The City of Geneva has an active policy to maintain the safety of public
lands from potentially hazardous trees. The city will endeavor to eliminate,
in a timely fashion, any tree deemed hazardous. When available fiscal,
equipment or human resources limit the ability of the city to remove highrisk
trees, priority shall be placed on trees deemed to carry the highest
risk. The standard for rating the level of hazard of a particular tree will be
the International Society of Arboriculture's twelve-point hazard evaluation
system. The Director of Public Works will administer this program and have
final judgment in all matters concerning the mitigation measures taken for
any tree deemed hazardous.
§ 327-16. Interference with City Shade Tree Committee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Geneva Shade Tree Committee, or any of its agents, while engaging in and
around the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing
of any street tree or park tree, as authorized in this article.
§ 327-17. Arborist's license and bond.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the occupation of
pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the city without
a license. No license shall be required of any public service company,
including electric utilities and their agents and contractors or city
employees doing such work in the pursuit of their normal endeavors.
§ 327-17.1. Standard of tree care. [Added 5-1-2019 by Ord. No.
3-2019]
The standard of tree care, as adopted by the Shade Tree Committee, shall
be the most recent version of the American National Standard for Tree Care
Operations, ANSI A300 - Part 1.
§ 327-18. Damage to trees.
No person shall mutilate, vandalize, carve or otherwise damage any public
tree. When, as determined by the Shade Tree Committee, such damage
results in destruction or removal of a tree, the guilty party shall replace that
tree with a tree of equivalent value and species, or otherwise be subject to
provisions of § 327-19, hereby appended.
§ 327-19. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be, upon conviction
or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 327-14 GENEVA CODE § 327-20
314:532
§ 327-20. Review by City Council.
The Geneva City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Shade Tree Committee. Any resident may appeal from any
ruling or order of the Shade Tree Committee to the City Council, who may
hear the matter and render a final decision.
§ 327-20 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 327-20
314:533

ARTICLE II
Powers and Immunities in Regard to Dutch Elm Disease
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 80 of the 1968 Code]
§ 327-21. Election to enjoy powers and immunities.
The city elects to exercise and enjoy the powers and immunities prescribed
and granted in §§ 164, 165 and 167 of Article 14 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law with respect and in regard to the dutch elm disease within the
limits of the city.
§ 327-21 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 327-21
314:535
Chapter 332
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 335.
§ 332-1. Purpose. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 5-2012]
The outdoor storage of abandoned, junked, or discarded vehicles, boats,
or trailers upon privately owned property within the City is a source of
vexation and annoyance. It constitutes an attractive nuisance to children,
and a peril to their safety in the case of fire or explosion whenever gasoline
is left in the fuel tanks of such vehicles. The preservation of public health
and safety compels the enactment of this chapter.
§ 332-2. Definitions. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 5-2012]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle, boat, or trailer which is not
operable, or which has been abandoned, junked, or discarded, or stored
in such a manner that the vehicle, boat, or trailer is not readily operable.
Any vehicle that is unlicensed, unregistered, and/or uninsured for a period
exceeding 12 months shall also be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle.
BOAT — Any vessel designed or otherwise used for transport on water.
TRAILER — Any conveyance with wheels or runners, designed or otherwise
used for transporting vehicles or equipment.
§ 332-3. Abandoned vehicles on private property prohibited;
exception.
§ 332-4. Presumption. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 5-2012]
It shall be conclusively presumed that the person having control of the real
property upon which the abandoned vehicle is placed or stored, whether as
owner, occupant, lessee, agent or tenant, is the person who has permitted
such abandoned vehicle to remain upon the premises.
A. No person shall place, deposit, store or allow to remain upon any
private land or property within the City more than one abandoned
vehicle for a period of more than two weeks, except in a garage or other
similar enclosure. [Amended 6-6-2012 by Ord. No. 5-2012]
B. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to
commercial garages and new or used car dealers at their place of
business.
§ 327-21 GENEVA CODE § 332-5
314:536
§ 332-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
Chapter 335
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking lots — See Ch. 243.
Railroads — See Ch. 268.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 321.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 332.
§ 332-5 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 332-5
314:537

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 335-1. Definitions of words and phrases.
§ 335-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Department of Public Works shall install and maintain traffic control
devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter to make
effective the provisions of said chapter and may install and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate, warn
or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York
subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 335-3. Authority of Chief of Police to regulate traffic.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this
chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of
the traffic ordinances of this City.
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — The time standard which is in current
use in this state whenever certain hours are named herein or on traffic
control devices.
PARKING METER ZONE — A designated location upon or within which
the parking of vehicles is regulated by parking meters.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A plot or parcel of land or building owned
and/or leased by this City, not including highways, upon or within which
the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs and/or parking meters.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the power, in the event of fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians or
property, to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or of local laws, ordinances,
orders, rules, regulations, administrative code or sanitary code
provisions regulating traffic.
B. The Chief of Police shall in the exercise of his powers as set forth in
Subsection A herein, cause appropriate signs to be temporarily erected
whenever necessary to adequately advise all persons of such temporary
changes.
§ 335-1 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-4
314:539
§ 335-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated as
follows:
A. Three section signal heads at the following intersections:
Name of Street At Intersection With
Castle Street Exchange Street
Castle Street Genesee Street
Castle Street Main Street and Milton Street
Castle Street [Added by Ord.
No. 78-18, eff. 12-6-1978]
Pulteney Street
Copeland Avenue and Town
and Country Plaza [Added
5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2]
Hamilton Street
Exchange Street [Repealed by Ord. No. 80-21, eff. 7-2-1980]
Exchange Street North Street
Exchange Street State Street and Middle Street
Genesee Street Avenue D
Genesee Street Lewis Street
Genesee Street North Street
North Main Street [Added
5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2]
North Street
North Street, East Evans Street
North Street, West Larchmont Street
North Street, West North Brook Street
Pulteney Street Hamilton Street
Pulteney Street Milton Street and High Street
Pulteney Street Washington Street
Pulteney Street William Street
Seneca Street Linden Street
Wegman's Entrance and Town
and Country Plaza [Added
5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2]
Hamilton Street
White Springs Road [Added
5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2]
Hamilton Street
William Street [Added by
Ord. No. 78-18, eff.
12-6-1978]
South Main Street
§ 335-4 GENEVA CODE § 335-4
314:540
§ 335-5. One-way roadways. [Amended by Ord. No. 70-5, eff.
3-4-1970; Ord. No. 70-16, eff. 6-3-1970; Ord. No. 70-30, eff.
12-2-1970; Ord. No. 74-13, eff. 6-5-1974; Ord. No. 74-23, eff.
8-7-1974; 12-6-1978 by Ord. No. 78-18; Ord. No. 79-18, eff.
9-5-1979; Ord. No. 80-13, eff. 6-4-1980; Ord. No. 80-22, eff.
8-6-1980; Ord. No. 83-15, eff. 7-6-1983; 4-5-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6]
B. Three section signal heads with green arrows permitting right turns on
red designated as follows:
(1) Castle Street at West North Street with green arrow permitting
right turn on red into Castle Street from West North Street for
traffic proceeding from the west.
(2) Exchange Street at Lake Street with green arrows permitting right
turns into Lake Street from Exchange Street for traffic proceeding
from the south and into Exchange Street from Lake Street for
traffic proceeding from the east.
(3) Seneca Street at Main Street with green arrow permitting right
turn into Seneca Street from Main Street for traffic proceeding
from the south.
A. The following streets are hereby designated as one-way traffic in the
direction indicated:
(1) Center Street between State Street and North Street proceeding
north.
(2) Dorchester Avenue proceeding north and east.
(3) Franklin Street from Exchange Street to west line of driveway west
of the Penn Central Railroad tracks proceeding east.
(4) Howard Street proceeding west.
(5) Linden Street proceeding south.
(6) Park Avenue proceeding west.
(7) Park Place proceeding from its northerly intersection with Main
Street and proceeding westerly, then southerly and then easterly in
a semicircle to its southerly intersection with Main Street.
(8) Pine Street proceeding south.
(9) Seymour Alley proceeding east.
(10) Union Street proceeding north.
(11)West Street between Washington Street and High Street
proceeding north. [Amended 8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
§ 335-4 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-5
314:541
§ 335-6. Prohibition of U-Turns.
The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction is hereby
prohibited at the following locations:
Name of Street At Intersection With
Castle Street Exchange Street
Castle Street Linden Street
Castle Street Main Street and Milton Street
Seneca Street Exchange Street
Seneca Street Linden Street
Seneca Street Main Street
(12)William Street between Main Street and Pulteney Street
proceeding east.
(13) Mason Street between North Street and Torrey Avenue proceeding
north.
(14) Milton Street between Pulteney and Main Street proceeding west.
(15) Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive proceeding south.
(16) Patterson Alley proceeding west.
(17) Argyle Street proceeding east.
(18)Worthington Avenue proceeding east.
(19) Geneva Gardens between Pulteney Street and Jay Street
proceeding west and south. [Added 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-12;
amended 11-17-1998 by Ord. No. 98-16]
§ 335-5 GENEVA CODE § 335-6
314:542
ARTICLE II
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 335-7. Through highways.
A. Castle Street is hereby designated a through highway between Main
Street and West North Street, and stop signs shall be erected on the
following entrances thereto:
(1) Union Street from the south.
(2) Pulteney Street from the south.
(3) West Avenue from the south.
(4) Oak Street from the north.
(5) Maxwell Avenue from the north.
(6) Brook Street [Repealed 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 11-95]
(7) Hillcrest Avenue from the north.
(8) Highland Avenue from the northeast.
(9) Sunset Drive from the east.
B. Exchange Street is hereby designated a through highway, and stop
signs shall be erected on the following entrances:
(1) Gates Avenue from the west.
(2) Buffalo Street from the west.
(3) Hogarth Avenue from the west.
(4) Willard Avenue from the west.
(5) Dove Street from the east.
(6) Toledo Street from the west.
(7) Jackson Street from the west.
(8) Railroad Place from the east.
(9) Canal Street from the east.
(10) Tillman Street from the west. [Added by Ord. No. 74-13, eff.
6-5-1974]
(11) Lewis Street from the west. [Added by Ord. No. 78-26, eff.
12-6-1978]
(12) Seneca Street from the west. [Added 12-4-1985 by Ord. No.
85-19]
§ 335-7 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-7
314:543
C. Genesee Street is hereby designated a through highway, and stop signs
shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(1) Avenue G from the east and west.
(2) Avenue F from the east and west.
(3) Gates Avenue from the east.
(4) Avenue E from the east and west.
(5) Avenue D from the east.
(6) John Street from the west.
(7) State Street from the east.
(8) LaFayette Avenue from the west.
(9) Goodelle Terrace from the west.
(10) Genesee Park Place from the east.
(11) Colt Street from the west.
D. Hamilton Street is hereby designated a through highway, and stop signs
shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(1) North Cloverleaf from the north.
(2) South Cloverleaf from the south.
(3) Madison Street from the north.
(4) Monroe Street from the north.
(5) DeLancey Drive from the north.
(6) Jefferson Avenue from the north.
(7) South West Street from the north.
(8) East entrance of Town and Country Plaza from the south.
(9) Copeland Avenue from the north.
(10) Sharon Street from the north.
(11)West entrance of Town and Country Plaza from the south.
(12) Spring Street from the north.
(13) White Springs Road from the south.
(14) Atwood Avenue from the north.
(15) Norwood Avenue from the north. [Added by Ord. No. 70-9, eff.
4-1-1970]
§ 335-7 GENEVA CODE § 335-7
314:544
E. High Street is hereby designated a through highway between Pulteney
Street and Nursery Avenue, and stop signs shall be erected on the
following entrances thereto:
(1) Elmwood Place from the north.
(2) Grove Street from the south.
(3) Hoffman Avenue from the south.
(4) Grant Avenue from the south.
(5) Brook Street from the north.
(6) Columbia Street from the north.
(7) West Street from the south.
(8) Davis Street from the south.
(9) Universal Avenue from the north.
(10) Optical Street from the north and south.
F. Lyceum Street is hereby designated a through highway from Elmwood
Place to Nursery Avenue, and stop signs shall be erected on the
following entrances thereto:
(1) Mill Street from the north.
(2) Brook Street [Repealed 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 15-95]
(3) Columbia Street from the south.
(4) Optical Street from the south.
G. Main Street is hereby designated a through highway, and:
(1) Stops signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(a) John Street from the east.
(b) LaFayette Avenue from the east and west.
(c) Lewis Street from the east and west.
(d) Dorchester Avenue from the west.
(e) Colt Street from the east.
(f) Park Place from the west.
(g) North Cloverleaf from the west.
(h) South Cloverleaf from the west.
(i) St. Clair Street from the west.
§ 335-7 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-7
314:545
(2) A yield sign shall be erected on the entrance thereto on Jay Street
from the west.
(3) A yield sign shall be erected on Washing Street from the west.
[Added by Ord. No. 83-17, eff. 9-7-1983]
H. North Street is hereby designated a through highway, and:
(1) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(a) Pre-Emption Street from the north.
(b) Munson Avenue from the south.
(c) Herbert Street from the south.
(d) Wadsworth Street from the north and south.
(e) Center Street from the south.
(f) North Avenue from the north.
(g) Clinton Street from the south.
(h) Sherrill Street from the north.
(i) Rose Street from the south.
(j) Folger Street from the south.
(k) Roosevelt Street from the north. [Added by Ord. No. 70-26,
eff. 9-2-1970]
(l) North Main Street from the south.
(m) Cherry Street from the south.
(n) Oak Street from the south.
(o) Maple Street from the south.
(p) Clover Street from the north.
(q) Carter Road from the north.
(r) Maxwell Avenue from the south.
(s) Hillcrest Avenue from the south.
(t) Sprucewood Drive from the south.
(u) Highland Avenue from the south.
(v) Clark Street from the north. [Added by Ord. No. 70-14, eff.
3-6-1974]
§ 335-7 GENEVA CODE § 335-7
314:546
(w) Evans Street from the south. [Added by Ord. No. 70-14, eff.
3-6-1974]
(x) North Brook Street from the south. [Added by Ord. No. 74-8,
eff. 3-6-1974]
(y) Larchmont Street [Added by Ord. No. 75-14, eff.
1-10-1975; repealed by Ord. No. 79-16, eff. 8-1-1979]
(2) Yield signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(a) Sweeney Avenue from the north.
(b) Hallenbeck Avenue from the south.
(c) Kirkwood Avenue from the north.
(d) Austin Place from the south. [Added by Ord. No. 70-14, eff.
5-13-1970]
(e) Doran Avenue from the north. [Added by Ord. No. 70-14, eff.
5-13-1970]
(f) Virginia Street from the north. [Added by Ord. No. 70-14,
eff. 5-13-1970]
(g) Crystal Street from the north. [Added by Ord. No. 70-14, eff.
5-13-1970]
(h) Syndicate Street from the south. [Added by Ord. No. 70-14,
eff. 5-13-1970]
I. Pulteney Street is hereby designated a through highway between
Castle Street and Jay Street, and stop signs shall be erected on the
following entrances thereto:
(1) Elmwood Avenue from the west.
(2) Worthington Avenue from the west.
(3) Cortland Street from the west.
(4) Argyle Street from the west.
(5) Clair Street [Added by Ord. No. 68-13, eff. 11-6-1968;
repealed by Ord. No. 71-7, eff. 4-7-1971]
(6) Ver Planck Street from the west.
(7) Hammond Street from the west.
(8) Hammond Place from the west.
(9) Park Avenue from the east. [Added by Ord. No. 70-16, eff.
6-30-1970]
§ 335-7 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-7
314:547
(10) Howard Street from the east. [Added by Ord. No. 70-16, eff.
6-30-1970]
J. Washington Street is hereby designated a through highway between
Pulteney Street and Reed Street, and:
(1) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(a) Pine Street from the north.
(b) Madison Street from the south.
(c) Monroe Street from the south.
(d) Grove Street from the north.
(e) Jefferson Avenue from the south.
(f) South West Street from the south.
(g) South Morrell Avenue from the south.
(h) Morrell Avenue from the north.
(i) Nagel Place from the north.
(j) Oxford Place from the south.
(k) Nursery Avenue from the north.
(l) Sharon Street from the south.
(m) Norwood Avenue from the north and south.
(n) Spring Street from the south.
(o) Atwood Avenue from the south.
(p) Linwood Avenue from the north.
(q) Reed Street from the south.
(2) A yield sign shall be erected on the entrance thereto on Copeland
Avenue from the south.
K. William Street is hereby designated a through highway between
Pulteney Street and Nursery Avenue, and stop signs shall be erected on
the following entrances thereto:
(1) Grove Street from the north and south.
(2) Hoffman Avenue from the north.
(3) West Street from the south.
(4) Nagel Place from the south.
§ 335-7 GENEVA CODE § 335-7
314:548
§ 335-8. Four-way stop intersections.
The following intersections are hereby designated as four-way stop
intersections, and stop signs shall be erected on all entrances thereto:
Name of Street At Intersection With
Avenue E [Added by Ord. No.
84-5, eff. 4-4-1984]
Lehigh Street
Brook Street [Added 11-6-1995
by Ord. No. 95-15]
Lyceum Street
Castle Street [Added 6-5-1995
by Ord. No. 95-11]
Brook Street and North Brook Street
High Street Nursery Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. 76-3, eff. 3-3-1976]
Pleasant Street
Jefferson Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. 80-15, eff. 6-4-1980]
Beacon Street
LaFayette Avenue [Added by
Ord. No. 84-16, eff. 11-7-1984]
Hillcrest Avenue
LaFayette Avenue Oak Street
Maple Street [Added by Ord. No.
73-19, eff. 9-5-1973]
Pleasant Street
Maxwell Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. 97-15, eff. 12-16-1997]
LaFayette Avenue
Maxwell Avenue [Added by Ord.
No. 69-14, eff. 11-5-1969]
Pleasant Street
North Brook Street [Added by
Ord. No. 75-10, eff. 9-3-1975]
Pleasant Street
Oak Street [Added 6-3-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-10]
Lewis Street
Pulteney Street [Added by Ord.
No. 71-7, eff. 4-7-1971]
St. Clair Street
L. Middle Street is hereby designated a through highway between
Exchange Street and Evans Street, and stop signs shall be erected on
the following entrances thereto: [Added by Ord. No. 70-8, eff.
4-1-1970]
(1) Wadsworth Street from the north and south.
(2) Herbert Street from the north.
(3) Andes Avenue from the north.
(4) Hallenbeck Avenue from the north.
§ 335-7 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-8
314:549
Name of Street At Intersection With
South Exchange Street [Added
by Ord. No. 78-14, eff.
11-1-1978]
East Washington Street and New
Linden Street
William Street Nursery Avenue
§ 335-9. Stop intersections.
The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and
stop signs shall be erected on the street entrances of the second mentioned
streets as follows:
Ada Street with Bennett Street from the west. [Added by Ord. No. 84-15,
eff. 8-1-1984; amended 5-3-1989 by Ord. No. 9-1989]
Avenue E with Lehigh Street from the north and south. [Added by Ord.
No. 70-16, eff. 6-3-1970]
Bell Avenue with Mason Street from the north. [Added 10-6-1993 by Ord.
No. 14-1993]
Bell Avenue with Roosevelt Street from the west. [Added 10-5-1998 by
Ord. No. 9-1988]
Bell Avenue with Sherrill Street from the west. [Added 10-5-1988 by Ord.
No. 9-1988]
Bennett Street with Reed Road from the north.
Bennett Street with West High Street from the east
Carter Road with Angelo Street from the east. [Added by Ord. No. 75-17,
eff. 11-5-1975]
Castle Street, East, with Bradford Street from the north.
Castle Street with Geneva Street from the north. [Added by Ord. No.
80-7, eff. 3-5-1980]
Center Street with Toledo Street from the east.
Central Avenue with Gates Avenue from the south. [Added 5-3-1989 by
Ord. No. 9-1989]
Colt Street with Elm Street from the north and south. [Amended by Ord.
No. 68-14, eff. 12-4-1968]
Copeland Avenue with Cross Street from the west.
Cortland Street with Madison Street from the north and south. [Added by
Ord. No. 70-14, eff. 5-13-1970]
East Lewis Street with South Wadsworth Street from the east. [Added
5-1-2002 by Ord. No. 2-2002]
E. North Street with Austin Place from the south. [Added 5-3-1989 by
Ord. No. 8-1989]
E. North Street with Crystal Street from the north. [Added 5-3-1989 by
Ord. No. 8-1989]
§ 335-8 GENEVA CODE § 335-9
314:550
E. North Street with Doran Avenue from the north. [Added 5-3-1989 by
Ord. No. 8-1989]
E. North Street with Hallenbeck Avenue from the south. [Added 5-3-1989
by Ord. No. 8-1989]
E. North Street with Kirkwood Avenue from the north. [Added 5-3-1989
by Ord. No. 8-1989]
E. North Street with Sweeney Avenue from the north. [Added 5-3-1989
by Ord. No. 8-1989]
E. North Street with Syndicate Street from the south. [Added 5-3-1989
by Ord. No. 8-1989]
E. North Street with Virginia Street from the north. [Added 5-3-1989 by
Ord. No. 8-1989]
Elmwood Place with Elmwood Avenue from the east. [Added 12-19-2000
by Ord. No. 9-2000]
Forge Avenue with Doran Avenue from the west. [Added by Ord. No.
78-8, eff. 8-2-1978]
Garden Street with Division Street from the north and south. [Added by
Ord. No. 71-16, eff. 8-4-1971]
Gates Avenue with Lehigh Street from the north and south. [Added by
Ord. No. 70-16, eff. 6-3-1970]
Geneva Street with Exchange Place from the east. [Added by Ord. No.
72-1, eff. 2-2-1972]
Geneva Street with Tillman Street from the east.
Greenhurst Street with Division Street from the north. [Added by Ord.
No. 71-16, eff. 8-4-1971]
Hallenbeck Avenue with Andes Avenue from the north and south.
Hillcrest Avenue with LaFayette Avenue from the north and south. [Added
by Ord. No. 83-19, eff. 11-2-1983]
Jackson Street with Center Street from the north. [Added 11-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 4-2018]
LaFayette Avenue with Cherry Street from the north and south.
LaFayette Avenue with Hillside Drive from the south.
LaFayette Avenue with Maple Street from the north. [Added by Ord. No.
70-16, eff. 6-3-1970]
Lake Front Arterial, southbound lane, with the northerly arc of traffic circle
opposite Lake Street from the east at Station 112-OOW as designated on
the State Arterial Map.
Lake Front Arterial, southbound lane, with the northerly arc of traffic circle
opposite Lake Street from the east at Station 115-OOW as designated on
the State Arterial Map.
§ 335-9 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-9
314:551
Lake Front Arterial, southbound lane, with the northerly arc of traffic circle
opposite Lake Street from the east at Station with Geneva Street from the
south.
Lewis Street with Cherry Street from the north and south.
Lewis Street with Geneva Street from the south.
Lewis Street with Merrill Place from the south.
Maxwell Ave with LaFayette [Repealed 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-15]
Middle Street with Wadsworth Street from the north and south.
Monroe Street with DeLancey Drive from the west.
New Linden Street with Paradise Alley from the east. [Added by Ord. No.
70-1, eff. 1-7-1970]
North Exchange Street with Prospect Avenue from the west. [Added by
Ord. No. 79-6, eff. 4-4-1979]
Nursery Avenue with Garden Street from the west.
Nursery Avenue with Greenhurst Avenue from the west.
Nursery Avenue with Lyceum Street from the west. [Added by Ord. No.
80-17, eff. 6-4-1980]
Oak Street with Hillside Drive from the west.
Oak Street with Lewis Street from the east.
Oak Street with Pleasant Street from the west.
Pre-Emption Road (County Road No. 6) with Reed Road from the east.
Prospect Avenue with Burrall Avenue from the north.
Pulteney Street with Jay Street from the north. [Added 4-5-1989 by Ord.
No. 5-1989]
Reed Street with Garden Street from the east. [Added by Ord. No. 70-23,
eff. 9-2-1970]
Reed Street with Greenhurst from the east. [Added by Ord. No. 70-23,
eff. 9-2-1970]
Reed Street with William Street from the east. [Added by Ord. No. 70-23,
eff. 9-2-1970]
Richards Avenue Playground entrance with John Street from the east and
west. [Added 5-7-1986 by Ord. No. 86-4]
Roosevelt Street with Torrey Avenue from the west. [Added by Ord. No.
73-2, eff. 1-3-1973]
S. Main Street with Jay Street from the west. [Added 5-3-1989 by Ord.
No. 8-1989]
Seneca Alley with Seneca Street from the south. [Added 2-1-1989 by
Ord. No. 1-1989]
Seneca Street with Exchange Street from the north. [Added 12-4-1985
by Ord. No. 85-18]
§ 335-9 GENEVA CODE § 335-9
314:552
Seneca Street with South Exchange Street from the south. [Added by Ord.
No. 69-13, eff. 9-3-1969]
Sharon Street with Cross Street from the east and west.
Sherrill Street with Avenue A from the east. [Added by Ord. No. 72-19,
eff. 9-6-1972]
Sherrill Street with Avenue C from the east. [Added by Ord. No. 72-19,
eff. 9-6-1972]
South Exchange Street with Paradise Alley from the west. [Added by Ord.
No. 70-1, eff. 1-7-1970]
State Street with Center Street from the south.
State Street with Clinton Street from the north. [Added by Ord. No.
73-23, eff. 11-7-1973]
Washington Street with Copeland Avenue from the south. [Added
5-3-1989 by Ord. No. 8-1989]
Washington Street with Reed Street from the east. [Added 3-2-2005 by
Ord. No. 1-2005]
Washington Street with West Street from the east and west. [Added
12-1-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004]
Washington Street with West Street from the south. [Added 12-1-2004 by
Ord. No. 11-2004]
West High Street with Ada Street from the north. [Added by Ord. No.
69-11, eff. 8-6-1969]
West High Street with Division Street from the south. [Added by Ord. No.
71-16, eff. 8-4-1971]
West High Street with Emily Street from the north. [Added 12-19-2000
by Ord. No. 9-2000]
West High Street with Jeanette Street from the north. [Added 12-19-2000
by Ord. No. 9-2000]
West High Street with Katherine Street from the north. [Added by Ord.
No. 84-1, eff. 1-11-1984]
West High Street with Reed Street from the south. [Added by Ord. No.
80-20, eff. 7-2-1980]
White Springs Road with Jay Street from the east. [Added by Ord. No.
69-11, eff. 8-6-1969]
White Springs Road with St. Clair Street from the east. [Added by Ord.
No. 69-11, eff. 8-6-1969]
§ 335-10. Yield intersections. [Amended 3-3-1976 by Ord. No.
3-1976; 4-4-1984 by Ord. No. 4-1984; 5-3-1989 by Ord. No. 9-1989]
The following intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections,
and yield signs shall be erected on the street entrances of the second
mentioned streets as follows:
§ 335-9 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-10
314:553
(Reserved)
§ 335-11. Right turn only. [Added 6-5-1974 by Ord. No. 13-1974]
Tillman Street from the west onto Exchange Street southerly.
§ 335-12. No left turn. [Added 8-1-1990 by Ord. No. 13-1990]
North Street from the east onto Maxwell Avenue southerly between the
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and
3:30 p.m. on school days.
§ 335-13. No right turn on red.
No right turn from Castle Street from the west onto Main Street. [Added
7-7-1999 by Ord. No. 5-1999]
No right turn on red from Castle Street from the west onto Pulteney Street,
Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m. [Added 7-7-1999 by Ord. No. 5-1999]
No right turn on red from Linden Street from the north onto Seneca Street.
[Added 10-5-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2016]
No right turn on red from Maxwell Avenue from the south onto North
Street, when school is in session from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 3:30 p.m. [Added 11-3-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004; amended
6-21-2006 by Ord. No. 3-2006]
No right turn on red from North Genesee Street from the north onto North
Street. [Added 10-6-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]
No right turn from Pulteney Street from the south onto Castle Street.
[Added 7-7-1999 by Ord. No. 5-1999]
No right turn on red from Pulteney Street onto Hamilton Street. [Added
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004]
No right turn on red from White Springs Road from the south onto
Hamilton Street. [Added 5-5-2004 by Ord. No. 4-2004]
§ 335-10 GENEVA CODE § 335-13
314:554
ARTICLE III
Speed Regulations
§ 335-14. Maximum speed limits.
§ 335-15. School speed zones.
A. Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed on or along highways within the corporate
limits of the City except on the following highways: [Amended
2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-5; 9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 3-2001]
(1) Hamilton Street.
(2) Arterial Highway.
(3) Lochland Road.
B. Thirty-five miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed
at which vehicles may proceed within the corporate limits of the City on
or along the following highways:
(1) Arterial Highway (Route 5 and 20) - Hamilton Street from a point
0.1 mile east of the South Main Street overpass westerly to the City
line. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-24, eff. 8-7-1974; Ord. No.
84-7; Ord. No. 96-11; Ord. No. 97-1; 2-11-1998 by Ord. No.
98-5]
(2) Lochland Road (Route 14) - from the City line northerly to a point
0.1 mile north of the north line of 1029 Lochland Road, Geneva,
New York. [Added 9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 3-2001]
C. Forty-five miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed
at which vehicles may proceed within the corporate limits of the City on
or along the following highways: [Added by Ord. No. 80-3, eff.
2-6-1980]
(1) Arterial Highway (Routes 5 and 20) from the east side of the South
Main Street overpass easterly to the City line.
D. Ten miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed within the corporate limits of the City on or
along the following highways: [Added by Ord. No. 82-5, eff.
3-3-1982]
(1) That portion of South Exchange Street from the south curbline of
East Washington Street south to and including the City of Geneva
Recreation Complex Parking Lot located at the southern end of
South Exchange Street.
A. Fifteen miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed on or along the following speed zones
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on school days:
§ 335-14 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-15
314:555
[Amended by Ord. No. 81-16, eff. 5-6-1981; Ord. No. 81-28, eff.
9-2-1981; 11-5-1986 by Ord. No. 86-9]
Carter Road in front of Geneva High School
Elmwood Avenue in front of St. Stephen's Grammar School
High Street in front of St. Stephen's Grammar School
Milton Street in front of Geneva Middle School
Pulteney Street in front of DeSales High School
Pulteney Street in front of Geneva Middle School
West North Street in front of North Street School
West Street in front of West Street School
William Street adjacent to Geneva Middle School
B. For the purpose of this section, "school speed zone" shall mean that
portion of the highway or street passing the school building and
extending 300 feet along such highway or street in either direction from
the building line of the school abutting on the highway or street.49
49.Editor's Note: Former § 60.32, Bridge speed limit, added by Ord. No. 70-29, eff. 11-4-1970,
was deleted by Ord. No. 81-26, eff. 9-2-1981.
§ 335-15 GENEVA CODE § 335-15
314:556
ARTICLE IV
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 335-16. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to stop
a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions
of a police officer or official traffic control device.
A. No person shall park any vehicle on the following streets, namely: Main
Street between Seneca Street and Castle Street; Castle Street between
Main Street and the Penn Central Railroad; Seneca Street; Linden
Street; Exchange Street between Lewis Street and East Washington
Street in the City of Geneva between 2:00 a.m and 6:00 a.m.
B. Time limit parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-24, eff. 11-1-1972]
(1) Except as otherwise prohibited or restricted by other provisions of
this Code now or hereafter adopted, the parking of vehicles
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m on Genesee Street
between Lewis Street and North Street; on North Genesee Street
between North Street and Wilbur Avenue; on South Main Street
from William Street southerly to its termination will be permitted
on the east side of the street on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and
Sunday; on the west side of the street on Tuesday, Thursday and
Saturday.
(2) Except as otherwise prohibited or restricted by other provisions of
this Traffic Code now or hereafter adopted, the parking of vehicles
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Castle Street from
Main Street to Brook Street will be permitted on the south side of
the street on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday; and on the
north side of the street on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday except
for that portion of Castle Street lying between Oak Street and
Maxwell Avenue where the parking of vehicles on both sides of the
street during all hours of the day will be permitted from April 1 to
December 1. [Amended 6-3-1987 by Ord. No. 87-19;
11-11-1987 by Ord. No. 87-35]
(3) Except as otherwise prohibited or restricted by other provisions of
this Traffic Code now or hereafter adopted; the parking of vehicles
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Lewis Street from
Exchange Street to Genesee Street will be permitted on the north
side on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday; on the south side
of the street on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. [Added by Ord.
No. 72-26, eff. 12-6-1972]
(4) Except as otherwise prohibited or restricted by other provisions of
this Traffic Code now or hereafter adopted, the parking of vehicles
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Milton Street will
be permitted on the north side of the street on Monday, Wednesday,
§ 335-16 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-16
314:557
§ 335-17. Parking, standing and stopping restrictions.
Parking, standing and stopping restrictions shall apply on the following
highways as follows:
Ada Street: No special restrictions
Andes Avenue
On the north side:
No parking between Munson Avenue and Evans Street. [Amended by
Ord. No. 77-12, eff. 11-2-1977]
On the south side:
No parking from the west curbline of Munson Avenue extended
westerly to the east end of the Marsh Creek foot bridge. [Added by
Ord. No. 79-15, eff. 8-1-1979]
On the east side:
Friday and Sunday; on the south side of the street on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday. [Added by Ord. No. 81-23, eff.
9-2-1981]
(5) Except as otherwise prohibited or restricted by other provisions of
this Traffic Code now or hereafter adopted, parking shall be
restricted on Rose Street to provide for no parking on the east side
of Rose Street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, between December 1 and
April 1. Additionally, no parking is permitted on the west side of
Rose Street, except on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays,
between December 1 and April 1. [Added 2-1-1989 by Ord. No.
89-2; amended 5-3-1989 by Ord. No. 89-10; 7-6-2011 by Ord.
No. 1-2011]
(6) Except as otherwise prohibited or restricted by other provisions of
this Traffic Code now or hereafter adopted, the parking of vehicles
on the north side of Hogarth Avenue will be permitted on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday,
except during the months of December, January, February and
March during the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added
4-5-1989 by Ord. No. 89-4]
C. No vehicles shall be parked on any other street in the City of Geneva
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. except during the months
of April, May, June, July, August, September, October and November.
[Amended by Ord. No. 70-10, eff. 5-13-1970; Ord. No. 70-19, eff.
8-5-1970; Ord. No. 72-6, eff. 5-3-1972; Ord. No. 73-22, eff.
10-17-1973; Ord. No. 87-34, eff. 10-21-1987]50
50.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, added by Ord. No. 73-24, eff. 11-7-1973, and amended
by Ord. No. 81-29, eff. 11-4-1981, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted
6-21-2000 by Ord. No. 5-2000.
§ 335-16 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:558
No parking from the north curbline of Middle Street to the west end of
the Marsh Creek foot bridge. [Added by Ord. No. 81-18, eff.
5-6-1981]
On the west side:
No parking from the north curbline of Middle Street to the west end of
the Marsh Creek foot bridge. [Added by Ord. No. 81-18, eff.
5-6-1981]
Angelo Street
On the south side:
No parking.
Argyle Street
On the north side:
No parking.
On the south side: [Added 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
No parking from the east curbline of Madison Street for a distance of 40
feet easterly.
Atwood Avenue
On both sides:
No parking from the north curbline of Hamilton Street to a point 350
feet northerly therefrom.
Austin Place: No special restrictions.
Avenue A
On the north side:
No parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 75-3, eff. 2-5-1975]
Avenue B [Amended by Ord. No. 71-1, eff. 1-6-1971]
On the south side:
No parking.
On the north side:
No parking from the east curbline of North Genesee Street for a
distance of 70 feet north. [Added 12-4-2019 by Ord. No. 8-2019]
Two-hour parking on weekdays from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Repealed
12-4-2019 by Ord. No. 8-2019]
Avenue C
On the north side:
Two-hour parking between North Genesee Street and Sherrill Street.
On the south side:
No parking between Sherrill Street and Genesee Street.
Avenue D: No special restrictions.
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:559
Avenue E [Amended by Ord. No. 70-4, eff. 3-4-1970; Ord. No. 75-2,
eff. 2-5-1975; Ord. No. 79-10, eff. 6-6-1979; Ord. No. 80-5, eff.
3-5-1980; Ord. No. 83-18, eff. 10-5-1983; Ord. No. 83-20, eff.
12-7-1983; Ord. No. 84-6, eff. 4-4-1984]
On the north side:
No parking from a point 30 feet east of the east curbline of Lehigh
Street to Humbert Street.
On the south side:
Two-hour parking on weekdays from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. from
Humbert Street to North Genesee Street.
No parking from the east curbline of North Genesee Street for a
distance of 45 feet easterly.
No parking from the west curbline of Lehigh Street for a distance of 74
feet westerly.
Two-hour parking on weekdays for a distance of 78 feet from a point 45
feet from the east curbline in an easterly direction.
Avenue F: No special restrictions.
Avenue G: No special restrictions.
Beacon Street
On the south side:
No parking from the east curbline of Jefferson Avenue easterly to the
Jefferson Avenue playground entrance. [Amended by Ord. No. 76-21,
eff. 8-4-1976]
On the north side:
No parking between Jefferson Avenue and South West Street. [Added
by Ord. No. 78-4, eff. 7-5-1978; amended by Ord. No. 79-26, eff.
12-5-1979]
Bell Street: No special restrictions.
Bennett Street: No special restrictions.
Bolger Place: No special restrictions.
Bradford Street
On both sides:
No parking between Canal Street and East Castle Street.
Brook Street
On the east side:
No parking between Lyceum Street and Castle Street.
On the west side:
No parking between Castle Street and High Street. [Amended by Ord.
No. 70-17, eff. 6-3-1970]
Brook Street, North
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:560
On the east side:
No parking from the south curbline of West North Street for a distance
100 feet southerly. [Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
On the west side:
No parking from the south curbline of West North Street for a distance
100 feet southerly. [Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
Buffalo Street
On both sides:
No parking from the west curbline of North Exchange Street for a
distance of 34 feet westerly. [Added by Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
Burrall Avenue: No special restrictions.
Canal Street
On both sides:
No parking.
Carter Road
On the east side:
No parking from the north curbline of West North Street northerly to
Angelo Street. [Added by Ord. No. 80-10, eff. 5-2-1980; amended
10-5-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011]
Castle Street [Amended by Ord. No. 72-5, eff. 5-3-1972; Ord. No.
72-21, eff. 9-6-1972; Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975; Ord. No. 76-20,
eff. 8-4-1976; Ord. No. 78-2, eff. 7-5-1978; Ord. No. 78-17, eff.
12-6-1978; Ord. No. 78-24, eff. 12-6-1978; Ord. No. 79-21, eff.
9-5-1979]
On the north side:
No parking from the west curbline of Exchange Street for a distance of
60 feet westerly. [Amended 1-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
No parking from the west curbline of Genesee Street for a distance of
23 feet westerly. [Amended 1-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
No parking from the west curbline of Elm Street to a point 28 feet
westerly therefrom. [Amended 1-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
No parking from the east curbline of Main Street for a distance of 42
feet easterly. [Amended 1-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
No parking from the west curbline of Main Street to a point 70 feet
westerly therefrom.
No parking from a point 50 feet east on the east curbline of Pulteney
Street to a point 160 feet westerly therefrom.
No parking from the east curbline of Oak Street to a point 170 feet
easterly therefrom.
No parking from the west curbline of Oak Street to a point 65 feet
westerly therefrom. [Added 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3]
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:561
No parking from the east line of Brook Street for a distance of 100 feet
in an easterly direction. [Added 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 94-8]
No parking from the west curbline of Brook Street for a distance of 50
feet in a westerly direction. [Added 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 94-8;
amended 1-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
No parking from the east curbline of Hillcrest Avenue for a distance of
50 feet easterly.
No parking from the west curbline of Hillcrest Avenue for a distance of
50 feet westerly.
On the south side: No parking from the east side of Brook Street to a
point 47' in an easterly direction. [Amended 11-5-1986 by Ord. No.
86-7]
No parking from the west curbline of Brook Street for a distance of 50
feet in a westerly direction. [Added 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 94-8;
amended 1-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
No parking from a point 50 feet west of the center line of West Avenue
to the west curbline of Pulteney Street.
Two-hour parking on any day from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except
Sundays and holidays from Pulteney Street to Union Street.
No parking from the west curbline of Main Street to a point 130 feet
westerly.
No parking from the east curbline of Pulteney Street to a point 40 feet
easterly.
No parking, standing or stopping from the east curbline of Main Street
to the west curbline of Linden Street.
No parking from the east edge of the driveway of 357 Castle Street and
extending to a point 106 feet easterly thereof.
Castle Street, East
On both sides:
No parking between Lake Front Arterial Highway and Penn
Central Railroad crossing.
Catherine Street: No special restrictions.
Center Street
On both sides:
No parking from State Street to North Street.
On the east side:
No parking from Jackson Street to State Street.
On the west side:
No parking any time except Saturday and Sunday from 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. between State Street and Jackson Street.
Central Avenue: No special restrictions.
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:562
Cherry Street
On the east side:
No parking.
Clark Street: No special restrictions.
Clinton Street: No special restrictions.
Clover Street: No special restrictions.
College Avenue
On the west side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 83-21, eff. 12-7-1983]
Collier Drive: No special restrictions.
Colt Street [Amended 7-3-1985 by Ord. No. 85-10]
On the north side:
No parking.
Columbia Avenue.
On the east side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 76-23, eff. 11-3-1976]
Copeland Avenue
On the east side:
No parking. [Added 1-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
On the west side:
No parking from the south curbline of Washington Street to a point 200
feet southerly therefrom. [Added 11-2-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
Cortland Street
On the north side:
No parking between Madison Street and Pulteney Street. [Added
7-5-1989 by Ord. No. 89-15]
Cross Street: No special restrictions.
Crystal Street: No special restrictions.
Davis Street
On the east and west sides:
No parking from the intersection of High Street to a point 25 feet
southerly. [Amended by Ord. No. 71-6, eff. 4-7-1971; 12-2-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-37; 5-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016]
DeLancey Drive
On the south side:
No parking from Monroe Street to its turning point southerly toward
Hamilton Street.
On the west side:
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:563
No parking from the north curbline of Hamilton Street to a point 80 feet
northerly therefrom. [Added 11-6-2013 by Ord. No. 6-2013]
Division Street: No special restrictions.
Dixon Avenue: No special restrictions.
Doran Avenue: No special restrictions.
Dorchester Avenue
On the east side:
No parking from the north curbline of Castle Street to a point 46 feet
northerly therefrom. [Amended by Ord. No. 70-22, eff. 9-2-1970]
Dove Street
On the north side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
Eagle Street: No special restrictions.
Elm Street
On the west side:
No parking.
Elmwood Avenue
On the north side:
No parking.
On the south side:
No parking on any school day from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. from a point
374 feet westerly of the center line of Pulteney Street to the west
curbline of Pulteney Street. [Amended by Ord. No. 70-1, eff.
1-7-1970]
Elmwood Place
On the west side:
No parking from a point 386 feet north of the center line of High Street
to a point 306 feet north of said center line.
Evans Street: No special restrictions.
Exchange Place
On both sides:
No parking.
Exchange Street
On the east side:
No parking or standing from the south curbline of North Street for a
distance of 100 feet southerly therefrom. [Amended by Ord. No.
73-25, eff. 12-5-1973; Ord. No. 78-17, eff. 12-6-1978]
No parking in front of Cinema Theater.
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:564
No parking from a point 25 feet south of the south curbline of Middle
Street to the south curbline of Middle Street.
No parking from the north curbline of Canal Street for a distance of 42
feet northerly. [Added by Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
No parking from the north curbline of Franklin Street to a point of 44
feet in a northerly direction. [Added 12-4-1985 by Ord. No. 85-17]
On the west side:
No parking from a point 50 feet north of the north curbline of Castle
Street to the north curbline of Castle Street.
No parking from the south curbline of State Street for a distance of 48
feet southerly. [Added by Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
No parking from the north curbline of Seneca Street to a point of 35
feet in a northerly direction. [Added 12-4-1985 by Ord. No. 85-17]
Exchange Street, North
On the east side:
No parking from North Street northerly to the northerly City boundary.
On the west side:
No parking between Gates Avenue and North Street.
Exchange Street, South
On both sides:
No parking from the south curbline of East Washington Street for a
distance of 450 feet southerly. [Added by Ord. No. 78-11, eff.
11-1-1978]
Folger Street
On both sides:
Two-hour parking. [Added by Ord. No. 70-15, eff. 5-13-1970]
Forge Avenue [Amended 10-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-7]
On the north side:
Two-hour parking with the exception of no parking from a point 59 feet
from west curb of receiving entrance of Zotos International for a
distance of 164 feet in a westerly direction.
On the south side:
No parking from a point 59 feet from the west curbline of the receiving
entrance of Zotos International for a distance of 164 feet in a westerly
direction.
Franklin Street
On both sides:
No parking.
Garden Street: No special restrictions.
Gates Avenue
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:565
On the north side:
No parking from the west line of the Lehigh Valley Railroad tracks to
the east curbline of Genesee Street.
On the south side:
No parking from the east curbline of Lehigh Street to a point 50 feet
easterly therefrom.
Genesee Park Place: No special restrictions.
Genesee Street
On the east side:
No parking from the south curbline of State Street for a distance of 50
feet southerly.
No parking from the north curbline of State Street for a distance of 50
feet northerly. [Amended 8-2-1972 by Ord. No. 18-1972]
No parking from the north curbline of Castle Street to the south
curbline of Lewis Street. [Added 8-3-1977 by Ord. No. 7-1977]
Two-hour parking from a point 20 feet from the southeast corner of
North Street 54 feet in a southerly direction. [Added 12-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 15-1990]
No parking from the south curbline of Avenue B to a point 69 feet
southerly therefrom. [Added 9-17-1996 by Ord. No. 9-1996]
On the west side:
No parking from a point 52 feet northerly of the center line of LaFayette
Avenue to a point 52 feet southerly of the center line of LaFayette
Avenue.
Two-hour parking from Lewis Street to Colt Street.
No parking from the south curbline of Colt Street for a distance of 35
feet southerly.
No parking from the north curbline of Colt Street for a distance of 50
feet northerly.
No parking from the south curbline of Lewis Street for a distance of 80
feet southerly.
No parking from the north curbline of Castle Street for a distance of
120 feet northerly.
No parking from the north curbline of Lewis Street for a distance of 60
feet northerly therefrom. [Amended 2-5-1975 by Ord. No. 2-1975;
12-6-1978 by Ord. No. 17-1978]
Two-hour parking from the south line of Colt Street to the north line of
Castle Street. [Added 4-19-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
Genesee Street, North
On the east side:
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:566
Two-hour parking between a point 45 feet north of the northerly rail of
the Lehigh Valley Railroad siding to Gates Avenue.
No parking from a point commencing 37 feet south of Avenue D and
running southerly therefrom 148 feet between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. [Added 10-6-1993 by Ord. No. 15-1993]
No stopping at any time between a point of the north curbline extended
of Avenue C and a point 32 feet north of the north rail of the Lehigh
Valley Railroad siding.
No parking from the south curbline of Gates Avenue for a distance of 50
feet southerly. [Amended 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 4-1998]
No parking from the north curbline of Gates Avenue for a distance of 50
feet northerly. [Added 2-11-1998 by Ord. No. 4-1998]
No parking from the north line of Avenue B for a distance of 50 feet
northerly. [Added 3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
On the west side:
No parking from the northerly City line to a point 40 feet south of the
driveway at 119 North Genesee Street.
Fifteen-minute parking from a point on the south curbline of Wilber
Avenue thence southerly to a point on the north curbline of Avenue C.
[Added 11-2-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
Geneva Gardens [Added 11-17-1998 by Ord. No. 98-17]
On the south side:
No parking.
On the east side:
No parking.
Geneva Street
On the east side:
No parking from Castle Street to a point at the north line of the Hydrant
Hose house.
Two-hour parking on any day from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except
Sundays and holidays, from Exchange Place to Lewis Street.
No parking from the south curbline of Tillman Street for a distance 30
feet southerly. [Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
On the west side:
No parking between Lewis Street and Castle Street.
Gillotte Drive: No special restrictions.
Goodelle Terrace
On the north side:
No parking. [Amended 2-5-1975 by Ord. No. 2-1975; 9-6-1978 by
Ord. No. 9-1978]
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:567
On the south side:
No parking.
Goodman Street: No special restrictions.
Grant Avenue
On the west side:
No parking.
On the east side:
No parking from the south curbline of High Street to a point 50 feet
southerly therefrom. [Amended 5-7-1980 by Ord. No. 12-1980]
Greenhurst Avenue: No special restrictions.
Grove Street
On the west side:
No parking. [Amended 9-2-1970 by Ord. No. 24-1970]
Hallenbeck Avenue
On the east side:
No parking from the south curbline of East North Street to a point 82
feet southerly therefrom.
On the west side:
No parking. [Added 2-5-1975 by Ord. No. 2-1975; amended
10-6-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
Hamilton Street
On both sides:
No standing anytime between Pulteney Street and the South Main
Street Bridge. [Added 6-7-1972 by Ord. No. 8-1972]
On the south side:
No parking or standing between the east curbline of White Springs
Road and a point 425 feet east of the east curbline of Copeland Avenue.
[Amended 3-6-1974 by Ord. No. 5-1974]
On the north side:
No parking or standing between the east curbline of Reed Street and a
point 425 feet and the east curbline of Copeland Avenue. [Added
4-1-1970 by Ord. No. 9-1970; amended 3-6-1974 by Ord. No.
5-1974]
Hammond Alley
On both sides:
No parking.
Hammond Place: No special restrictions.
Hammond Street: No special restrictions.
Hampson Place
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:568
On the south side:
No parking. [Added 5-5-1977 by Ord. No. 4-1977]
Hawkins Street: No special restrictions.
Herbert Street: No special restrictions.
High Street
On the north side:
No parking between Pulteney Street and Elmwood Place. [Added
7-2-1969 by Ord. No. 7-1969]
No parking from the east curbline of Columbia Avenue to a point 50 feet
easterly therefrom. [Added 7-2-1969 by Ord. No. 7-1969]
No parking from the west curbline of Brook Street for a distance of 33
feet westerly. [Added 2-5-1975 by Ord. No. 2-1975]
On the south side:
No parking between Grove Street and Nursery Avenue. [Amended
8-5-1970 by Ord. No. 19-1970]
No parking from the east curbline of Grove Street to a point 164 feet
easterly therefrom.
No parking from the west curbline of Nursery Avenue for a distance 90
feet westerly. [Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
No parking on school days from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
3:30 p.m. between a point 435 feet westerly from the west curbline of
Pulteney Street and a point 50 feet west from said west curbline.
[Amended 5-17-2000 by Ord. No. 4-2000]
No parking from a point 50 feet west from the west curbline of Pulteney
Street to said curbline.
Highland Avenue [Amended 7-10-2019 by Ord. No. 4-2019]
On the east side:
No parking.
On the west side:
No parking from the north curbline of Castle Street to a point 50 feet
north.
No parking from the south curbline of West North Street to a point 50
feet south.
Hillcrest Avenue
On the west side:
No parking from the north curbline of Castle Street to a point 50 feet
northerly thereof.
On the east side:
No parking from the north curbline of Castle Street to a point 50 feet
northerly thereof. [Added by Ord. No. 76-18, eff. 8-4-1976]
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:569
Hillside Drive: No special restrictions.
Hoffman Avenue
On the east side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 76-12, eff. 5-5-1976]
Hogarth Avenue
On both sides:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 71-9, eff. 5-5-1971; amended by
Ord. No. 73-15, eff. 8-1-1973]
Howard Street
On both sides:
No parking.
Humbert Street
On the east side:
No parking from north curbline of Avenue E to a point 25 feet north of
said north curbline.
On the west side:
No parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 73-14, eff. 8-1-1973]
Jackson Street
On the north side:
No parking.
On the south side:
No parking from westerly end to a point 75 feet easterly therefrom.
No parking from a point 164 feet westerly from the west curbline of
Exchange Street to a point 114 feet easterly from said curbline.
Jay Street
On the north side:
No parking between the west curbline of Pulteney Street and a point 75
feet westerly of said curbline.
Jefferson Avenue
On the east side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 76-24, eff. 11-3-1976]
On the west side:
No parking from the south curbline of Washington Street to a point 66
feet southerly.
No parking from the north curbline of Beacon Street to a point 40 feet
northerly.
No parking from the south curbline of Beacon Street to a point 40 feet
southerly.
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:570
No parking from the north curbline of Hamilton Street to a point 100
feet northerly. [Amended by Ord. No. 75-1, eff. 1-8-1975]
No parking on the west side of the street from November 1 to and
through March 31 of each year. [Added by Ord. No. 80-14, eff.
6-4-1980]
No parking between the north side of the driveway at 24 Jefferson
Avenue and the north side of the driveway at 28 Jefferson Avenue.
[Added by Ord. No. 82-23, eff. 7-7-1982]
No parking on the west side of the street from December 1 to and
through March 31 of each year except that parking is allowed
December 24, 25, 31 and January 1. [Added 3-7-1990 by Ord. No.
90-9]
John Street
On the north side:
No parking from the east curbline of Main Street for a distance of 100
feet easterly. [Added by Ord. No. 72-20, eff. 9-6-1972]
No parking from the west curbline of Genesee Street for a distance of
162 feet westerly.
No parking from the east curbline of Rose Street to a point 56 feet
easterly therefrom along John Street. [Added by Ord. No. 80-16, eff.
6-4-1980]
On the south side:
No parking.
King's Lane: No special restrictions.
Kirkwood Avenue
On the east side:
No parking from the north curbline of East North Street for a distance
of 53 feet northerly. [Added by Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
LaFayette Avenue
On the north side:
No parking between Genesee Street and Oak Street. [Amended by
Ord. No. 71-11, eff. 7-7-1971]
On the south side:
From the intersection of LaFayette Avenue and Brook Street Circle to a
point 55 feet west on LaFayette Avenue in a westerly direction. [Added
12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13]
Lake Front Arterial Highway
On both sides:
No parking or standing from North Cloverleaf and South Cloverleaf to
easterly City line except in parking vista opposite Castle Street.
Lake Street
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:571
On both sides:
No parking.
Larchmont Street: No special restrictions.
Lehigh Street
On both sides:
No parking from the south curbline of Gates Avenue to a line 30 feet
southerly from said curbline.
On the east side:
No parking from the north curbline of Avenue E to a point 30 feet
northerly from said curbline.
No parking from the north curbline of Gates Avenue for a distance of 26
feet northerly. [Added by Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
Lewis Street
On the north side:
No parking from a point 467 feet easterly of the center line of Genesee
Park Place to a point 445 feet easterly of said center line.
No parking from the west curbline of Genesee Street for a distance of
50 feet westerly therefrom. [Added by Ord. No. 71-18, eff.
11-3-1971; amended by Ord. No. 81-4, eff. 4-1-1981; 4-1-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-5]
No parking from the west curbline of Exchange Street to a point 186
feet westerly therefrom. [Amended by Ord. No. 78-30, eff.
12-6-1978]
No parking from the east curbline of Genesee Street to a point 40 feet
easterly therefrom. [Added by Ord. No. 79-7, eff. 4-4-1979]
No parking from a point 40 feet east of the east curbline of Genesee
Street to the west curbline of Genesee Park between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. except on Sunday. [Added by Ord. No. 79-7, eff. 4-4-1979]
No parking from the east curbline of North Main Street to a point 65
feet easterly therefrom. [Added by Ord. No. 82-3, eff. 3-3-1982]
No parking for 50 feet from a point 104 feet from the western curbline
of North Main Street in a westerly direction. [Added 2-2-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-6]
No parking on school days from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. from a point 50
feet from the west curbline (of Genesee Street) to a point 100 feet in a
westerly direction. [Added by Ord. No. 85-11, eff. 1-2-1985]
On the south side:
No parking from Oak Street to Genesee Street. [Amended by Ord. No.
69-3, eff. 4-2-1969]
No parking from the west curbline of Exchange Street to a point 30 feet
westerly. [Added by Ord. No. 78-27, eff. 12-6-1978]
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:572
Two-hour parking from the easterly line of the former Stubbs Lumber
Company property westerly to the westerly line of the former Stubbs
Lumber Company property. [Added by Ord. No. 79-28, eff.
12-5-1979]
Linden Street
On both sides:
No parking between Seneca Street and Exchange Street.
On the east side:
No parking between Castle Street and Seneca Street. [Amended by
Ord. No. 73-16, eff. 8-1-1973; Ord. No. 77-13, eff. 11-2-1977]
On the west side:
No parking from the north curbline of Seneca Street to a point 21 feet
northerly therefrom. [Added 11-3-1982 by Ord. No. 82-25;
amended 11-2-1977 by Ord. No. 77-13; 6-3-1987 by Ord. No.
87-16]
Linwood Avenue: No special restrictions.
Lochland Road: No special restrictions.
Lyceum Street [Amended 11-5-2003 by Ord. No. 4-2003]
No parking from Elmwood Place to Brook Street. [Added by Ord. No.
69-7, eff. 7-2-1969]
On the south side:
No parking between Nursery Avenue and Brook Street.
Madison Street: No special restrictions.
Main Street, North
On both sides:
Two-hour parking between Castle Street and Colt Street.
On the west side:
No parking from the north curbline of Lewis Street for a distance of 100
feet northerly.
No parking from the south curbline of North Street for a distance of 160
feet southerly. [Added 3-4-1970 by Ord. No. 5-1970]
No parking from the south curbline of Lewis Street for a distance of 40
feet southerly. [Added 4-6-1974 by Ord. No. 28-1974]
No parking from the south curbline of Dorchester Avenue for a distance
of 58 feet southerly. [Added 2-5-1975 by Ord. No. 2-1975]
No parking from the north curbline of Dorchester Avenue for a distance
of 25 feet northerly. [Added 12-3-1975 by Ord. No. 19-1975;
amended 8-4-1976 by Ord. No. 9-1976]
Two-hour parking from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. from the northerly
curbline of 196 North Main Street for a distance of 25 feet in a
northerly direction. [Added 1-5-1994 by Ord. No. 1-1994]
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:573
On the east side:
No parking from the north curbline of Lewis Street for a distance of 94
feet northerly. [Added 3-4-1970 by Ord. No. 5-1970]
No parking from the south curbline of Lewis Street for a distance of 84
feet southerly. [Added 3-4-1970 by Ord. No. 5-1970]
No parking from the south curbline of North Street for a distance of 125
feet southerly. [Added 5-1-1974 by Ord. No. 11-1974]
No parking from the south curbline of Colt Street for a distance of 64
feet southerly. [Added 2-5-1975 by Ord. No. 2-1975]
Main Street, South
On the east side:
No parking from a point 50 feet southerly of the south curbline
extended of the South Cloverleaf to said south curbline extended.
No parking from the north curbline extended of the North Cloverleaf to
a point 56 feet northerly from said curbline.
No parking from a point in the east curbline of crosswalk located in
front of 615 South Main Street (Alumni House) to a point 20 feet south.
[Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
Two-hour parking between 629 and 639 South Main Street from 7:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Added 7-7-1993 by Ord. No. 8-1993]
No parking from a point in the east curbline of crosswalk located in
front of 639 South Main Street (Hobart Admissions) to a point 20 feet
south. [Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
No parking between signs beginning at a point 615 feet north of the
north curbline of St. Clair Street for a distance of 140 feet. [Added
3-7-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
No parking between signs beginning at a point 930 feet north of the
north curbline of St. Clair Street for a distance of 330 feet. [Added
3-7-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
On the west side:
No parking from a point 150 feet northerly from the north curbline of
the North Cloverleaf to said north curbline.
No parking from the north curbline of the South Cloverleaf for a
distance of 112 feet northerly from said curbline. [Added 6-4-1969 by
Ord. No. 6-1969]
No parking beginning at the south curbline of South Cloverleaf for a
distance of 300 feet. [Amended 3-7-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
No parking from a point 148 feet northerly of the center line of St. Clair
Street to a point 131 feet southerly of said center line. [Amended
1-6-1999 by Ord. No. 1-1999]
No parking from the south curbline of Jay Street to a point 80 feet
southerly from the center line of Jay Street.
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:574
No parking from a point 224 feet south of the south curb of St. Clair
Street to a point 100 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 9-1-1971 by
Ord. No. 17-1971]
No parking from the center line of Jay Street for a distance of 112 feet
northerly. [Added 11-1-1972 by Ord. No. 22-1972; amended
1-6-1999 by Ord. No. 5-1970]
No parking from the north curbline of Park Place exit for a distance of
100 feet northerly. [Added by Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
No parking from the south curbline of Park Place exit for a distance of
44 feet southerly. [Added by Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
No parking between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday,
from a point 50 feet north and south of the driveway at 512 South Main
Street. [Added by Ord. No. 85-4, eff. 4-3-1985]
No parking from a point in the west curbline of crosswalk located in
front of 615 South Main Street (Alumni House) to a point 20 feet north.
[Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
No parking from a point in the west curbline of crosswalk located in
front of 639 South Main Street (Hobart Admissions) to a point 20 feet
north. [Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
No parking between signs beginning at a point 515 feet south of the
south curbline of South Cloverleaf for a distance of 160 feet. [Added
3-7-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
No parking beginning from a point 1,850 feet from the north curbline of
Jay Street to a point 100 feet south of the southern curbline of Jay
Street. [Added 7-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014]
On the west side:
From a point 260 feet north of the north curbline of Jay Street, to a
point 195 feet south of the southern curbline of Jay Street, and no
parking on the west side from a point 190 feet north of the north
curbline of St. Clair Street to a point 190 feet south of the southern
curbline of St. Clair Street. [Added 2-3-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
Maple Street [Amended 1-9-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
On the west side:
No parking from the north curbline of West North Street to a point 50
feet southerly therefrom.
On the east side:
No parking from the north curbline of West North Street southerly to
the north curbline of Pleasant Street.
Maplewood Drive: No special restrictions.
Maryland Street: No special restrictions.
Mason Street
On the east side:
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:575
No parking between the north curbline of North Street and the south
curbline of Torrey Avenue. [Amended by Ord. No. 71-11, eff.
7-7-1971; Ord. No. 75-6, eff. 5-7-1975]
On the west side:
No parking.
Maxwell Avenue
On both sides:
No parking from the center line of West North Street to a point 124 feet
southerly therefrom.
Merrill Place: No special restrictions.
Middle Street
On the north side:
No parking from Gulvin Park to Exchange Street.
On the south side:
No parking from Exchange Street to Hallenbeck Avenue. [Amended by
Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
Mill Street [Amended 12-6-2000 by Ord. No. 8-2000]
No parking on the east side
Milton Street
On the north side:
No parking from the east curbline of Pulteney Street for a distance of
82 feet easterly.
No parking from the west curbline of Main Street for a distance of 165
feet westerly. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-17, eff. 8-2-1972; Ord. No.
75-2, eff. 2-5-1975; Ord. No. 81-21, eff. 9-2-1981]
No parking from the east curbline of Pulteney Street to a point 60 feet
easterly from said curbline. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-2, eff.
2-7-1979]
No parking from the west curbline of Main Street to a point 120 feet
westerly from said curbline. [Amended by Ord. No. 69-1, eff.
2-5-1969; Ord. No. 81-21, eff. 9-2-1981]
Monroe Street
On the east side:
No parking from Washington Street to Hamilton Street. [Added by
Ord. No. 70-29, eff. 11-4-1970; amended 12-16-1997 by Ord. No.
97-14]
On the west side: [Added 12-4-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019]
No parking from the north curbline of Hamilton Street for a distance of
70 feet north.
Morrell Avenue: No special restrictions.
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:576
Morrell Avenue, South: No special restrictions.
Munson Avenue: No special restrictions.
Nagel Place: [Amended 5-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016]
East or west side:
No parking from the intersection with William Street to a point 25 feet
southerly. No parking on either side from the intersection with
Washington Street to a point 25 feet northerly.
On the west side:
No parking.
Nellis Street: No special restrictions.
Nester Alley
On both sides:
No parking.
North Avenue [Amended by Ord. No. 73-24, eff. 11-7-1973; Ord. No.
81-25, eff. 9-2-1981; 6-21-2000 by Ord. No. 5-2000]
On the west side:
No parking.
North Cloverleaf
On both sides:
No parking or standing.
North Morelle Avenue: [Added 5-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016]
East or west side:
No parking from the intersection with Washington Street to a point 25
feet northerly.
On the west side:
No parking.
North Street
On the north side:
No parking from Exchange Street westerly to the City line.
No parking or standing from the east curbline of Exchange Street for a
distance of 210 feet easterly. [Added by Ord. No. 78-17, eff.
12-6-1978]
On the south side:
No parking between North Main Street and Folger Street.
No parking from the east curbline of Rose Street for a distance of 60
feet easterly.
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:577
No parking between the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. from a point 60
feet east of the east curbline of Rose Street to Genesee Street except
Saturdays and Sundays. [Amended by Ord. No. 71-5, eff. 3-3-1971;
Ord. No. 71-13, eff. 7-7-1971]
No parking or standing from the west curbline of Exchange Street for a
distance of 160 feet westerly therefrom. [Added by Ord. No. 78-17,
eff. 12-6-1978]
No parking or standing from the east curbline of Exchange Street for a
distance of 210 feet easterly. [Added by Ord. No. 78-17, eff.
12-6-1978]
North Street, East
On the south side:
No parking between Wadsworth Street and a point 150 feet east of the
Marsh Creek Bridge.
North Street, West [Amended by Ord. No. 81-24, eff. 9-2-1981;
9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 5-2002]
On the south side:
No parking between Pre-Emption Road and Main Street.
Norwood Avenue: No special restrictions.
Nursery Avenue
On the east side:
No parking from the south curbline of William Street for a distance 65
feet southerly. [Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
On the west side:
No parking from the south curbline of William Street for a distance 65
feet southerly. [Added 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
Oak Street
On the east side:
No parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-30, eff. 12-4-1974]
Ontario Street: No special restrictions.
Optical Street
East or west side:
No parking from the intersection with Lyceum Street to a point 25 feet
southerly. No parking on either side from the intersection with High
Street to a point 25 feet northerly. [Added 5-4-2016 by Ord. No.
2-2016]
On the west side:
Two-hour parking between Lyceum Street and High Street.
Oxford Place: No special restrictions.
Paradise Alley
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:578
On both sides:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 68-13, eff. 11-6-1968]
Park Avenue
On both sides:
No parking.
Park Place
No parking on the park side.
No parking from a point 30 feet northerly from the northerly curbline of
Park Avenue to a point 30 feet easterly from the southerly curbline of
Park Avenue on side opposite park side.
On the west side:
No parking from the south curbline of Washington Street for a distance
of 40 feet southerly. [Added by Ord. No. 74-12, eff. 6-5-1974]
From December 1 to April 1 parking will be limited to 72 hours in any
one designated spot. [Added 11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001]
Patterson Alley: No special restrictions.
Pepsi Lane: No special restrictions.
Pine Street
On both sides:
No parking. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-4, eff. 5-3-1972]
Plaza Drive
On both sides:
No parking from a point 130 feet south of the south curbline of
Hamilton Street (northern boundary of Key Drugs) southerly to Plaza
Mall thence westerly to White Springs Road. [Added by Ord. No.
70-27, eff. 10-7-1970; amended by Ord. No. 74-7, eff. 3-6-1974]
Plaza Mall
On both sides:
No parking from the southern curbline of Plaza Drive for a distance of
120 feet southerly. [Added by Ord. No. 70-27, eff. 10-7-1970]
Pleasant Street: No special restrictions.
Pre-Emption Road: No special restrictions.
Pre-Emption Street: No special restrictions.
Prospect Avenue
On the north side:
No parking from the west curbline of North Exchange Street for a
distance of 70 feet westerly.
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:579
No parking from a point 346 feet west of the western curbline of North
Exchange Street for a distance of 128 feet westerly therefrom. [Added
by Ord. No. 69-7, eff. 7-2-1969]
On the south side:
No parking or standing from North Avenue to North Exchange Street.
Pulteney Street [Amended by Ord. No. 70-8, eff. 4-1-1970; Ord. No.
75-2, eff. 2-5-1975; Ord. No. 78-17, eff. 12-6-1978; Ord. No. 79-3,
eff. 2-7-1979; Ord. No. 81-22, eff. 9-2-1981]
On the east side:
No parking from Jay Street to Hamilton Street.
No parking from the north curbline of William Street to the south
curbline of Milton Street.
No parking from the north curbline of Howard Street for a distance of
30 feet northerly.
No parking from the north curbline of Milton Street for a distance of 39
feet northerly.
No parking from the south curbline of William Street for a distance of
120 feet southerly.
No parking from the south curbline of Castle Street to a point 40 feet
southerly therefrom.
No parking from the south curbline of Park Avenue to a point of 50 feet
in a southerly direction. [Added 12-4-1985 by Ord. No. 14-1985]
No parking from the north line of driveway at 235 Pulteney Street for a
distance of 73 feet in a northerly direction. [Added 9-11-1995 by Ord.
No. 14-1995]
No parking from the north curbline of Hamilton Street for a distance of
73 feet in a northerly direction. [Added 1-6-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
On the west side:
No parking.
Railroad Place: No special restrictions.
Reed Road: No special restrictions.
Reed Street: No special restrictions.
Richards Avenue
On the west side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 73-11, eff. 8-1-1973]
Ridgewood Drive: No special restrictions.
Roosevelt Street: No special restrictions.
Rose Street: [Amended 5-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016]
East or west side:
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:580
No parking from the intersection with North Street to a point 25 feet
southerly. No parking on either side from the intersection with John
Street to a point 25 feet northerly.
On the west side:
No parking.
St. Clair Street [Amended 4-5-1972 by Ord. No. 72-3; 10-3-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-23; Ord. No. 79-27, eff. 12-5-1979; Ord. No. 84-12, eff.
7-11-1984; Ord. No. 84-13, eff. 7-11-1984; 4-4-2001 by Ord. No.
1-2001]
On the north side:
No parking between Pulteney Street and South Main Street.
No parking from the west curbline of Pulteney Street for a distance of
55 feet westerly.
No parking from the east edge of O'Dell's Pond to the west edge of the
driveway at 296 St. Clair Street.
On the south side:
No parking between South Main Street and a point opposite the east
edge of O'Dell's Pond.
Sears Avenue
No parking on the east side. [Added 6-3-1987 by Ord. No. 87-17]
Seneca Alley
On both sides:
No parking.
Seneca Street [Amended by Ord. No. 69-9, eff. 8-6-1969; Ord. No.
94-3, eff. 6-6-1994]
On the south side:
Diagonal parking is allowed between Linden Street and Exchange
Street.
On the north side:
Parallel parking between Linden Street east to the first crosswalk to
accommodate for truck deliveries. Diagonal parking is allowed from the
east line of the crosswalk to Exchange Street.
No parking in front of the Geneva Theater.
Seymour Alley
On both sides:
No parking.
Sharon Street: No special restrictions.
Sherrill Street
On the east side:
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:581
No parking from North Street to Wilbur Avenue. [Added by Ord. No.
76-1, eff. 1-2-1976]
On the west side:
No parking from north line of the driveway at 97 Sherrill Street for a
distance of 96 feet northerly. [Amended by Ord. 69-13, eff.
9-3-1969; Ord. No. 76-1, eff. 1-2-1976; 6-5-1991 by Ord. No.
91-12]
Slosson's Lane: No special restrictions.
Snell Road: No special restrictions.
South Cloverleaf
On both sides:
No parking or standing.
South Optical Street [Added 10-3-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001; amended
12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 10-2001]
On the east side:
No parking.
Spring Street
On both sides:
No parking from the north curbline of Hamilton Street to a point 250
feet northerly. [Added by Ord. No. 78-1, eff. 2-1-1978]
Sprucewood Circle: No special restrictions.
Sprucewood Drive: No special restrictions.
State Street
On the north side:
Two-hour parking from Genesee Street to Exchange Street.
On the south side:
No parking on Sunday from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. between Exchange
Street and the Penn Central Railroad Crossing. [Amended by Ord. No.
70-21, eff. 9-2-1970]
Sunset Drive: No special restrictions.
Sweeney Avenue: No special restrictions.
Syndicate Street: No special restrictions.
Tillman Street
No parking on south side. [Amended 1-8-1986 by Ord. No. 86-1]
Toledo Street
On both sides:
No parking.
Torrey Avenue: No special restrictions.
Tracey Lane: No special restrictions.
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:582
Twoomey Place
On the west side:
No parking from the South curbline of Park Avenue to a point 45 feet
southerly.
On the east side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 81-19, eff. 7-1-1981; amended
1-9-1995 by Ord. No. 3-95]
Union Street
On both sides:
No parking.
Universal Avenue: No special restrictions.
VerPlanck Street
On the south side:
No parking.
On the north side:
No parking from the west curbline of Pulteney Street for a distance of
50 feet westerly from said curbline. [Added by Ord. No. 70-1, eff.
1-7-1970]
Virginia Street
On the east side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 71-4, eff. 3-3-1971]
Wadsworth Street
On the east side:
Fifteen-minute parking from the south curbline of East North Street to
a point 90 feet southerly therefrom.
No parking on the east side from a point 90 feet southerly therefrom to
the north curbline of Middle Street. [Amended by Ord. No. 76-9, eff.
4-7-1976; Ord. No. 76-13, eff. 5-5-1976]
Wadsworth Street, North
On the west side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 77-8, eff. 9-7-1977]
Washington Street [Amended by Ord. No. 75-20, eff. 12-3-1975; Ord.
No. 76-2, eff. 1-2-1976]
On both sides from December 1 through April 1: [Added 11-7-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-2001]
Alternate parking from a point 110 feet east of the intersection of
Pulteney Street to a point 30 feet west of intersection of Park Place.
[Amended 2-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1-2019]
On the north side:
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-17
314:583
No parking from the west curbline of Pulteney Street to a point 50 feet
westerly therefrom.
No parking from the west curbline of Nursery Avenue to a point
opposite the west curbline of Copeland Avenue.
No parking from the west curbline of Park Place to a point 60 feet
westerly.
On the south side:
No parking from the west curbline of Pulteney Street to a point 50 feet
westerly therefrom.
No parking from the east curbline of Copeland Avenue to a point 60 feet
easterly therefrom.
No parking from the west curbline of Park Place to a point 60 feet
westerly.
West Avenue
On the south side:
No parking.
On the north side:
No parking from the south curbline of Castle Street to a point 82 feet
westerly therefrom. [Amended by Ord. No. 75-2, eff. 2-5-1975]
West Street
On the west side:
No parking between Washington Street and High Street.
No parking from the north curbline of Hamilton Street to a point 75 feet
northerly therefrom. [Amended 6-5-2013 by Ord. No. 4-2013]
On the east side:
No parking during school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., between Washington Street and High Street.
No parking from Washington Street to Hamilton Street. [Amended by
Ord. No. 69-7, eff. 7-2-1969; Ord. No. 70-28, eff. 10-7-1970; Ord.
No. 74-17, eff. 7-3-1974; Ord. No. 75-1, eff. 1-8-1975; Ord. No.
75-9, eff. 8-6-1975]
White Springs Road
On the east side:
No parking from the south curbline of Hamilton Street for a distance of
570 feet southerly therefrom. [Added by Ord. No. 82-2, eff.
1-6-1982]
Wilbur Avenue
On the north side:
Two-hour parking.
Willard Avenue: No special restrictions.
§ 335-17 GENEVA CODE § 335-17
314:584
William Street
On the north side:
No parking from the west curbline of Main Street to the east curbline of
Pulteney Street. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-8, eff. 5-2-1979; Ord.
No. 82-18, eff. 4-7-1982]
No parking from the west curbline of Pulteney Street to a point 100 feet
westerly from said curbline.
No parking from the west curbline of Grove Street to a point 20 feet
westerly from said curbline. [Added by Ord. No. 94-4, eff. 6-6-1994]
No parking from a point 50 feet easterly from the east curbline of West
Street to Nursery Avenue.
On the south side:
No parking from a point 100 feet from the southwest curb of South
Main Street for a distance of 50 feet in a westerly direction. [Amended
7-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-7; repealed 8-6-2006 by Ord. No.
4-2006]
No parking from a point 95 feet in an easterly direction from the
southeast curbline of Nursery Avenue. [Added by Ord. No. 98-9,
6-16-1998; amended by Ord. No. 98-15, 11-17-1998]
Worthington Avenue
On the north side:
No parking. [Added by Ord. No. 70-10, eff. 5-13-1970]
On the south side:
No parking from the east curbline of Madison Street for a distance of 40
feet east. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord. No. 6-2019]
No parking for 32 feet from a point 254 west of the west curbline of
Pulteney Street in a westerly direction. [Added 10-2-2019 by Ord.
No. 6-2019]
No parking for 120 feet from the westerly section of the driveway of 7
Worthington Avenue in an easterly direction to the eastern part of the
driveway at 9 Worthington Avenue. [Amended 12-4-1985 by Ord. No.
85-15; 6-3-1992 by Ord. No. 92-9; repealed 10-2-2019 by Ord. No.
6-2019]
§ 335-18. Parking limits in unmetered public parking lots.
[Amended by Ord. No. 71-8, eff. 5-5-1971; Ord. No. 73-20, eff.
9-5-1973; Ord. No. 76-17, eff. 7-14-1976]
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
unmetered parking lots between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday:
(1) Lakeside Parking Lot, north portion. [Amended by Ord. No.
78-13, eff. 11-1-1978]
§ 335-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-18
314:585
§ 335-19. One-way traffic in public parking lots. [Added by Ord. No.
71-8, eff. 5-5-1971]
(2) Exchange-Tillman Parking Lot.
(3) Exchange Place Parking Lot: that portion of the lot north of
Exchange Place (76 spaces). [Added by Ord. No. 78-5, eff.
8-2-1978]
(4) Elm Street Parking Lot (24 spaces). [Added by Ord. No. 78-5, eff.
8-2-1978]
(5) Canal Street Parking Lot. [Added by Ord. No. 79-11, eff.
6-6-1979; amended by Ord. No. 79-14, eff. 7-11-1979]
(6) Gulvin Park Parking Lot. [Added by Ord. No. 80-2, eff. 1-2-1980]
B. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
unmetered parking lots between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday:
(1) Exchange Place Parking Lot.
(2) Wadsworth-Railroad Place Parking Lot.
(3) Lakeside Parking Lot, south portion. [Amended by Ord. No.
78-13, eff. 11-1-1978]
(4) Exchange Place Parking Lot: that portion of the lot south of
Exchange Place (81 spaces). [Added by Ord. No. 78-5, eff.
8-2-1978]
(5) Elm Street Parking Lot, south portion. [Added by Ord. No. 80-30,
eff. 12-3-1980]
C. The parking of unlicensed or inoperable vehicles is prohibited at all
times in the following unmetered parking lots:
(1) Wadsworth-Railroad Place Parking Lot.
(2) Lakeside Parking Lot.
(3) Exchange-Tillman Parking Lot.
A. One-way traffic flow is designated in the following parking lots:
(1) Exchange-Tillman Street Parking Lot: Enter from Exchange Street
and exit on Tillman Street.
(2) Castle Street Parking Lot: Enter from the easterly driveway from
the Geneva Federal Savings and Loan Association and exit from the
westerly driveway near the City Hall. [Added by Ord. No. 82-1,
eff. 1-6-1982]51
§ 335-18 GENEVA CODE § 335-20
314:586
§ 335-20. Reserved parking spaces.
A. The following shall have parking spaces reserved adjacent to City Hall
(parking lot):
(1) Mayor.
(2) City Manager.
(3) City Engineer.
(4) Police Department: six spaces. [Amended by Ord. No. 78-22, eff.
12-6-1978; 1-7-1981 by Ord. No. 81-3]
B. Handicapped persons shall have the right to park in those parking
spaces designated by the Police Department by proper signs indicating
"Handicapped Parking Permitted." [Added by Ord. No. 79-17, eff.
8-1-1979]
(1) A "handicapped person," for the purpose of this section, shall mean
any person who has any one or more of the following impairments,
disabilities or conditions which are permanent in nature:
(a) Has limited or no use of one or both lower limbs.
(b) Has a neuro-muscular dysfunction which severely limits
mobility.
(c) Has a pulmonary or cardio-vascular condition which limits
mobility or severely limits the individual's activities in the open
air.
(d) A person whose physical or mental impairment or condition is
other than those specified above, but is of such nature as to
impose unusual hardships in utilization of public
transportation facilities and such condition is certified by a
physician duly licensed to practice medicine in this state as
constituting an equal degree of disability (specifying the
particular condition) so as to prevent such person from getting
around without great difficulty.
(e) A child with any one or more of the impairments or conditions
listed above.
(2) Such handicapped person shall have a valid permit issued by the
Police Department that provides such medical certification
together with such other information as requested by the Police
Department to obtain a handicapped parking permit which must be
displayed on the vehicle parked by a handicapped person in the
designated reserved parking space.
51.Editor's Note: Original § 60.45, entitled "Angle parking," which immediately followed this
section, was repealed by Ord. No. 78-12, eff. 11-1-1978.
§ 335-20 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-20
314:587
§ 335-21. Parking of trailers or semi-trailers.
(3) Such handicapped person possessing a valid permit issued by a
police department or other agency under the laws of the State of
New York and such municipality and who displays such permit in
the same manner as above stated shall be entitled to such parking,
but must adhere to existing parking regulations and ordinances
regarding alternate parking or any other parking prohibition now
in effect. [Amended by Ord. No. 82-4, eff. 3-3-1982]
(4) Any person who parks in spaces clearly marked for use by the
handicapped in accordance with this section without a special use
parking permit or whose motor vehicle is not registered in
accordance with § 404-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York and being used for the transportation of a handicapped
person shall be subject to a fine of $50 for the first offense and $100
for the second offense occurring within a period of two years. The
failure of such owner or operator to make such payment to the City
Comptroller as required shall render such owner or operator
subject to the penalties hereinafter provided for a violation of the
provisions of this chapter. [Added 7-2-1980 by Ord. No. 80-18,
eff. 9-1-1980; amended 11-2-1988 by Ord. No. 88-10;
10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
C. On all sections of College and VerPlanck Streets where parking is
permitted under § 335-17 of this chapter, parking shall be restricted to
those vehicles displaying a City-issued permit. [Added 7-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 2-2014]
(1) The City shall issue two parking permits to each property owner on
each street.
(2) Property owners shall cause said permits to be applied to any
vehicle they wish to be permitted to park on the street.
(3) Owners of vehicles parked on the street without displaying said
permit shall be subjected to a fine of $100 for the first occurrence
and $250 for each subsequent occurrence.
A. The parking of trailers or semi-trailers on any highway or public
parking lot in the City is prohibited at all times when the motivating
power of such trailer or semi-trailer is detached from the same.
B. No boat trailer, whether or not affixed to a powering vehicle, shall park
in any public parking lot, or at the Lakefront Park, except as posted.
From April 1 through October 31, parking is permitted by permit only;
said permit to be clearly displayed. Failure to obtain or display said
permit shall result in a fine of $20 for the first occurrence, and $50 for
each occurrence thereafter. [Added by Ord. No. 73-7, eff. 5-2-1973;
amended by Ord. No. 79-17, eff. 8-1-1979; 4-5-2017 by Ord. No.
2-2017]
§ 335-20 GENEVA CODE § 335-21
314:588
C. Recreational vehicles, including campers over 20 feet in length, shall be
prohibited from parking on any street or public parking lot in the City
for more than 48 hours. Waivers may be granted in exceptional
circumstances by the City Manager for up to a period of seven days.
[Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 3-2005]
§ 335-21 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-21
314:589

ARTICLE V
Parking Meters
§ 335-22. Zones.
A. Highways: Parking meter zones pertaining to Castle St. and Linden St.
[Repealed 3-7-1990 by Ord. No. 90-6.52]
B. Highways: Parking zones. Parking zones are hereby established on
highways as follows:
(1) Castle Street on the north side between Exchange Street and Main
Street, except as otherwise provided in Subsection A herein, and on
the south side between Exchange Street and a point 75 feet east of
the east building line extended from Geneva City Hall. [Amended
by Ord. No. 78-20, eff. 12-6-1978]
(2) Castle Street, East: on both sides between Exchange Street and the
Penn Central Railroad crossing.
(3) Elm Street: on the east side between Castle Street and Colt Street.
(4) Exchange Street: on both sides between Seneca Street and Lewis
Street; on the west side between the south building line extended
of the Finger Lakes Occupational School and Lewis Street.
(5) Exchange Street, South: on both sides between Seneca Street and
Linden Street.
(6) Genesee Street: on the west side between Colt Street and Castle
Street.
(7) Lewis Street: on the north side between Exchange Street and the
Penn Central Railroad crossing; on the south side between the east
line of Hulse Parking Lot and Exchange Street.
(8) Linden Street: on the west side between Castle Street and Seneca
Street.
(9) Main Street: on both sides between Seneca Street and Castle
Street.
(10) Main Street, South: on the east side between the northerly
intersection of Park Place with South Main Street and William
Street; on the west side between Seneca Street and the northerly
intersection of Park Place with South Main Street.
(11) Seneca Street: on both sides.
C. Public parking lots. Parking zones are hereby established in public
parking lots as follows:
52.Editor's Note: See Ord. No. 78-20, adopted 12-1-1978, and Ord. No. 98-8, adopted
5-6-1987, for repealed provisions.
§ 335-22 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-22
314:591
§ 335-23. Parking time limits on highways.
(1) Seneca Street Parking Lot located at Linden Street and Seneca
Street.
(2) South Exchange Street Parking Lot located on westerly side of
South Exchange Street between South Exchange Street and Linden
Street. [Added by Ord. No. 76-15, eff. 6-2-1976]
(3) Elm Street Parking Lot located off Elm Street north of Castle
Street. [Added by Ord. No. 78-7, eff. 8-2-1978]
(4) Exchange Place Parking Lot located north and south of Exchange
Place between Geneva and Exchange Streets. [Added by Ord. No.
78-7, eff. 8-2-1978]
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited for a period of longer than
15 minutes from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except Sundays and holidays, as
follows: [Amended by Ord. No. 75-15, eff. 7-3-1974; Ord. No.
78-23, eff. 12-6-1978; 5-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-9; 3-7-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-8]
(1) Castle Street: on the south side between Linden Street and a point
75 feet east of the east building line extended from Geneva City
Hall.
(2) Linden Street: on the west side from a distance of 45 feet from the
northwest curbline of Castle Street to a point 68 feet in a southerly
direction.
B. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited for a period of longer than
two hours, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays, as
follows: [Amended by Ord. No. 74-15, eff. 7-3-1974; Ord. No.
78-23, eff. 12-6-1978; Ord. No. 79-28, eff. 12-5-1979; Ord. No.
87-28, eff. 9-2-1987]
(1) Castle Street: on the north side between Exchange Street and Main
Street and on the south side between Exchange Street and Linden
Street, except as otherwise provided in Subdivision A herein.
(2) Castle Street, East: on both sides between Exchange Street and the
Penn Central Railroad crossing.
(3) Exchange Street: on both sides between Seneca Street and Lewis
Street; on the west side between the south building line extended
of the Finger Lakes Occupational School and Lewis Street.
(4) Exchange Street, South: on both sides between Seneca Street and
Linden Street.
(5) Lewis Street: on the north side between Exchange Street and the
Penn Central Railroad crossing; on the south side 30 feet west of
Exchange Street westerly to the easterly line of the former Stubbs
§ 335-22 GENEVA CODE § 335-23
314:592
§ 335-24. Parking time limits in public parking lots. [Amended by
Ord. No. 71-8, eff. 5-5-1971; Ord. No. 74-15, eff. 7-3-1974; Ord. No.
76-15, eff. 6-2-1976]
Lumber Company property, and from the westerly line of the
former Stubbs Lumber Company property westerly to Geneva
Street.
(6) Linden Street: on the west side between Castle Street and Seneca
Street.
(7) Main Street: on both sides between Seneca Street and Castle
Street.
(8) Seneca Street: on both sides.
(9) Castle Street: on both sides between Main Street and Union Street.
(10) Elm Street: on the east side between Castle Street and Colt Street.
(11) Genesee Street: on the west side between Colt Street and Castle
Street.
(12) Main Street, South: On the east side from the north curbline of
Seymour Alley to a point 180 feet north; on the west side from the
south curbline of William Street to a point 205 feet south.
[Amended 3-1-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006]
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited for a period of more than
one hour from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays, as
follows:
(1) Seneca Street Parking Lot: western section, first 17 spaces, eastern
row in a southerly direction. [Added 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-253
]
(2) Exchange Place Parking Lot: five spaces in northeast corner of that
portion of lot north of Exchange Place. [Added 10-3-2007 by Ord.
No. 9-2007]
B. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited for a period of more than
three hours, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays and
Sundays, as follows: [Amended by Ord. No. 78-6, eff. 8-2-1978;
Ord. No. 78-15, eff. 11-8-1978; Ord. No. 81-2, eff. 1-7-1981;
9-2-1987 by Ord. No. 87-29; 9-2-1987 by Ord. No. 87-31;
5-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-7; 9-1-1993 by Ord. No. 93-12;
2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2; 10-3-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
(1) Castle Street Parking Lot.
53.Editor's Note: Said ordinance also redesignated former Subsections A, B, D and E as
Subsections B, C, E and F, respectively.
§ 335-23 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-24
314:593
(2) Seneca Street Parking Lot: north, eastern, with the exception of the
first 29 spaces eastern row in a southerly direction, western
section.
(3) South Exchange Street Parking Lot: northerly section with the
exception of last 10 spots in each of the four rows.
(4) Elm Street Parking Lot.
(5) Exchange Place Parking Lot: that portion south of Exchange Place.
(6) Public Parking Lot located adjacent to intersection of Canal and
Bradford on the east side.
C. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited for a period of longer than
10 hours, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays, as
follows:
(1) South Exchange Street Parking Lot: last 10 spots in each of four
rows, northern section and southern section. [Amended 9-1-1993
by Ord. No. 12-93]
(2) Exchange Place Parking Lot: that portion north of Exchange Place,
excluding five spaces in the northeast corner of said portion; also,
14 spaces at the far western section of the lot adjacent to the
Hydrant Hose property.
(3) Seneca Street Parking Lot: in the center portion of the lot, at the
south end, 24 spaces, and also five spaces at the southernmost part
of lot, last 12 spaces eastern row in a southern direction, western
section. [Amended 9-1-1993 by Ord. No. 93-12; 2-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-2]
(4) Public Parking Lot located northeast of Canal and Bradford
intersection near the railroad tracks. [Added 5-3-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-7]
D. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited between the hours of 2:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday in the
following parking lots:
(1) South Exchange Street Parking Lot. [Amended 6-2-2004 by Ord.
No. 7-2004]
(2) Exchange Street parking lot, south of entrance drives. [Added
5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2-2005]
(3) Neider Playground parking lot, east of entrance drive. [Added
1-4-2006 by Ord. No. 1-2006]
E. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited between the hours of 2:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday in the following
parking lots:
§ 335-24 GENEVA CODE § 335-24
314:594
§ 335-25. Parking meters. [Amended by Ord. No. 69-3, eff. 4-2-1969;
1-2-1974 by Ord. No. 74-1; Ord. No. 76-15, eff. 6-2-1976; Ord. No.
78-21, eff. 12-6-1978; 3-7-1990 by Ord. No. 90-6]
§ 335-26. Enforcement procedures. [Amended by Ord. No. 74-15,
eff. 7-3-1974; Ord. No. 76-15, eff. 6-2-1976; 10-5-1977 by Ord. No.
4-1977; Ord. No. 77-11, eff. 10-5-1977; Ord No. 78-25, eff. 1-1-1979;
11-2-1988 by Ord. No. 88-11; 12-6-1989 by Ord. No. 89-23; 3-7-1990
by Ord. No. 90-6]
(1) Castle Street Parking Lot.
(2) Seneca Street Parking Lot. [Amended 6-2-2004 by Ord. No.
7-2004]
(3) Exchange Street parking lot, north of entrance drives. [Added
5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2-2005]
(4) Neider Playground parking lot, west of entrance drive. [Added
1-4-2006 by Ord. No. 1-2006]
F. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited for a period of more than
one hour from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays, as
follows:
(1) Castle Street Parking Lot adjacent to City Hall inclusive of four
spaces located at the southerly end of said lot immediately adjacent
to the National Bank of Geneva property and two spaces located on
the westerly side of said lot and immediately adjacent to the City of
Geneva Boiler Building. [Added by Ord. No. 81-2, eff. 1-7-1981;
amended 11-6-1985 by Ord. No. 85-13; 9-2-1987 by Ord. No.
87-30; 10-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6]
A. Method of parking.
(1) Any vehicle parked or standing in any parking space on any City
street in any parking meter zone shall be parked with the righthand
wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the
right-hand curb.
(2) In any parking meter zone or parking zone, it shall be unlawful and
an offense to park any vehicle in a space not specifically designated
a legal parking space either by meters, official signs or pavement
markings.
A. Enforcement procedures.
(1) It shall be the duty of each traffic officer, or such other officer as
shall be instructed by the Chief of Police, to take the number of any
meter at which any vehicle is parked in violation of this article and
the registration number of such vehicle and report the same to the
Police Department, together with the length of time during which
§ 335-24 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-26
314:595
said vehicle has remained in violation of any of the provisions
of this article, as well as other facts, a knowledge of which is
necessary to an understanding of the circumstances attending such
violation.
(2) In parking zones described in this article, it shall be the duty of
such traffic officer or such individual or individuals as shall be
authorized and instructed by the Chief of Police to mark by any
suitable device the tire of any vehicle parked in violation of this
article, to take the registration number, report the same to the
Police Department together with the length of time in which the
vehicle has remained in violation of any of the provisions of this
article, as well as other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to
an understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
(3) Each such officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice stating
that such vehicle has been parked or has remained in such place in
violation of a provision of this article and instructing the owner or
operator of such vehicle to report to the City Comptroller's office in
regard to such violation.
(4) Each such operator or owner may within one week of the time
when such notice was attached to such vehicle pay to the City
Comptroller as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such
violation, an amount equivalent to $10 multiplied by the number of
periods of parking time established as a legal limit for such parking
space, and during which said vehicle occupied such parking space
in violation of any of the provisions of this article. After expiration
of 15 days from time such notice was attached to the vehicle the
penalty shall be increased to $20 multiplied by the number of said
periods and after expiration of 30 days from time when such notice
was attached to such vehicle the penalties shall be increased to $30
multiplied by the number of said periods. [Amended 8-5-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-12; 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
(5) The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment or
payments as aforesaid shall render such owner subject to the
penalties as hereinafter provided.
(6) It shall be presumed that any vehicle parked in violation of any
provision of this article was parked with the permission of the
owner.
B. Penalties upon conviction. Upon conviction of any person of a violation
of any provision of this article, a fine not exceeding $50 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days or both shall be imposed for each
violation.
§ 335-26 GENEVA CODE § 335-26
314:596
ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 335-27. Restrictions on abandoned, illegally parked or illegally
operated vehicles.
A. Authority to impound vehicles. When any vehicle is parked or
abandoned on any highway in the City during a snow storm, flood, fire
or other public emergency which affects that portion of the public
highway upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, or when any
vehicle is found unattended on any highway in the City where said
vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, or when any vehicle is
parked or abandoned on any highway or parking lot in the City where
not duly registered or not displaying registration and plates or is
parked or abandoned on any highway or any City property, said vehicle
must be removed by direction of any police officer of the City to any
place or garage designated by the Chief of Police. [Amended
10-5-1977 by Ord. No. 10-1977; 8-6-1985 by Ord. No. 8-1985]
B. Operation of vehicles on City property. It shall be unlawful to operate
any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or vehicle known as
a "minibike" or "trail bike" on any property not specifically designed for
the operation of motor vehicles that is owned, leased or under the
control and supervision of the City. [Amended 3-2-1973 by Ord. No.
6-1973; 10-3-1973 by Ord. No. 21-1973]
C. Storage and charges. After removal of any vehicle as provided in this
section, the Police Department may store such vehicle in a suitable
place at the expense of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of
the vehicle may redeem the same upon payment to the garage owner of
the amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in
effecting such removal, such removal charges not to exceed $90; an
additional charge of $20 for flatbed or dolly shall also be added
together with any charges for storage, such storage charges not to
exceed $20 per day or a fraction thereof. [Amended 4-1-1970 by Ord.
No. 7-1970; 3-6-1991 by Ord. No. 3-1991; 7-21-1998 by Ord. No.
10-1998; 7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
D. Notice of removal. The Police Department shall have the duty to
ascertain to the extent possible the owner of the vehicle or a person
having charge of the same, and to notify him of the removal and
disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will be required to
redeem the same.
E. Parking prohibited in certain places or in excess of 14 days. [Added
2-4-1970 by Ord. No. 2-1970; amended 7-7-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
(1) No person shall block a private or public driveway or stop, stand or
park a vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
§ 335-27 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-27
314:597
§ 335-28. Truck route system.
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic; except that a driver
may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of
passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations
or traffic signs or signals of a police officer.
(2) No person shall park a vehicle on any street in the City of Geneva in
excess of 14 days without moving said vehicle or without receiving
permission from the Chief of Police to park in excess of said
fourteen-day limit.
A. A truck route system, upon which all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer
combinations having a total gross weight in excess of five tons are
permitted to travel and operate, shall consist of the following highways:
(1) Hamilton Street between the west City line and South Main Street.
(2) Route 5 and 20 bypass at South Main Street, both north and south
cloverleafs.
(3) Lochland Road between the south City line and South Main Street.
(4) South Main Street from Lochland Road to the northerly cloverleaf
of Route 5 and 20 bypass.
(5) Lake Front Arterial Highway, Route 5 and 20 from Hamilton Street
to east City line.
(6) Lake Street between Exchange Street and Lake Front Arterial
Highway, Route 5 and 20.
(7) Exchange Street between Lake Street and north City line.
(8) Forge Avenue and Pre-Emption Street between Route 14 and North
Street. [Added 12-6-1978 by Ord. No. 31-1978]
B. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross
weight in excess of five tons are hereby excluded from all highways
within the City, except from those highways listed in Subsection A,
except that this exclusion shall not be construed to prevent the delivery
or pickup of merchandise or other property along the highway from
which such vehicles and combinations are excluded.
C. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations are hereby
excluded from Hammond Lane between Colt Street and Patterson Alley.
[Added 4-2-1969 by Ord. No. 3-1969]
D. 54All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations are hereby
excluded from Colt Street between North Main Street and Elm Street.
[Added 2-4-1987 by Ord. No. 4-1987]
54.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding the railroad bridge on West North Street,
added by Ord. No. 29-1970, was repealed by Ord. No. 8-1986.
§ 335-27 GENEVA CODE § 335-28
314:598
§ 335-29. Truck stand.
A truck stand on the south side of East Castle Street immediately west of
the Penn Central Railroad crossing and for a distance of 20 feet westerly
therefrom is hereby designated, and no vehicle except a truck engaged
in loading or unloading freight or baggage for hire shall park or stand
therein.55
§ 335-30. Taxicab stands.
The Chief of Police is hereby delegated the authority to exercise by official
order, rule or regulation the designation of taxicab stands upon the streets
of the City.
§ 335-31. Pavement markings.
Pavement markings in accordance with the standards and specifications
established by the State Traffic Commission shall be applied on the
following highways or portions of highways:
§ 335-32. Penalties for non-moving violations.
E. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations are hereby
excluded from Merrill Place. [Added 7-3-1974 by Ord. No. 16-1974]
A. North Genesee Street between its intersection with Avenue B and a
point 128 feet north of the north rail of the Lehigh Valley Railroad
siding.
A. Duty of Police Officer. It shall be the duty of each traffic patrolman or
such other officer as shall be so instructed by the Chief of Police to take
the registration number of any vehicle parked or standing in violation of
any provisions of this chapter, as well as any other facts and
circumstances, the knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of such violation.
B. Notice to be attached. Each such police officer shall also attach to such
vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has
been parked or left standing in violation of a provision of this chapter
and instructing such owner or operator to report to the City
Comptroller in regard to such violation.
C. Payment to City Comptroller. Each such owner or operator may, within
one week of the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle,
pay to the City Comptroller as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of
such violations, the sum of $5. After the expiration of one week of the
time when such notice was attached to such vehicle, the penalty shall
be increased to $10. The failure of such owner or operator to make such
payment or payments as aforesaid shall render such owner subject to
55.Editor's Note: Former § 60.63, Bus Stop, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 9-5-1973 by Ord. No. 17-1973.
§ 335-28 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-32
314:599
§ 335-33. Transportation of radioactive wastes. [Added by Ord. No.
80-4, eff. 3-5-1980]
the penalties hereinafter provided for a violation of the provisions of
this chapter. This fee schedule shall apply to all non-moving violations,
except overtime parking violations and those violations for parking
without a permit in a space reserved for handicapped persons.
[Amended by Ord. No. 74-27, eff. 11-6-1974; 7-12-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-19]
D. Presumption. The parking or standing of a vehicle in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be presumptive evidence that the
owner did park or leave standing, or cause or permit said vehicle to be
so parked or left standing in violation of this chapter.
A. Notwithstanding any law, order or regulation to the contrary, no highlevel
radioactive waste, including spent fuel rods, shall be transported
by rail or highway into, through or out of the City of Geneva, New York,
unless the shipper, carrier or person or firm responsible for its
transportation shall have first:
(1) Given two weeks' prior written notice to the Chief of Police of the
City of Geneva before the arrival at the City of Geneva City limits of
any shipment of high-level radioactive waste, including spent fuel
rods. Such prior notification shall include the date of the shipment,
method of transportation, route, starting point, destination, an
identification of all radioactive elements contained in each
shipment by name, atomic number, weight and the radioactive level
of each element or shipment in curies, the identity of the person,
firm or agency responsible for safety, emergency and cleanup in the
event of accident and such other information as the Chief of Police
may require consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.
Such radioactive sources shall only be transported into and
through the City of Geneva over such route or routes and only at
such time or times of the day as the Chief of Police may direct
consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.
(2) Furnished satisfactory proof of financial security and insurance
coverage for any costs, damages or expenses incurred as a result of
an accident, including but not limited to, liability claims for
personal injury and property damage, and agreed to be financially
responsible for the total cost of all damages resulting from any
such accident. Such carrier, shipper or person or firm responsible
for transportation shall additionally provide adequate assurances
that trained emergency response units are available in the event of
accident.
(3) Obtained a permit for such transportation from the City Clerk of
the City of Geneva and paid a permit fee of $100 prior to such
transportation through City limits.
§ 335-32 GENEVA CODE § 335-33
314:600
B. This section shall not apply to radiation sources shipped by and for the
United States Government for military or national security purposes or
which are related to national defense, nor shall it apply to low-level
radioactive materials used for medical, educational, agricultural or
research purposes and the same are hereby excluded from the
provisions of this section.
C. "High-level radioactive wastes" shall be defined for purposes of this law
as any quantity of radioactive material specified as a large quantity by
the United States Atomic Energy Commission or the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission, or any radioactive material in any quantity or
form exceeding two grams or 20 curies, whichever is less.
D. The violation of this law shall constitute an offense and the operator of
the vehicle shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or both, for each
such offense and if the owner of the vehicle not be the operator, then for
each such offense the owner of the vehicle shall also be subject to a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding six
months, or both.
E. If any part or provision of this law or the application thereof is held by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the other
provisions of this section or their application.
§ 335-33 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-33
314:601

ARTICLE VII
Penalties
§ 335-34. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 76-7, eff.
3-3-1976; Ord. No. 79-5, eff. 4-4-1979]
Penalties for the violation of this chapter are contained in the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
§ 335-34 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-34
314:603

ARTICLE VIII
Requirement to Obey
[Added 6-6-1984 by Ord. No. 84-8]
§ 335-35. Traffic infraction.
Every person shall be required to obey the provisions, rules or regulations
established in Articles I, II, and III of this chapter, and it shall be deemed to
be a traffic infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions of these
articles.
§ 335-35 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 335-35
314:605
Chapter 341
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 277.
§ 335-35 GENEVA CODE § 335-35
314:606
ARTICLE I
Water
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 45, Art. I, of the 1968 Code]
§ 341-1. Rules governing City-supplied water. [Amended by Ord. No.
76-16, eff. 6-2-1976; Ord. No. 82-11, eff. 4-7-1982]
The following rules shall be considered a part of the contract with any
person who takes water supplied by the City and every such person taking
the water shall be considered as having expressed his consent to be bound
thereby. Whenever any one of the said rules is violated, the right is reserved
to cut off the water without notice, and the person whose water is thus cut
off shall forfeit all payments made and the water shall not be turned on
again until all unpaid rents and charges are paid, together with a charge
of $10 for turning the same on again. In case the violation of any rule is
discovered previous to turning on the water, then the water shall not be
turned on said premises until the rules are fully complied with.
§ 341-2. Applications.
A. All persons desiring a water supply from the City must first make a
written application on the books of the Department of Public Works
kept for that purpose at its office, stating fully the several and various
uses for which the water is wanted and the name of the licensed
plumber selected to do the work of introducing the water. Such
application must be signed by the owner of the premises or his duly
authorized agent, whereupon a permit to perform the said work and no
other will be issued to said plumber specifying the particular use thus
applied for.
B. All persons desiring a water supply from the City shall employ a regular
licensed plumber to do the work. When the work is completed to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works and in compliance
with all the rules and regulations, on payment of the charges due the
City at the Comptroller's Office, the water will be turned on the
premises.
C. Any person wishing a water supply from the City shall make application
through the City Engineering Department for a water tap permit. Work
will be performed by Department of Public Works personnel. Before this
permit is granted a fee, which is to be adjusted administratively
annually, based on the inflation rate is charged as listed below: [Added
5-3-1989 by Ord. No. 89-12; amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No.
4-2002]
(1) Water tap fees, installed, complete from water main to City right-ofway
line:
(a) Tap, 3/4-inch:
[1] Service materials: $154.
§ 341-1 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-2
314:607
§ 341-3. General conditions and restrictions. [Amended 3-2-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-7]
[2] Materials for excavation/restoration: $1,154.
[3] Equipment: $816.
[4] Labor: $1,501.
[5] Total for 3/4-inch: $3,625.
(b) Tap, 1-inch:
[1] Service materials: $204.
[2] Materials for excavation/restoration: 1,154.
[3] Equipment: $816.
[4] Labor: $1,501.
[5] Total for 1-inch: $3,675.
(c) Tap, 1 1/2-inch:
[1] Service materials: $464.
[2] Materials for excavation/restoration: $1,154.
[3] Equipment: $816.
[4] Labor: $1,501.
[5] Total for 1 1/2-inch: $3,935.
(d) Tap, 2-inch:
[1] Service materials: $624.
[2] Materials for excavation/restoration: $1,154.
[3] Equipment: $816.
[4] Labor: $1,501.
[5] Total for 2-inch $4,095.
NOTE: Cost of tap fees larger than two inches in size will
be determined on an individual basis.
(2) Disconnect fee, 1 1/2- to 2-inch: $1,000.
NOTE: Cost of disconnect fee larger than two inches in size will be
determined on an individual basis.
A. The plumber employed and designated by the owner of the premises
will be considered as the agent of said owner while employed in the
§ 341-2 GENEVA CODE § 341-3
314:608
prosecution of the work of introducing water into the said premises,
and will not be recognized in any sense the agent of the Department of
Public Works or the City. Neither will the Department of Public Works
nor the City hold itself responsible for the acts of the said plumber.
B. The Department of Public Works will determine the size of the taps to
be inserted in any water main and the form and size of curb box to be
used under any application and permit, and will furnish such taps and
curb boxes at the expense of the applicant, to be paid for upon making
the application.
C. The work of inserting taps, tees or braces and connections in any water
main shall be done only by persons employed by the Department of
Public Works or by a competent plumber having a permit in writing
from the Superintendent to make such connections.
D. Owners desiring to introduce a water service pipe into their premises
will be required to extend said service at right angles with the main
pipe to the inside of the curbline of the street, at which point a metallic
curb cock and curb box shall be placed, of such form and construction
as shall be approved by the Department of Public Works. The top of said
curb box shall be placed on the grade of the sidewalk of the street, and
shall be kept at all times in perfect order and repair.
E. In cases where the curb boxes and street washers are set in flagging or
pavement of the sidewalk, the stones are to be neatly and accurately
cut, and top of the boxes set even with the surface of the pavement or
flagging; and in all other cases flush with the surface of the sidewalk.
F. Owners desiring to introduce water into any premises along or in front
of which water mains have not been laid must make application
therefor to the Department of Public Works.
G. The owner receiving a permit for the introduction of a water service
into his premises and the plumber doing the work will be required to
cause said service to be placed not less than four feet below the surface
of the earth at any point between the water main in the street and the
inside of the foundation wall of the building into which the water
service is introduced.
H. No water pipe which is to operate as a water main shall be laid in the
same trench with a sewer, either public or private, and no water service
pipe shall be laid in the same trench with a lateral sewer under any
circumstances.
I. The owner of the property, into which water is introduced by a service
pipe, will be required to maintain in perfect order and repair, at his own
expense, the said service pipe and its fixtures and appurtenances,
including all fixtures therein provided for delivering or supplying water
for any purpose and, in case said service and fixtures are not so kept in
perfect repair, the Department of Public Works may cut off the supply of
water therefrom without notice and collect the expenses incurred
§ 341-3 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-3
314:609
against the premises, to be collected with the first bill of supply for
water that shall become due against said premises.
J. Specifications of service pipe.
(1) All service pipes from the water main to the curb box, up to and
including one inch bore, shall be of copper pipe of suitable quality
and strength or lead or tin lined lead pipe. Said lead pipe is to be of
the quality, strength and weight known as AAA and shall meet the
following minimum specifications:
1/2 inch, 3 lbs. per foot, 1 inch exterior diameter
5/8 inch, 3 1/2 lbs. per foot, 1.10 inch exterior diameter
3/4 inch, 4 7/8 lbs. per foot, 1.33 inch exterior diameter
1 inch, 6 lbs. per foot, 1.60 inch exterior diameter
(2) The said lead or copper service pipe shall have an excess of length
of not less than six inches above the length required to connect the
tap in the main and the curb cock, so as to produce a slack, the
greater part of which shall occur near the tap.
K. Just inside the basement wall of a building, into which the service pipe
extends, a stop and waste cock shall be conveniently located and
arranged so that the water may be drawn back and all the pipes within
the building emptied through said stop and waste by opening the
faucets at the highest point therein and allowing the air to enter said
pipes.
L. Water will be turned on to premises only after the plumber has
completed the work, as required by the rules. The curb cock controlling
any service shall not be left open by the plumber or any other person,
after connecting said service with street main, or after making any new
extension in unoccupied premises, so that the water may be supplied to
said premises, by said service, without a written permit from the
Superintendent. But in cases where the work is simple extension or
additional attachment in premises where the water is then in use, and
when a permit has been duly obtained for same, then the plumber may
leave the water on the premises and the owner will be charged for the
additional use from the date of the application.
M. In all cases where range or steam boilers are supplied with water, it is
understood and agreed that the Department of Public Works and the
City will not be liable for any damage which may result to any person or
premises from shutting off the water from any water main or service for
any purpose whatever, even in cases where no notice is given; but it is
the intention of the department when practicable to give suitable notice
of such shutting off to the consumer, and no deduction from water bills
will be made in consequence thereof.
N. Permission will not be granted to supply two or more buildings fronting
on the same street from a single tap, unless the service shall be divided
§ 341-3 GENEVA CODE § 341-3
314:610
at the curb and a separate service extended therefrom, controlled by
a separate curb cock for each service. In case only one of several
buildings occupies the frontage of a single lot and others are located in
the rear of the said front building, then permission may be granted to
supply all of the said buildings from one service, where the owner shall
pay for all the water used.
O. In case a double house or other building fronting on any street is to be
supplied with water, a separate service to each from the curb, and
controlled by a separate curb cock, will be required. But said double
house or building may be supplied by a single service where the owner
shall pay for the water used.
P. When water shall be supplied to more than one party through a single
tap, the bill for the water supply will be made to the owner of the
premises, and in case of nonpayment, the water may be shut off,
notwithstanding one or more of the parties may have paid their
proportion to such owner or to any other party.
Q. Whenever two or more parties are supplied with the same service pipe,
the failure of any one of the number to pay the water rates when due or
comply with any rule, shall authorize the Department of Public Works to
turn the water off from said pipe until rates, terms and conditions are
complied with.
R. It is understood and agreed that the Department of Public Works, their
agents and assistants, may enter the premises of any water-taker, at
any reasonable time, to examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantity of
water used and the manner of its use, and in case of fraudulent
representation on the part of any water-taker, or unnecessary waste of
water, the payment will be forfeited and the supply cut off.
S. In case of making repairs or constructing new work, the City and the
Department of Public Works reserve the right to shut off the water from
any consumer without notice and keep it shut off as long as may be
necessary.
T. The City and the Department of Public Works reserve the right to limit
the amount of water furnished to any consumer, should circumstances
seem to warrant such action, although no limit may be stated in the
application or permit for such use; or the Department of Public Works
may entirely cut off the use for any manufacturing purposes, or any use
for supplying power at any time, by giving reasonable notice to the
consumer of such intended action.
U. Unless said property has a fire suppression system wholly dependent
upon the public water source, the Director of Public works shall order
water service disconnected to any property ordered vacated and unfit
for human habitation by the Geneva Municipal Court or other court of
competent jurisdiction; said service not to be restored until the order is
lifted by the same court and upon payment of a reconnection fee of $25,
§ 341-3 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-3
314:611
§ 341-4. Discontinuance of use of water. [Amended by Ord. No.
76-16, eff. 6-2-1976]
§ 341-5. Builder's use.
Masons and contractors shall not take water without a builder's permit
for every separate job, and any party suffering others to get water from
his premises, without first exhibiting a permit, will be held strictly liable.
When any person desires to use the City water at any premises for building
purposes of any description, the owner of such premises, or his agent
having such premises in charge, must, before using City water for such
purposes, make a regular application at the office of the Department of
Public Works for permission therefor, and agree to pay such rates
established therefor.
§ 341-6. Special uses.
No person shall use the City water for flushing sewers, settling earth
in ditches, or purposes of a like nature, without permission from the
Department of Public Works and paying for the same in advance.
§ 341-7. Fire hydrants.
as well as any outstanding water rates, sewer rents, and other
applicable fees. [Added 3-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2-2012]
A. Any consumer wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from
the water works must give notice thereof at the office of the
Department of Public Works, and he will be charged for the use until
such notice is given.
B. Whenever water has been turned off by the Department of Public Works
for nonpayment of rents, or for purpose of repair or construction, or for
any other necessary or proper reason, no person will be permitted to
turn it on again who is not duly authorized to do so by the Department
of Public Works. And when water is turned off for nonpayment of rents
or for violation of any one rule or regulation contained herein or of the
Department of Public Works, it shall not be turned on again until the
party in default shall pay all water rents or other charges due and the
amount of $150 as a penalty for the discontinuance and restoration of
service. [Amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002; 1-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 1-2013]
C. Prior to discontinuance of water service for nonpayment of rents, the
Director of Public Works shall order the property to be posted with
notice that said discontinuance is scheduled to occur. Any account for
which such posting is required shall be assessed a charge of $50 which
shall be paid, in addition to other charges due, prior to restoration of
service. [Added 1-9-2013 by Ord. No. 1-2013]
§ 341-3 GENEVA CODE § 341-7
314:612
§ 341-8. Valves and mains.
No person except the Superintendent of Public Works or those acting under
his direction shall open or close any valve or gate in the street mains or
molest or interfere with same in any manner.
§ 341-9. Water elevators and other motors.
Permits may be granted in certain cases, on special application to the
Department of Public Works, for supplying water from the water mains to
elevators and for other purposes under the following conditions:
A. No person shall open any fire plug or hydrant, or draw water therefrom,
except under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works or as
hereinafter provided.
B. The Fire Chief, his assistants and officers, and members of the Fire
Department are authorized to use the hydrants and plugs for the
purpose of extinguishing fire or cleaning engines, hose or department
materials, or making trials of engines or hose of the department. But all
such uses shall be under the direction and supervision of the Fire Chief
or his assistants, and in no event will an inexperienced or incompetent
person be permitted to manipulate or control in any way any hydrant,
plug or other fixture.
C. Illegal use of a fire hydrant is subject to a fine of $150. [Added
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002]
A. Tapping of the main is to be done by the employees of the Water
Department.
B. A gate or valve must be put in which shall be accessible only to the
Water Department.
C. The service supplying the motor must have attached thereto an
approved meter, or other appliance which shall correctly register the
quantity of water which passes through said service.
D. The expense and cost of said connections and service and of
maintaining the same in good condition shall be paid by the applicant.
E. The charges for water shall be at meter rates, payable in time and
manner as such prescribed.
F. In case of any failure on the part of the owner of the premises at any
time promptly to cause repairs to be made to said service, measuring
apparatus, or any fixture connected with said service, the Department
of Public Works may shut off the water.
G. In case the Department of Public Works shall so direct, the owner of any
water elevator or hydraulic motor shall be required to connect
therewith air chambers of such form and design as shall be directed.
§ 341-7 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-10
314:613
§ 341-10. Water for fire protection.
Standpipes or other pipes for automatic suppression of fires in buildings,
which fixtures are only intended for use in suppression of fires, will be
permitted to be attached to the water supply and no charge shall be made
for the use of water for that purpose. But all such pipes must be provided
with a suitable valve outside of the building under the exclusive control of
the Department of Public Works. Also, in the case of standpipes, a valve
must be placed at each hose opening, which valve shall be sealed by the
Department of Public Works, for which the owner or tenant shall pay for
sealing. In case such seals shall be broken for the extinguishment of any
fire, the party breaking the seal shall immediately thereafter give notice
at the office of the Department of Public Works and the valve shall be
again resealed at the owner's expense. No standpipe or other fixture for fire
protection will be allowed in premises when the water is not taken for other
than fire purposes, and the Department of Public Works reserves the right
to refuse any and all applications for purely fire protection uses in their
discretion.
§ 341-11. Meters.
A. The Department of Public Works reserves the right to attach a meter to
any service pipe whenever it is deemed expedient to do so and
thereafter to charge meter rates for the water used. After a meter is
attached, any damage which such meter may sustain, resulting from the
carelessness of the owner, agent or tenant, or from the neglect of either
of them properly to secure and protect the same, as well as any damage
that may result from allowing the meter to become frozen, or to be
injured by hot water or steam setting back from a boiler, shall be paid to
the Department of Public Works on demand and, in case such payment
is not so made, the water may be shut off from the premises without
notice and will not be turned on again until all charges are paid.
B. The following regulations concerning the use of meters shall apply:
(1) If a meter gets out of order and fails to register, the consumer will
be charged at the average daily consumption as shown by the
meter when in order.
(2) All water passing though a meter will be charged for whether used
or wasted.
(3) No meter shall be removed or disturbed without permission from
the Superintendent of Public Works.
(4) The owner and tenant shall provide ready and convenient access to
the meter so that it may be frequently read and examined by agents
of the Department of Public Works.
(5) Meters will be removed and tested upon request. If any meter so
tested shall be found to be registering correctly or to be running
slowly or not to exceed 2% fast, the expense of removing and
§ 341-10 GENEVA CODE § 341-11
314:614
§ 341-12. Plumbers to make connections.
testing such meter shall be $25 and charged to the property owner.
All bills for testing meters will be treated as water bills under
Subsection C of § 341-15 of these regulations. [Amended by Ord.
No. 82-12, eff. 4-7-1982; 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002]
(6) Meters that are larger than two inches in diameter and owned by
the customer shall be maintained in operable condition at all times.
Meters shall be tested based on the schedule listed below. Meters
shall be within +/- 2% of design accuracy limits. When said meter
becomes inoperable and notice is given to the property owner of
said condition, the owner shall, within 30 days, cause said repairs
to be made. Failure on the part of the owner to effectuate the
necessary repairs to the water meter shall result in a surcharge of
10% on the total water and sewer bill and a final notice given the
customer as to termination of service. [Added by Ord. No. 75-18,
eff. 11-5-1975; amended 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002]
Meter Test Greater Than 2”
Size of Meter
(inches) Test Schedule
3 Every 3 years
4 Every 2 years
6 or larger Annually
(7) When a property owner requests a meter to be removed and then
replaced at a later date, a charge of $25 will be imposed. [Added
by Ord. No. 82-12, eff. 4-7-1982]
A. No person shall make any attachment to or connection with the pipes of
the City water system, nor make any addition to or alteration of any tap,
pipe, cock or other fixture connected with the pipes supplying water to
consumers from said water system unless licensed as a plumber by the
City and authorized to perform the work as herein provided.
B. Any plumber before undertaking any work involving the City water
system or connections thereto shall execute and deliver to the City of
Geneva a bond in the penal sum of $2,000, with two sufficient sureties
or a surety company authorized to do business in this state as surety,
conditioned that he will indemnify and save harmless the City of Geneva
from all damage and loss that may result from his work being done
carelessly or imperfectly or in such a way as to cause injury or loss to
person or property, or from his failing to comply with any provision of
the rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works or of the
Charter or ordinances of the City now existing or that may be enacted
hereafter.
§ 341-11 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-12
314:615
§ 341-13. Meter rates.
C. No plumber shall be allowed to make any attachment or alteration of
any pipe or fixture by which water is or may be supplied to consumers,
without first obtaining a written permit for the same from the
Superintendent of Public Works and said permit must be returned as
soon as work is completed.
D. The provisions contained in § 341-3 of these regulations, entitled
"General restrictions and conditions," are hereby made binding upon
the plumber also, as far as they may be applicable.
E. No plumber shall allow his name to be used by any other person or
party, either for the purpose of obtaining permits or doing any work
under his license.
F. Plumbers will be held responsible for the violation of any of the rules of
the department by journeyman plumbers or others while in their
employ.
G. After a permit shall have been issued to a plumber in pursuance of any
application of an owner or premises, the following order shall be
observed by the plumber in making the insertion of taps: After receiving
a permit for the opening of any water service trench, which requires the
insertion of a tap in the main with which to connect said service, the
plumber shall file a written notice with the Superintendent of Public
Works between 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on the day in which he desires
the tapping done, and such notice shall designate the name of the street
and the house or lot number where the tap is to be inserted and the
name of the owner or applicant, and the hour when the main pipe will
be exposed ready for tapping.
H. Printed forms of the notices required by the foregoing rules will be
furnished to the plumbers on application to the Superintendent of
Public Works.
A. All meter rates will be based on three months' consumption and,
whenever water is supplied through a meter, the minimum rate for a
period of three months will be charged. If, for any reason, a meter is not
read quarterly, the charge will be based on average consumption for the
prior year.
B. Meters will be read monthly without extra charge, if receipts from the
water supplied through the meter amount to $15 or more monthly and
the maximum rate will be charged for the first month in each quarter
only. If, however, the receipts from any month should amount to less
than $15, an extra charge of $5 will be made for reading the meter.
[Amended by Ord. No. 82-13, eff. 4-7-1982]
C. In all other cases a charge of $10 will be made for extra reading of a
meter. [Amended by Ord. No. 82-13, eff. 4-7-1982]
§ 341-12 GENEVA CODE § 341-13
314:616
§ 341-14. Abatements.
§ 341-15. Collection of rates and fines.
All sums charged for water supplied or for expenses for the repair of
services, meters, fixtures and all other appliances connected with the water
service, or for damages to the same, or for penalties imposed for violation
of any rule or regulation shall be regarded as due from the owner of the
premises and a lien upon the property until paid. If said sums for any
reason cannot be collected from said owner or occupant of the premises
and the water shall be turned off on account of nonpayment, no application
for water service for such premises shall be granted by the Department of
Public Works, notwithstanding that the said premises shall have changed
ownership in any way, until such sums shall have been paid in full to the
City Comptroller.
D. For all meters six inches and larger connected to fire-suppression
systems, the minimum charge referenced in Subsection A of this section
shall be reflective of the meter size deemed appropriate for traditional
consumption of the facility, irrespective of the fire-suppression system,
as deemed appropriate by the Director of Public Works. [Added
7-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2-201056]
A. No abatement from any water bill shall be made where the owner or
consumer has not complied with the requirements of these rules or
regulations in making application at the water office for the
discontinuance of the use of water, in making application to have any
fixture disconnected, in making application to have the water turned off
from service or in giving notice under § 341-4 of these regulations.
B. No abatement from any water bill will be made in cases where the
charge for water results from a failure on the part of the owner or
consumer to repair promptly any broken or defective fixture or service.
C. No abatement from any water bill will be made in cases where any
fixture is left open for waste of water, or continuous flow of same, by
any tenant or occupant of any premises supplied with City water.
D. No abatement in any case made shall establish a precedent for an
abatement in any following or ensuing bill, nor for an abatement in any
other case, but each case shall be determined upon its merits.
E. No abatement from any water bill or remittance of any penalty provided
by these rules shall be made except by the Director of Public Works in
writing.
A. A book shall be kept in the office of the Department of Public Works,
which shall be called the delinquent register, which shall contain the
street, number and location of premises from which the water has been
56.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it apply to consumption beginning in the
third quarter of 2010.
§ 341-13 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-15
314:617
§ 341-16. Acts prohibited.
The following acts are prohibited:
turned off for nonpayment of dues and the sum remaining unpaid,
which book shall be for the information and protection of persons
intending to purchase City property, and such persons may ascertain at
the office whether any charges for such unpaid dues appear upon said
register.
B. If no such charges appear, any person may upon the payment of 50
cents receive a certificate from the Superintendent of Public Works to
that effect, but, unless such certificate is issued, the Department of
Public Works may collect any sums which may be subsequently
discovered to have been due against said premises, but which are not
discovered or has been omitted from the register at the time of search.
C. All water rates shall be due and payable at the office of the City
Comptroller quarterly on the first days of January, April, July and
October.
(1) On all bills not paid on or before the first day of the month following
the date of issue 5% will be added and 1% additional thereto will be
charged for every month thereafter until paid.
(2) Bills will be sent out to consumers at the address of the premises
where the water is consumed unless otherwise notified by the
owner.
(3) All charges for material furnished or work done by employees of
the Department of Public Works in connection with a private water
service will be treated as water rates.
A. To use the City water or permit its use for any purpose other than that
for which the property owner pays water rates.
B. To take water from any fire hydrant for filling sprinkling wagons, or for
any other purpose, without written permission from the Superintendent
of Public Works. This prohibition does not apply to the Fire Department.
C. To open, close, turn or interfere with any stop valve or stop cock
belonging to the Department of Public Works.
D. To throw any substance into a reservoir or to throw any deleterious
matter into the lake within 2,000 feet of the inlet pipes at the pumping
station.
E. Anyone found guilty of theft of services shall be subject to a fine of
$150. [Added 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002]
§ 341-15 GENEVA CODE § 341-16
314:618
ARTICLE II
Water Rates
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 45, Art. II, of the 1968 Code; last
amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 11-2015]
§ 341-17. Water rates for resident users. [Amended 12-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 4-2016; 12-4-2019 by Ord. No. 7-2019]
The water rates in accordance with § 341-13 of this chapter for users of
water within the City limits shall be as follows:
Size of Meter in
Inches (In)
Water
Allowance in
Gallons
Minimum
Charge
Per Gallon Over
Min.
5/8 4,000 $31.54 $0.00571
3/4 8,000 $63.07 $0.00588
1 15,000 $118.27 $0.00605
1.5 34,000 $268.06 $0.00624
2 60,000 $473.04 $0.00642
3 120,000 $946.09 $0.00662
4 184,000 $1,450.66 $0.00681
6 371,000 $2,924.98 $0.00702
8 634,000 $4,998.46 $0.00723
§ 341-18. Water rates for nonresident users. [Amended 12-7-2016
by Ord. No. 4-2016; 12-4-2019 by Ord. No. 7-2019]
The water rates in accordance with § 341-13 of this chapter for nonresident
users of water shall be as follows:
Size of Meter in
Inches (Out)
Water
Allowance in
Gallons
Minimum
Charge
Per Gallon Over
Min.
5/8 4,000 $44.71 $0.00839
3/4 8,000 $89.43 $0.00865
1 15,000 $167.67 $0.00890
1.5 34,000 $380.04 $0.00917
2 60,000 $670.66 $0.00944
3 120,000 $1,341.31 $0.00973
4 184,000 $2,056.68 $0.01001
6 371,000 $4,146.89 $0.01032
8 634,000 $7,086.60 $0.01063
§ 341-17 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-18
314:619

ARTICLE III
Resident Sewer Charges
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 45, Art. III, of the 1968 Code]
§ 341-19. Regulations for use of City sanitary sewer system.
[Amended 12-5-1990 by Ord. No. 90-17; amended by implication,
see L.L. No. 1-1995, adopted 1-9-1995;]
A. All resident users of said sewer shall be governed by the following rules
and regulations in addition to the provisions of Chapter 277 of this
Code. Sewer rates for resident sewer users shall be based upon the
metered consumption of water on premises connected with the sewer
system.
B. The rates of such rents shall be as follows per quarter: [Amended
12-5-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001; 12-4-2002 by L.L. No. 6-2002;
12-3-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; 12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2-2004;
12-7-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; 12-6-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006;
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007; 12-18-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008;
12-2-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009; 4-6-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011;
12-7-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(1) First 4,000 gallons: $14.29 per 1,000 gallons, minimum bill $57.16.
(2) All over 4,000 gallons: $7.37 per 1,000 gallons.
(3) Minimum charge per quarter shall be established in accordance
with the size of the water meter as follows: [Amended 12-4-2019
by L.L. No. 3-2019]
Size of Meter
in Inches (In)
Water
Allowance in
Gallons
Minimum
Charge
Per Gallon
Over Min.
5/8 4,000 $57.85 $0.00964
3/4 8,000 $115.70 $0.00993
1 15,000 $216.95 $0.01022
1.5 34,000 $491.74 $0.01053
2 60,000 $867.78 $0.01084
3 120,000 $1,735.55 $0.01117
4 184,000 $2,661.19 $0.01151
6 371,000 $5,365.75 $0.01185
8 634,000 $9,169.52 $0.01221
§ 341-19 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-20
314:621
§ 341-20. Collection of charges. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-25, eff.
1-1-1980; Ord. No. 80-27, eff. 1-1-1981]
All sums charged for use of sewers by residents shall be added to the
quarterly water bill and collected in the same manner as provided in Article
I of this chapter for the collection of water bills, including penalties and
shutting off of water for nonpayment of either water or use of sewers.
§ 341-20 GENEVA CODE § 341-20
314:622
ARTICLE IV
Nonresident Sewer Charges
[Adopted 7-3-1968 as Ch. 45, Art. IV, of the 1968 Code]
§ 341-21. Regulations for use of City sanitary sewer system by
nonresidents. [Amended by Ord. No. 79-25, eff. 1-1-1980; Ord. No.
80-27, eff. 1-1-1981; 12-5-1990 by Ord. No. 90-18; amended by
implication, see L.L. No. 1-1995, adopted 1-9-1995]
A. All nonresident users of said sewers shall be governed by the following
rules and regulations in addition to the provisions of Chapter 277 of this
Code.
B. The sewer rates for nonresident sewer users shall be based upon the
metered consumption of water on premises connected with the sewer
system.
C. The rates of such rents shall be as follows per quarter: [Amended
12-5-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001; 12-4-2002 by L.L. No. 6-2002;
12-3-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; 12-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2-2004;
12-7-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; 12-6-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006;
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007; 12-18-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008;
12-2-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009; 4-6-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011]
(1) First 4,000 gallons: $23.72 for 1,000 gallons, minimum bill $94.88.
(2) All over 4,000 gallons: $9.59 per 1,000 gallons.
(3) Minimum charge per quarter shall be established in accordance
with the size of the water meter as follows: [Amended 12-3-2014
by L.L. No. 2-2014; 12-7-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016; 12-4-2019
by L.L. No. 3-2019]
Size of Meter
in Inches (In)
Water
Allowance in
Gallons
Minimum
Charge
Per Gallon
Over Min.
5/8 4,000 $57.85 $0.00964
3/4 8,000 $115.70 $0.00993
1 15,000 $216.95 $0.01022
1.5 34,000 $491.74 $0.01053
2 60,000 $867.78 $0.01084
3 120,000 $1,735.55 $0.01117
4 184,000 $2,661.19 $0.01151
6 371,000 $5,365.75 $0.01185
8 634,000 $9,169.52 $0.01221
§ 341-21 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-21
314:623
§ 341-22. Application by nonresidents to connect with City sanitary
sewer system. [Added by Ord. No. 79-25, eff. 1-1-1980; reenacted by
Ord. No. 80-27, eff. 1-1-1981]
Applications for permission to connect with the City sanitary sewer system
by any person for property not within the City limits shall be governed by
the following rules and regulations in addition to all other provisions of this
article and Chapter 277 of this Code.
§ 341-23. Collection of charges. [Added by Ord. No. 79-25, eff.
1-1-1980; reenacted by Ord. No. 80-27, eff. 1-1-1981]
All sums charged for use of sewers by nonresidents shall be added to the
quarterly water bill and collected in the same manner as provided in Article
I of this chapter for the collection of water bills, including penalties and
shutting off of water for nonpayment of either water or use of sewers.
Size of Meter
in Inches
(Out)
Water
Allowance in
Gallons
Minimum
Charge
Per Gallon
Over Min.
5/8 4,000 $96.04 $0.01004
3/4 8,000 $192.07 $0.01035
1 15,000 $360.13 $0.01065
1.5 34,000 $816.29 $0.01097
2 60,000 $1,440.51 $0.01130
3 120,000 $2,881.02 $0.01164
4 184,000 $4,417.56 $0.01199
6 371,000 $8,907.16 $0.01235
8 634,000 $15,221.40 $0.01273
A. One-half of the installation cost of the sanitary sewer per foot frontage
shall be paid in cash for each foot frontage on premises to be served.
For premises facing upon a sewer which has been heretofore installed
by the City of Geneva, the said payment shall accompany the
application.
B. In cases where the sewer is not constructed by the City of Geneva, the
above payment shall not be required.
§ 341-21 GENEVA CODE § 341-23
314:624
ARTICLE V
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 12-30-1969 by L.L. No. 3-1969; last amended by L.L. No.
1-1995]
§ 341-24. Sewer rents established.
There is hereby established in the City of Geneva a scale of rents to be
called "sewer rents", the revenues from which shall be used for financing
and maintaining sewage collection and treatment facilities. The funds
derived from these charges shall be used for all municipal expenses
associated with design, engineering, construction, improving or
maintaining a sewerage system, including engineering, planning,
construction, reconstruction of sewers and sewage treatment works and
all necessary appurtenances thereto, including pump stations, extension,
enlargement, replacement or additions to the sanitary or stormwater sewer
system, separation of sanitary and stormwater sewers, or the preliminary or
other studies and surveys relative thereto and from the acquisition of land
or rights-of-way for any of the capital improvements.
§ 341-25. Imposition of sewer rents.
A. In addition to any and all other fees and charges provided by law, the
owner of any parcel of real property connected with the sanitary sewer
system of the City of Geneva shall pay a sewer rent for the use of such
sanitary sewer system.
B. The sewer rental charge shall be assigned to owners of properties
located within or without the corporate limits of the City of Geneva who
contribute wastes to the municipal sanitary sewer system.
C. The basis for the normal sewer rental charge shall be the volume of
water consumed from the public water supply system by the individual
property owner. The sewer rental charge shall be determined by
multiplying the amount shown on the individual water bill by the
following percent: [Amended 12-6-1989 by L.L. No. 3-1989;
12-5-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990; 12-2-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992;
1-10-1995 by L.L. 1-1995; 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 3-2007]
Residential rate
First 500 cubic feet: $8 per 100 cubic feet
All over 500 cubic feet: $3.24 per 100 cubic feet
Minimum bill: $40
Nonresidential rate
First 500 cubic feet: $13.28 per 100 cubic feet
All over 500 cubic feet: $4.32 per 100 cubic feet
Minimum bill: $66.40
§ 341-24 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-25
314:625
§ 341-26. Levy and collection of sewer rents.
§ 341-27. Sewer fund.
All charges and moneys collected under provisions of this article shall be
credited to the revenues of the Sewer Rent Fund for Sewage Facilities
which fund is hereby established.
§ 341-28. Collection of charges.
All sums charged for the use of sewers shall be added to the quarterly water
bill and collected in the same manner as provided in Article I of Chapter
341 of the City of Geneva Municipal Code, for the collection of water bills,
including penalties and shutting off of water for nonpayment of either water
or use of sewers.
D. The City Council reserves the right to change the stated percentage
multiplier of the water bill in accordance with the requirements of the
above subsections.
E. The sewer rental charge assigned to any property owner who is not
connected to the public water supply system but who is connected to
the public sewers shall be based on the estimated or measured volume
of sewage contributed by the City Engineer. Such charges shall be
expressed in terms similar to water charge arrangements.
F. The City Council reserves the right from time to time to change the
sewer rental charges originally or previously assigned to any property
owner.
A. The amount of the sewer rent due each quarter shall be added to the
regular water bill.
B. All sewer rents shall be due and payable at the same time water bills
are due and payable.
C. All unpaid sewer rents shall be a lien on the real property where the
water is used and may be included in the general City tax roll and
enforced in the same manner as the City real estate tax.
§ 341-25 GENEVA CODE § 341-28
314:626
ARTICLE VI
Cross-Connection Control
[Adopted 11-6-2002 by L.L. No. 4-200257]
§ 341-29. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to replace Local Law No. 1 of the year 1989
for cross-connection control.
§ 341-30. Responsibility of water supplier.
§ 341-31. Responsibility of water user.
A. A reduced pressure zone (RPZ) device must be installed on all
agricultural, industrial, commercial and retail water services within the
premises of the water user or as required by the New York State
Department of Health regulations at the expense of the water user.
B. The supplier of water is responsible for cross-connection controls found
in Part V of the State Sanitary Code; Section 5-1.31 in title "Cross
Connection Control," shall be a part of these regulations.
C. The supplier of water is responsible to assure that water of
questionable or unsuitable quality does not enter the public water
supply system.
D. The supplier is required to determine the degree of hazard that a
facility poses to its water supply system, and to require that an
acceptable backflow prevention containment device be installed,
tested, operated, and maintained by the water user and that adequate
records of maintenance and repair be kept and submitted annually to
the City of Geneva Water Maintenance Department and the New York
State Department of Health local district office.
A. The water user has the primary responsibility of preventing
contaminants from entering the potable water piping system and,
subsequently, the public water supply and shall, as required by the
supplier of water per Part V, Section 5-1.31(A) and (B), install, test,
operate, maintain and keep adequate maintenance and repair records
for every backflow prevention device installed to provide containment.
The supplier of water may discontinue water service to any premises if
any violations exist. Water service will not be restored until the
violations are corrected.
B. Additionally, as stated in Part V, Section 5-1.31(C), the water user shall
prevent cross-connections between the potable water piping system
and any other piping system within the premises.
57.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Art. VI, Cross-connection Control,
amended 5-5-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989.
§ 341-29 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-32
314:627
§ 341-32. (Reserved)
§ 341-33. (Reserved)
§ 341-34. (Reserved)
§ 341-35. (Reserved)
§ 341-32 GENEVA CODE § 341-35
314:628
ARTICLE VII
Use of Fluoride in Water Supply
[Adopted 11-3-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
§ 341-36. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to repeal Local Law No. 2-1963, which
prohibited the use of fluoride or fluoride solution in the City of Geneva's
water supply, and to hereinafter permit use of fluoride or fluoride solution
to be added to and made a part of the water supply of the City of Geneva.
§ 341-37. Utilization of fluoride or fluoride solution authorized.
Fluoride or fluoride solution may be added to and made a part of the City of
Geneva's water supply.
§ 341-36 TANKS, UNDERGROUND § 341-37
314:629
Chapter 346
WIRES AND POLES
§ 346-1. Permission required.
§ 346-2. Location to be stated.
Every application to the Department of Public Works for permission to
place, erect and maintain poles or electric wires in, over and under any
street or highway shall state the intended location of each pole and wires
and the purpose for which said poles and wires are to be used.
§ 346-3. Indemnification of city.
Every person or corporation erecting, maintaining or using such poles,
structures, supports or wires shall indemnify and save harmless the city,
its officers, agents and servants from and against all claims and demands
for injuries or alleged injuries to persons or property, occasioned by the
existence of such poles, posts, structures, supports or wires, or by the
transmission of electric currents by means thereof; and said city,
Department of Public Works or its officers, agents or servants of the city
exercising the rights, powers and permission herein, shall not be held liable
by such person or corporation on account thereof, or by reason of any injury
or damage caused thereby.
§ 346-4. Fire alarm telegraph takes precedence.
The wires, posts, poles, structures and supports of the fire alarm telegraph
shall at all times take precedence and right-of-way as to all other wires,
poles, posts, structures and supports maintained or erected in the city, and
no lineman or any other person, either in erecting wires, poles, or posts,
structures or supports or in any way whatsoever, shall interfere with, or
disturb, disarrange or change the fire alarm or any appurtenance thereof.
A. No posts, poles, structures or supports used for supporting electric or
other wires, and no wires used or to be used for conducting electricity
shall be placed in, over or under any street, square, lane or alley in the
city without permission of the Department of Public Works.
B. Such permission shall not become operative, take effect or have any
validity until the person to whom it is granted shall, if a natural person,
file with the Department of Public Works a written agreement and, if a
corporation, duly adopt a resolution and file a certified copy thereof in
the office of the Department of Public Works, assenting to the
conditions contained in this article, accepting said permit subject
thereto and promising to abide by and perform all the conditions and
provisions contained in this chapter and of all other ordinances
contained in this code or hereafter enacted amendatory thereof or
supplementary thereto.
§ 341-37 GENEVA CODE § 346-5
346:630
§ 346-5. Size and general description of equipment.
All poles for telegraph, telephone and electric lights shall be straight,
properly trimmed and painted, shall not be less than 25 feet from the
ground, and shall be of iron, cedar, chestnut or hard pine, as may be
directed by the Department of Public Works. Wherever any wires shall cross
any street or way, they shall be at a height of not less than 25 feet above
such street or way and cross at right angles unless otherwise directed by
the Department of Public Works.
§ 346-6. Poles to be branded by owner.
All poles now standing or to be hereafter erected shall be branded or
stamped with the initials of the company owning them, at a point not less
than five or more than seven feet from the street surface; and when a pole
is occupied by wires belonging to more than one company, each group of
cross arms, or, where necessary, the support of a single wire of different
ownership must be distinguished by some characteristic paint, mark or
fastening.
§ 346-7. Dead wires and poles.
All broken and dead wires and all wire, poles and fixtures not actually in
use must be removed from the streets, avenues and highways of the city.
When an old pole is taken down, it must be removed from the street the
same day. New poles must not be brought upon any street more than two
days in advance of their erection. Any pole that shall lie on any street more
than two days shall be removed at the expense of the party owning it.
§ 346-8. Location of wires and poles.
All other wires shall be placed at least three feet distant from electric light
or power circuit unless otherwise ordered by the Department of Public
Works. Whenever any person or corporation maintaining electric wires in
any highway shall make any alteration in the arrangement of such wires,
or shall make any addition to those already in operation, such person or
corporation shall forthwith notify the Department of Public Works to end
that the same may be seasonably inspected.
§ 346-9. Location of poles.
A. On all streets where curbstones are set, all poles shall be erected next
to and adjoining the curbstone, and where there are no curbstones, the
poles shall be erected so as not to interfere with the gutters, unless the
Department of Public Works shall otherwise direct. No poles shall be
erected within five feet of any hydrant nor so as to interfere with any
water pipes, driveway or intersection of a street.
B. On streets where underground conduits have been built for conducting
electrical wires, no poles, posts or similar obstructions shall be
permitted to be erected or allowed to remain in the sidewalk except
§ 346-5 WIRES AND POLES § 346-9
346:631
§ 346-10. Number of lines on street.
No two lines of poles shall be erected on any street or avenue, and on any
street where there is more than one line of poles, one of such lines of poles
shall, upon direction of the Department of Public Works, be removed and all
the wires placed upon a single line of poles. No poles shall be erected in any
street containing a conduit for the reception of electrical conductors.
§ 346-11. Power of Chief of Fire Department.
In case of fire, the Chief of the Fire Department shall have full power and
authority to order and cause any electric wires to be cut and removed, and
electric currents discontinued until the fire is extinguished.
§ 346-12. Permission to use fire alarm pole.
No wire for the transmission of electricity shall be attached to posts of the
fire alarm telegraph pole, except by permission of the Department of Public
Works.
§ 346-13. Reservation by city.
The city reserves the right to place wires on all telegraph, telephone,
electric light and other poles erected in the city, at least two feet below the
other wires, for use in connection with the fire alarm system and for other
city purposes, and every person or corporation erecting or maintaining such
poles shall, when directed by the Director of Public Works, properly affix
thereto, on the space reserved as aforesaid, and cause to be kept in proper
repair and condition an arm bracket, or other fixtures, as may be directed
by the Director of Public Works, and having thereon such number of pins for
wires as shall be directed by the Director of Public Works, for the exclusive
use of the city.
§ 346-14. Penalties for offenses. [Amended by Ord. No. 72-12, eff.
7-5-1972]
Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, entitled "General Provisions,"
of this Code.
where poles, posts or other similar obstructions are erected for
streetlighting purposes. In such case, no pole or post shall be erected
without the location being approved by the Department of Public
Works.
§ 346-9 GENEVA CODE § 346-14
346:632
Chapter 350
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Enforcement officers — See Ch. 22.
Board of Zoning Appeals — See Ch. 59.
Building construction — See Ch. 105.
Business improvement districts — See Ch.
116.
Economic development zones — See Ch. 138.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 147.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 177.
Satellite dishes — See Ch. 282.
Signs and fire escapes — See Ch. 288.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 310.
§ 346-14 WIRES AND POLES § 346-14
346:633

ARTICLE I
Purpose, Definitions and Districts
§ 350-1. Authority and purpose.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority and provisions of the
General City Law to promote public health, safety and welfare and the most
desirable use of land and to conserve the value of buildings and enhance the
value of land and the aesthetic aspects throughout the City.
§ 350-2. Word usage and definitions.
A. In interpreting this chapter, certain terms or words herein shall be
defined as follows:
(1) The word "building" shall include the word "structure."
(2) The words "used for" shall be construed to include the words
"arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and
"occupied for."
B. The following definitions shall be used in interpreting this chapter:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building detached from and subordinate
to a main building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily
incidental to those of the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such
principal use or building.
ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENT[Added 6-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-3]
— Any adult arcade, adult bookstore or video store, adult cabaret,
adult motel, adult motion-picture theater, adult theater, escort agency,
massage establishment, nude model studio or sexual encounter center,
as those terms are defined herein. This definition shall not include
any bona fide medical or health service office or establishment in
which clients or customers may be required to display any specified
anatomical area for the purpose of diagnosis or treatment.
ADULT — When used as part of or in conjunction with other terms
defined herein, refers to establishments which customarily exclude
persons who, by reason of age, are defined as minors under New
York State law.
(1)
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(2)
§ 350-1 WIRES AND POLES § 350-2
346:635
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR VIDEO STORE:
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or
video reproductions, slides or other visual representations
which depict or describe specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
[1]
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
[2]
(a)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental
of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an
adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its
principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration of specified materials which depict or describe
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(b)
(3)
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features any of the
following:
Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or where there is
topless waitressing, bussing or table or bar service; or
establishments which offer service where the servers wear
pasties or G-strings or both;
(a)
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(b)
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
(c)
(4)
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration and which provides patrons with closed-circuit
television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises
(a)
(5)
§ 350-2 GENEVA CODE § 350-2
346:636
the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions;
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than 10 hours; or
(b)
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the
room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
(c)
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial
establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(6)
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.
(7)
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to
act as a companion, guide or date for another person or who
agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform
a striptease for another person.
(8)
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or commercial enterprise who or
which furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts
as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other
consideration.
(9)
ESTABLISH — Includes any of the following:
The opening or commencement of any adult use establishment
as a new business;
(a)
The conversion of any existing business to any adult use
establishment;
(b)
The addition of any adult use establishment to any other
existing use or business; or
(c)
(d) The relocation of any adult use establishment.
(10)
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed
place of business where massages are administered for pay,
including but not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and
steam baths. This definition shall not be construed to include a
hospital, nursing home or medical clinic or the office of a physician,
surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or duly licensed physical or
massage therapist or barbershops or beauty salons in which
massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck or
(11)
§ 350-2 WIRES AND POLES § 350-2
346:637
shoulders. This definition also shall exclude health clubs which
have facilities for physical exercise, such as tennis courts,
racquetball courts or exercise rooms, and which do not receive
their primary source of revenue through the administration of
massages.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay
money or any form of consideration.
(12)
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The state of dress of the human
body in which the buttocks or anus, genitals, pubic region or full
female breast are less than completely and opaquely covered.
(13)
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
(14)
PRINCIPAL BUSINESS PURPOSE — Twenty percent or more of the
business is devoted to or comprised of any of the following:
(a) The number of different titles or kinds of such merchandise;
(b) The number of copies or pieces of such merchandise;
The amount of floor area or space devoted to the sale and/or
display of such merchandise; or
(c)
The amount of advertising which is devoted to such
merchandise, either in the print or broadcast media.
(d)
(15)
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more
than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast
as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
(16)
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for
any form of consideration:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of opposite sexes; or
(a)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of
the same sex when one or more of the persons are in a state of
nudity or seminudity.
(b)
(17)
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals or pubic
region in a state of nudity, or the human male genitals in a
discernible state, even if completely and opaquely covered, and/
or the vulva or pubic region or the full female breast in a state of
nudity.
(18)
§ 350-2 GENEVA CODE § 350-2
346:638
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts of existing facilities of such
building or structure or any enlargement thereof, whether by extension
on any side or by any increase in height, or the moving of such building
or structure from one location to another.
APARTMENT, UPPER-STORY — A dwelling unit located on the second
floor, or higher, of a multi-story building meeting all applicable
requirements of GMC – 202 Housing Code and the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code having a gross leasable
area as follows:[Added 9-21-1999 by Ord. No. 8-1999; amended
6-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2-2009]
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane
at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of terraces and uncovered steps.
ATTIC — That space of a building which is immediately below and
wholly or partly within the roof framing. An attic with a finished floor
shall be counted as 1/2 story in determining the permissible number of
stories.
AUTO JUNKYARD — Two or more old or secondhand motor vehicles no
longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways.
BASEMENT — A story partly below finished grade but having at least
1/2 of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, but not less than four
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or
(a)
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated.
(19)
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — Any of the
following:
(a) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or
(b)
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business,
except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon
the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
(c)
(20)
A one-bedroom unit or studio unit having a minimum of 500 square
feet.
(1)
(2) A two-bedroom unit having a minimum of 1,000 square feet.
(3) A three-bedroom unit having a minimum of 1,500 square feet.
§ 350-2 WIRES AND POLES § 350-2
346:639
feet, above average finished grade. A basement shall be counted as one
story when determining the height of a building in stories.
BILLBOARD — A sign or structure which directs attention to an idea,
products, business activity, service or entertainment which is
conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the lot on which such
sign is situated.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building, other than a hotel, containing a
general kitchen and a general dining room in which at least three,
but not more than six, sleeping rooms are offered for rent, with or
without meals. A lodging house, tourist house or rooming house shall
be deemed a boardinghouse.
BUILDING — Any structure which is permanently affixed to the land,
has one or more floors and a roof and is intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — See "accessory building."
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING GROUP — A group of two or more principal buildings, and
any buildings accessory thereto, occupying a lot in one ownership and
having any yard in common.
BUILDING LINE — The line, established by statute, local law or
ordinance, beyond which a building shall not extend, as specifically
provided by law.
BUILDING, MAIN — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUILDING, SEMIDETACHED — A building attached by a party wall to
another building normally of the same type on another lot but having
one side yard.
BULK — A term used to describe the size, volume, area, and shape of
buildings and structures and the physical relationship of their exterior
walls or their location to lot lines, other buildings and structures, or
other walls of the same building, and all open spaces required in
connection with a building, other structure, or tract of land.
CELLAR — Any space in a building the structural ceiling level of which
is less than four feet above average finished grade where such grade
meets the exterior walls of the building. A cellar shall not be counted in
determining the permissible number of stories.
CLUB, MEMBERSHIP — An organization catering exclusively to
members and their guests or premises and buildings for recreational or
athletic purposes which are not conducted primarily for gain, providing
there are not conducted any vending stands, merchandising or
§ 350-2 GENEVA CODE § 350-2
346:640
commercial activities except as required generally for the membership
and purposes of such club.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A vehicle of more than one-ton capacity
used for the transportation of persons or goods primarily for gain or a
vehicle of any capacity carrying a permanent affixed sign exceeding one
square foot in area or lettering of a commercial nature.
COMMUNITY POLE — A sign owned and maintained by the City or
by a group of businessmen as approved by the City and which sign
contains several directional signs for the purpose of directing persons
to business and community establishments within the community.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — Any space, whether inside or outside a
building, used for the storage or keeping of construction equipment,
machinery, or vehicles, or parts thereof, which are in active use by a
construction contractor.
COVERAGE — That lot area or percentage of lot area covered by
buildings or structures, including accessory buildings and structures.
DEVELOPMENT — The utilization of a lot or tract of land for two or
more uses.
DISTRICT, MORE RESTRICTED OR LESS RESTRICTED — In the
following list each district shall be deemed to be more restricted than
the district which follows it: AR, R1, R2, MR, H, B1, B2, X, F1 and
F.[Amended effective 5-6-1981 by Ord. No. 81-14]
DUMP — A lot or land used primarily for the disposal by abandonment,
burial, burning or any other means and for whatever purpose of
garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or
parts thereof, or waste material of any kind, including auto junkyards.
DWELLING — A building designed or used principally as the living
quarters for one or more families. The term "dwelling," "one-family
dwelling," "two-family dwelling," "multifamily dwelling," "multiple
dwelling" or "dwelling group" shall not be deemed to include a motel,
hotel, rooming house or other accommodations used for more or less
transient occupancy. (See "residence.")
DWELLING GROUP — A group of three or more, but not over nine,
attached single- or two-family dwellings with party walls between.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing one dwelling unit
only.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units and occupied or designed for occupancy by three or
more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family.
§ 350-2 WIRES AND POLES § 350-2
346:641
EXTRACTIVE OPERATION — The removal of soil, gravel, sand or dirt
for purposes unrelated to excavation for construction where the
extractive operation is conducted.
FAMILY — A family consists of:
FINISHED GRADE — The elevation at which the finished surface of the
surrounding lot intersects the walls or supports of a building or other
structure. If the line of intersection is not reasonably horizontal, the
finished grade in computing height of buildings and other structures
or for other purposes shall be the average elevation of all finished
grade elevations around the periphery of the building, except that this
average shall not exceed 1/2 of the floor-to-ceiling height.
FLOOR AREA — The aggregate sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of the building or buildings, measured from the exterior
walls or from the center lines of walls separating two buildings.
One person, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption; or
(1)
Not more than five persons not necessarily related by blood,
marriage or adoption and, in addition, any domestic servants or
gratuitous guests who live together in a single dwelling unit and
maintain a common household.
(2)
In particular, the floor area of a building or buildings shall include:
(a) Basement space.
(b) Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
Floor space for mechanical equipment with structural
headroom of seven feet and six inches or more.
(c)
(d) Penthouses.
Attic space (whether or not a floor has actually been laid)
providing structural headroom of seven feet and six inches or
more.
(e)
(f) Interior balconies and mezzanines.
(g) Enclosed porches.
Accessory uses, not including space for accessory off-street
parking.
(h)
(1)
However, the floor area of a building shall not include:
Cellar space, except that cellar space used for retailing shall
be included for the purposes of calculating requirements for
accessory off-street parking spaces and accessory off-street
loading berths.
(a)
(2)
§ 350-2 GENEVA CODE § 350-2
346:642
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use. The area of tenant occupancy is measured
from the centerlines of joint partitions to the outside of the tenant walls.
All tenant areas, including areas used for storage, shall be included in
calculating gross leasable area, provided they are within the dwelling
unit.[Added 6-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2-2009]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the
average finished grade along the wall of the building (or adjacent to the
side of the structure) to the highest point of such building or structure.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a service character
customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling by the residents
thereof which is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for living
purposes and does not change the character thereof or have any
exterior evidence of such secondary use other than a small nameplate
and in connection therewith there is not involved the keeping of a
stock-in-trade. A professional person, including violin, piano or other
individual musical instrument or voice instructor limited to a single
pupil at a time, who offers skilled services to clients and is not
professionally engaged in the purchase or sale of economic goods shall
be deemed to be a home occupation, and the occupation of dressmaker,
milliner, or seamstress each with not more than one paid assistant
shall also be deemed to be a home occupation. Dancing instruction,
band instrument instruction in groups, tearooms, tourist homes, beauty
parlors, real estate offices, convalescent homes, mortuary
establishments and stores, trades or businesses of any kind herein
excepted shall not be deemed to be home occupations.[Amended
effective 2-6-1974 by Ord. No. 74-4]
HOSPITAL — A building containing beds for four or more patients and
used for the diagnosis, treatment, or other care of ailments and shall
be deemed to be limited to places for the diagnosis, treatment, or other
care of human ailments.
Elevator and stair bulkheads, accessory water tanks, and
cooling towers.
(b)
Floor space used for mechanical equipment, with structural
headroom of less than seven feet and six inches.
(c)
Attic space, whether or not a floor has actually been laid,
providing structural headroom of less than seven feet and six
inches.
(d)
(e) Uncovered steps and exterior fire escapes.
Terraces, breezeways, open porches, and outside balconies
and open spaces.
(f)
(g) Accessory off-street parking spaces.
(h) Accessory off-street loading berths.
§ 350-2 WIRES AND POLES § 350-2
346:643
HOTEL — A building, or any part thereof, which contains living and
sleeping accommodations for transient occupancy, has a common
exterior entrance or entrances and which may contain one or more
dining rooms.
HOUSE TRAILER or MOBILE HOME — A vehicle which is used or
designed to be used for living or sleeping purposes and which is
customarily standing on wheels or rigid supports.
JUNKYARD — An area of land with or without buildings used for or
occupied by the storage, keeping, or abandonment of junk, including
scrap metals or other scrap, used or salvaged building materials, or
the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other
vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. The deposit on a lot of two or
more wrecked or broken-down vehicles or the major parts thereof for
three months or more shall be deemed to make the lot a junkyard.
KENNEL — Any place at which there are kept four or more dogs more
than four months of age or any number of dogs that are kept for the
primary purpose of sale or for the boarding, care or breeding of which
a fee is charged or paid.
LIBRARY, CENTRAL — A repository to house a minimum of 100,000
volumes and to provide services as a central reference and
informational center to membership libraries of a cooperative library
system.[Added 6-3-1992 by Ord. No. 8-92]
LIBRARY, PUBLIC — A library established pursuant to the Education
Law and includes a free association library as defined in Subdivision 2
of § 253 of the Education Law.[Added 6-3-1992 by Ord. No. 8-92]
LOT — A defined portion or parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted
to a specific use or occupied by a building or a group of buildings that
are united by a common interest, use or ownership and the customary
accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. A lot shall abut and
be accessible from a public or private street.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at the junction of and adjacent to two or
more intersecting streets when the interior angle of intersection does
not exceed 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — See "coverage."
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean distance from the front street line of a lot
to its rear line.
LOT FRONTAGE — A lot line which is coincident with a street line.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which faces on two streets at opposite ends of
the lot and which is not a corner lot.
§ 350-2 GENEVA CODE § 350-2
346:644
LOT WIDTH —
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing individual living
and sleeping accommodations for hire, each of which is provided with
a separate exterior entrance and a parking space and is offered for
rental and use principally by motor vehicle travelers. The term "motel"
includes but is not limited to every type of similar establishment known
variously as an auto court, motor hotel, motor court, motor inn, motor
lodge, tourist court, tourist cabin, or roadside hotel.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, including
structures thereon, or any building or part thereof, that is used
primarily for the sale and direct delivery to the motor vehicle of
gasoline or any other motor vehicle fuel or oil and other lubricating
substances, including any sale of motor vehicle accessories, and which
may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing (which does
not require mechanical equipment) or otherwise servicing motor
vehicles, but not including auto body work, welding, or painting.
NONCONFORMING BULK — That part of a building, other structure or
tract of land which does not conform to one or more of the applicable
bulk regulations of this chapter, either following its effective date or as
a result of subsequent amendment thereto.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of a building, other structure or
tract of land which does not conform to the use regulations for the
district in which such use is located, either at the effective date of this
chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto.
NURSERY SCHOOL — Any place, however designated, operated for
the purpose of providing daytime care or instruction for two or more
children from two to five years of age, inclusive, and operated on
a regular basis, including kindergartens, day nurseries, and day-care
centers.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A building with fewer than
15 sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and furnished
with meals and nursing care for hire.
PRECONSTRUCTED HOME — Any dwelling unit that is fully equipped
upon arrival at the site after being transported to it on wheels.
PREMISES — A lot together with all the buildings and uses thereon.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — Offices or studios of physicians, surgeons,
dentists, chiropractors or similar health practitioners, lawyers,
engineers, architects, accountants, teachers and tutors, real estate
brokers, insurance brokers or other similar professional or occupation
The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front
and rear lot lines; or
(1)
The width of a lot measured along the rear line of the required front
yard.
(2)
§ 350-2 WIRES AND POLES § 350-2
346:645
pursuits and where the primary activity is the furnishing of services.
Specifically excluded are occupations such as barbers, hairdressers,
and the like; mortuary establishments; dancing and musical instruction;
and milliners, seamstresses, dressmakers, tailors and the like.[Added
effective 8-1-1984 by Ord. No. 84-14]
RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY — A renewable energy facility is a
facility that generates energy from natural resources such as sunlight,
wind, rain, tides, and geothermal heat, which are renewable (naturally
replenished).[Added 5-12-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
RESIDENCE, RESIDENTIAL — A building, or any part of a building,
which contains living and sleeping accommodations for permanent
occupancy. Residences, therefore, include all one-family, multifamily,
boarding, fraternity and sorority houses. However, residences shall not
include the following:
RIDING ACADEMY — Any establishment where horses are kept for
riding, driving or stabling for compensation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The property of a circulatory facility. (See "street
width.")
ROAD STAND — A light structure with a roof, either attached to the
ground or movable, intended for the sale of local produce to the general
public.
SETBACK — The distance in feet from the street line to the principal
building on a lot.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of three or more retail stores in a single
structure, depending mostly on customers coming by automobile, and
having parking facilities which are integrated with the site plan and the
design of the stores.
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof or any device attached to a
structure or painted or represented on a structure which shall display
or include any lettering, wording, model, drawing, picture, banner, flag,
insignia, device, marking, or representation used as, or which is in
the nature of, an announcement, direction or advertisement. "Sign"
includes a billboard, neon tube, fluorescent tube, or other artificial light
or string of lights outlining or hung upon any part of a building or lot
for the purposes mentioned above, but does not include the flag or
insignia of any nation or of any governmental agency or of any political,
educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or
similar organization, campaign, drive, movement, or event which is
temporary in nature.
Transient accommodations, such as hotels, motels, and hospitals;
or
(1)
That part of a building containing both residences and other uses
which is used for any nonresidential uses, except accessory uses
for residences.
(2)
§ 350-2 GENEVA CODE § 350-2
346:646
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered
elsewhere than on the premises and only incidentally on the premises
if at all.
SIGN AREA — The area within the shortest lines that can be drawn
around the outside perimeter of a sign, including all decorations and
lights but excluding the supports if they are not used for advertising
purposes. All faces of the sign shall be counted in computing the area.
Any neon tube, string of lights, or similar device shall be deemed to
have minimum dimensions of one foot.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted on the premises. A "for sale" sign or a "to let"
sign relating to the property on which it is displayed shall be deemed a
business sign.
SIGN, DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED — A sign which incorporates any
artificial lighting as an inherent part or feature or which depends for
its illumination on transparent or translucent material or electricity or
radio-activated or gaseous material or substance.
SIGN, FLASHING — An illuminated sign on which the artificial lighting
is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all
times while in use.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign designed to give forth any artificial light
or designed to reflect such light deriving from any source which is
intended to cause such light or reflection.
SIGN, INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED — A sign illuminated with an
artificial light which is separated from or is not an intrinsic part of the
sign itself.
SIGN, REPRESENTATIONAL — Any three-dimensional sign which is
built so as to physically represent the object advertised.
SINGLE OWNERSHIP — Possession of land under single or unified
control, whether by sole, joint, common or other ownership, or by a
lease having a term of not less than 30 years, regardless of any division
of such land into parcels for the purpose of financing.
STORY — That part of a building comprised between a floor and the
floor or roof above it. (See "attic," "basement" and "cellar.")
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building situated above a full story
and having at least two opposite exterior walls meeting a sloping roof
at a level not higher above the floor than a distance equal to 1/2 the
floor-to-ceiling height of the story below.
STREET —
An existing public or private way which affords the principal means
of access to abutting properties and is suitably improved; or
(1)
§ 350-2 WIRES AND POLES § 350-2
346:647
§ 350-3. Establishment of districts. [Amended effective 4-2-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-9; 5-6-1981 by Ord. No. 81-6; 5-6-1987 by Ord. No.
87-12]
For the purpose of this chapter, the City is hereby divided into the following
18 zoning districts:
STREET WIDTH — The width of the right-of-way or the distance
between property lines on opposite sides of a street.
STRUCTURE — A static construction of building materials, including
buildings, stadiums, platforms, towers, sheds, display stands, storage
bins, signs, reviewing stands, gasoline pumps, mobile dwellings
(whether mobile or stationary at the time) and the like.
TOWNHOUSE — A building consisting of a series of one-family
attached dwelling units having common party walls between each
dwelling unit. See also "building, semidetached."
TRAILER CAMP or TRAILER PARK — A tract of land which is used or
intended to be used for the parking of two or more house trailers.
TRAILER, HOUSE — See "house trailer."
USE — This term is employed in referring to:
WAY — A thoroughfare, however designated, permanently established
for passage of persons or vehicles.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending along the full length of the front lot
line between the side lot lines.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot
line between the side lot lines.
YARD, REQUIRED — That portion of the open area of a lot extending
open and unobstructed from the ground upward along a lot line for a
depth or width as specified by the bulk regulations of the district in
which the lot is located. No part of such yard shall be included as part of
a yard or other open space similarly required for buildings on another
lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard situated between the building and the side line
of a lot and extending from the front yard rear line (or from the front
lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the rear yard front line (or
rear lot line).
A proposed way shown on a plat approved by the Planning Board
and/or recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
(2)
The purpose for which any buildings, other structures or land may
be arranged, designed, intended, maintained or occupied.
(1)
Any occupation, business activity, or operation conducted (or
intended to be conducted) in a building or other structure or on
land.
(2)
§ 350-2 GENEVA CODE § 350-3
346:648
AR Agricultural Residential Use Districts
R1 One-Family Residential Use Districts
R2 Two-Family Residential Use Districts
MR Multiple-Family Residential Use Districts
B1 Business Use Districts
B2 Business Use Districts
H Highway Users Use Districts
X Open Spaces Use Districts
F Industrial Use Districts
F1 Industrial Use Districts
LF-1 Planned Unit Development District designated as L-5 in Article III
LF-2 Planned Unit Development District designated as L-1, L-2 and L-4
in Article III
LF-3 Planned Unit Development District designated as L-3 and L-6 in
Article III
LF-4 Planned Unit Development District designated as L-7 and L-8 in
Article III
LF-5 Lands designated as public lands in Article III
C-R College-Residential District [Added 11-7-2001 by Ord. No.
5-2001]
H-R Historic-Residential District [Added 11-7-2001 by Ord. No.
5-2001]
AT Agricultural Technology District [Added 11-20-2002 by L.L. No.
5-2002]
§ 350-4. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of said zoning districts are shown on the
map designated "Official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva," adopted on
July 3, 1968, which is attached hereto and is hereby made a part of this
chapter.58 Said map and all notations, references and designations shown
thereon shall be, as such, a part of this chapter as if the same were all fully
described and set forth herein.
A. The Zoning Map was changed by Ordinance No. 72-10, effective July 5,
1972. Section 2 thereof reads as follows:
58.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the City offices.
§ 350-3 WIRES AND POLES § 350-4
346:649
Section 2. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva, adopted
on July 3, 1968, shall be amended by the following described boundary
change: Beginning at a point at the intersection of the center lines
of East North Street and Wadsworth Street thence southerly 258 feet
more or less to a point in the center line of Wadsworth Street said point
being 33 feet easterly of the southeast corner of Block 18, Lot 66 of the
City Assessor's map, thence westerly 136 feet more or less along the
south line of Block 18, Lot 66 and continuing to a point in the easterly
line of the present B1 District thence northerly along the east line of
the present B1 District 180 feet more or less to a point in the center
line of East North Street thence easterly along the center line of East
North Street 156 feet more or less to the point of beginning. (Changed
from R2 to B1.)
B. The Zoning Map was further changed by Ordinance No. 73-10, effective
July 5, 1973. Section 2 thereof reads as follows:
That the official zoning map of the City of Geneva adopted on July
3, 1968 and as amended on July 5, 1972 shall be amended by the
following described boundary change: Beginning at the point of
intersection of the center line of Copeland Avenue and the center
line of Hamilton Street for a distance of approximately 700 feet to a
point which is on the extended westerly boundary line of College of
the Senecas thence; southerly at right angles with the center line of
Hamilton Street approximately 250 feet to a point thence; westerly
approximately 350 feet on a line parallel to the center line of Hamilton
Street thence; northerly for a distance of 50 feet at right angles to
the center line of Hamilton Street thence; westerly parallel to the
center line of Hamilton Street for a distance of approximately 350
feet more or less said point being on the extended center line of
Copeland Avenue thence; northerly along said Copeland Avenue center
line extension a distance of 200 feet more or less to the point of
beginning. (Intending to change from MR to B1.)
C. The Zoning Map was further changed by Ordinance No. 76-6, effective
March 3, 1976, as follows:
§ 350-4 GENEVA CODE § 350-4
346:650
Section II. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968 and amended July 5, 1972 and July 5, 1973 shall be
amended by the following described boundary change:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Main Street and
the center line of Washington Street thence; westerly along the
center line of Washington Street to a point 200 feet east of the
center line of Pulteney Street thence; northerly along a line 200
feet east of and parallel to the center line of Pulteney Street to a
point in the center line of Howard Street said point being 200 feet
easterly of the center line of Pulteney Street thence; southeasterly
to a point on the center line of Milton Street said point being 300
feet westerly from the center of Main Street thence; southerly
along a line 300 feet from and parallel to the center line of Main
Street to a point on the center line of William Street thence;
easterly along the center line of William Street to the center line of
Main Street thence; southerly along the center line of Main Street
to the point of beginning. (Intending to change from B-3 to MR.)
Section III. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968 and amended on July 5, 1972 and July 5, 1973 shall be
amended by the following described boundary change:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the north line of Lyceum
Street with the west line of Nursery Avenue extended and running
thence; southerly along the west line of Nursery Avenue 155 feet
to a point thence; westerly 1,269 feet to a point on the east
line of lands formerly owned by the New York State Agricultural
Experiment Station and now owned by the City of Geneva thence;
northerly along the east line of said City land 601 feet to a point on
the south line of lands of the aforementioned Experiment Station
thence; easterly along the south line of said Experiment Station
95 feet to a point thence; northerly along the east line of said
Experiment Station 139 feet to a point thence; easterly 482 feet to
a point thence; northeasterly 68.5 feet to a point thence; easterly
668.9 feet to a point in the easterly line of Nursery Avenue
extended northerly thence; northerly along said extended street
line 98 feet more or less to the center line of Castle Creek thence;
easterly and southeasterly along the center line of Castle Creek
thence; easterly and southeasterly along the center line of Castle
Creek as it winds and turns to its intersection with the west line of
Brook Street thence; southerly along said Brook Street 50 feet to
a point thence; westerly on a line parallel with or nearly so to the
north line of Lyceum Street 193.7 feet to a point thence; southerly
along a line parallel with or nearly so to the west line of Brook
Street 80 feet to a point thence; westerly on a line parallel with
or nearly so to the north line of Lyceum Street 426 feet to a point
thence; southerly 150 feet to a point on the north line of Lyceum
Street thence; westerly along the north line of Lyceum Street to
the point and place of beginning.
§ 350-4 WIRES AND POLES § 350-4
346:651
Accepting and reserving from the above described parcel all that
tract or parcel of land bound on the west by a chain link fence on
the north by the center line of Castle Creek on the east by a chain
link fence and on the south by the north line of Lyceum Street
said bounds enclosing existing commercial businesses. (Intending
to change from Industrial to Open Space X.)
Section IV. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968 and amended on July 5, 1972 and July 5, 1973 shall be
amended by the following described boundary change:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of East North
Street and the southerly boundary of the right-of-way of the
Lehigh Valley Railroad thence; westerly along the center line of
East North Street 1,000 feet to a point thence; northerly at a right
angle to the center line of East North Street to the south boundary
of said right-of-way thence; easterly along the south boundary of
said right-of-way to the point of beginning. (Intending to change
from B1 to R2 Residential.)
Section V. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968 and amended on July 5, 1972 and July 5, 1973 shall be
amended by the following described boundary change:
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the center line of
North Street and the east boundary of the right-of-way of the Penn
Central Railroad thence; northerly along the easterly boundary of
the Penn Central Railroad to the center line of Avenue B extended
thence; westerly along the center line of Avenue B 300 feet more
or less to a point thence; southerly along a line 300 feet from and
parallel to the easterly boundary of the Penn Central Railroad to a
point on the center line of North Street thence; easterly along the
center line of North Street to the point of beginning. (Intending to
change from Industrial to R2.)
Section VI. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968 and amended on July 5, 1972 and July 5, 1973 shall be
amended by the following described boundary change:
§ 350-4 GENEVA CODE § 350-4
346:652
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the center line of
Mason Street and the center line of Bell Avenue thence; westerly
along the center line of Bell Avenue and Bell Avenue extended
approximately 550 feet to a point thence; northerly at a right angle
250 feet more or less to a point said point being 350 feet more or
less south of the south boundary line of the Lehigh Valley Railroad
Naples Branch thence; westerly 360 feet more or less from and
parallel to the Lehigh Valley Railroad Naples Branch to a point on
the center line of Carter Road thence; northerly along the center
line of Carter Road to its intersection with the south boundary
of the Lehigh Valley Railroad Naples Branch right-of-way thence;
easterly along the south boundary of the Lehigh Valley Railroad
Naples Branch right-of-way to its intersection with the center line
of Mason Street extended thence; southerly along the center line
of Mason Street extended to the point of beginning. (Intending to
change from Industrial to R2 Residential.)
Section VII. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968 and amended on July 5, 1972 and July 5, 1973 be
amended by the following described boundary change:
Beginning at a point of intersection of the center line of Castle
Creek with the east line of Nursery Avenue extended northerly
and running thence; southerly along said east line 98 feet more
or less to a point thence; westerly 668.9 feet to a point thence;
southwesterly 68.5 feet to a point thence; westerly 482 feet to
a point in the east line of lands owned by the New York State
Agricultural Experiment Station thence; northerly along the
Experiment Station east line 424 feet more or less to the center
line of Castle Creek thence; easterly and southeasterly along the
center line of Castle Creek as it winds and turns to the point and
place of beginning. (Intending to change from R1 to Open Space
X.)
Section VIII. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva
adopted on July 3, 1968 and amended on July 5, 1972 and July 5, 1973
shall be amended by the following described boundary change:
Beginning at a point at the southwest corner of lands now owned
by the Town and Country Plaza, said point also being a northeast
corner of a parcel of land now or formerly owned by Heinz Mohr
& Conrad P. Mohr, Jr. and running thence; along said Mohr parcel
westerly 250.32 to a point thence; northerly 40 to a point on the
south line of land now or formerly owned by Edith Cass. Running
thence; along said Cass parcel easterly 38.98 to a point thence;
northerly 149.17 to a point on the south line of lands of the Town
and Country Plaza running thence; along said Plaza lands easterly
223.76 to a point thence; southerly 182.29 to the point and place
of beginning. (Intending to change from R1 to B1.)
D. The Zoning Map was subsequently changed by Ordinance No. 77-5,
effective June 1, 1977, as follows:
§ 350-4 WIRES AND POLES § 350-4
346:653
Section I. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968 and as amended on July 5, 1972 and July 5, 1973 shall
be amended in accordance with the map attached to this Ordinance.
Section II. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968 and as amended on July 5, 1972 and as amended on July
5, 1973 shall be amended by the following described boundary change:
Beginning at the point of the intersection of the west line of
Roosevelt Street and in the center line of North Street and running
thence westerly along the center line of North Street and West
North Street to the intersection of the center line of Carter Road;
thence northerly along the center line of Carter Road to the
intersection of the right-of-way of what was formerly the Naples
Branch of the Lehigh Valley Railroad; thence easterly along the
southerly line of the aforementioned railroad right-of-way to a
point where said right-of-way intersects with the west line of
Roosevelt Street extended; thence southerly along the west line of
Roosevelt Street extended and the west line of Roosevelt Street to
the point of beginning. (Intending to change from R1 to MR.)
Section I. That the following described property shall be rezoned from
an existing F district designation to that of an F1 district designation:
Beginning at a point on North Exchange Street at the intersection
of the center line of North Exchange Street and the north line
of the Lehigh Valley Railroad right-of-way; thence northerly along
the center line of North Exchange Street to the intersection of
the center line of North Exchange Street and the City and Town
line; thence easterly along the City and Town line extended
approximately 2,900 feet to a point; thence northerly along the
former City and Town line to a point on the south line of the New
York Central Railroad Penn Division (Conrail) right-of-way; thence
southeasterly along the railroad right-of-way to the intersection
of the south line of the right-of-way and the center line of Pre-
Emption Street; thence southerly along the center line of Pre-
Emption Street and approximately 420 feet to a point on the
north line of property occupied by the Geneva Housing Authority
extended; thence westerly along the north line of property
occupied by the Geneva Housing Authority extended
approximately 1,500 feet to a point; thence southerly along a
line running parallel to Clark Street and approximately 350 feet
westerly thereof to the intersection of the north right-of-way line
of the Lehigh Valley Railroad; thence westerly along the north line
of the Lehigh Valley Railroad to the point of beginning.
Section II. That the official Zoning Map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968, and amended from time to time shall be and is hereby
amended accordingly.
E. The Zoning Map was also amended by Ordinance No. 80-9, effective
April 2, 1980, as follows:
§ 350-4 GENEVA CODE § 350-4
346:654
Section II. That the official zoning map of the City of Geneva adopted
on July 3, 1968, and amended from time to time shall be amended by
the following described boundary change:
Parcel #1: Beginning at a point on the east line of New York
State Route #14 (North Exchange Street), at the southwest corner
of lands now or formerly Watson (Liber 390, Page 319); thence
South 82-03-30 East along the south line of Watson 150.00 feet to
a point on the west line of the City of Geneva (Liber 569, Page
316); thence South 08-21-00 West along the west line of the City
of Geneva 150.00 feet to the northeast corner of lands now or
formerly Casasanta (Liber 514, Page 411); thence North 82-03-30
West along the north line of Casasanta 150.00 feet to a point on the
east line of NYS Rt. 14; thence North 08-21-00 East along the east
line of NYS Rt. 14 150.00 feet to the place of beginning. Comprising
an area of 0.517 acre.
§ 350-4 WIRES AND POLES § 350-4
346:655
Parcel #2: Beginning at a point on the west line of lands now or
formerly Geneva Forge, Inc., said point being North 08-03-00 East
186.00 feet from a concrete monument at the northeast corner of a
50-foot right-of-way (Liber 609, Page 569); thence North 82-07-27
West along the north boundary line of the City of Geneva 1995.25
feet to a point on the east line of lands now or formerly Russo
(Liber 387, Page 331); thence North 08-21-00 East 132.43 feet
to a point; thence North 85-02-40 West 230.00 feet to a point on
the east line of lands now or formerly the City of Geneva (Liber
569, Page 316); thence North 04-31-40 East 596.82 feet to a point;
thence North 85-02-40 West 20.00 feet to a point; thence North
08-21-00 East 510.00 feet to a point; thence North 35-21-00 East
600.00 feet to a point; thence North 25-47-00 East 58.56 feet to the
northeast corner of lands of the City of Geneva (Liber 569, Page
316); thence North 82-03-30 West along the North line of lands of
the City of Geneva 233.98 feet to a point in the center line of Marsh
Creek at the southeast corner of lands now or formerly Wheeler
(Liber 422, Page 310); thence along the center line of Marsh Creek
the following courses and distances: North 28-01-30 East 146.92
feet; North 40-08-50 East 98.19 feet; North 20-01-10 East 59.32
feet; North 23-38-10 East 103.58 feet; North 20-46-30 East 103.36
feet; North 02-38-50 East 115.42 feet and North 24-56-00 West
89.86 feet to a point on the south line of lands now or formerly
Hogan; thence South 81-12-59 East along the south line of lands
now or formerly Hogan 1127.22 feet to a point on the west line of
the New York Central Railroad; thence South 32-06-41 East along
the west line of the New York Central Railroad 853.63 feet to a
point; thence South 82-03-30 East 32.66 feet to a point on the
west line of the New York Central Railroad; thence South 32-06-41
East along the west line of the New York Central Railroad 625.35
feet to a point at the northwest corner of lands now or formerly
Geneva Forge, Inc.; thence South 08-03-00 West, along the west
line of lands now or formerly Geneva Forge, Inc., 1,332.58 feet to
the place of beginning. Comprising an area of 110.453 acres. (Adds
F1 Industrial Use District.)
F. The following described property was rezoned by Ordinance No. 85-2,
effective February 6, 1985, from an existing MR District (in part) and an
R1 District (in part) designation to that of a B1 District designation:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the center
lines of Copeland Avenue and Hamilton Street; thence running easterly
along said center line of Hamilton Street a distance of 565 to a point;
thence running northerly a distance of 650 to a point on the south
property line of property now or formerly owned by Catherine M.
Duffle; thence westerly a distance of 570 to a point being the center
line of Copeland Avenue; thence running southerly a distance of 665 to
point of beginning.
§ 350-4 GENEVA CODE § 350-4
346:656
G. The following described property was rezoned by Ordinance No. 85-9,
effective June 5, 1985, from an existing MR District (in part) and an R1
District (in part) designation to that of a B1 District designation:
Beginning at a point in the center line intersection of South West
Street and Hamilton Street; thence running northerly along the center
line of South West Street a distance of 250 plus or minus to a point;
thence running westerly a distance of 164 plus or minus to a point;
thence running southerly a distance of 15 plus or minus to a point
which is the north-east corner of property now or formerly owned by
Elizabeth Heaton; thence running westerly a distance of 284 plus or
minus to a point; thence running southerly a distance of 235 plus or
minus to a point in the center line of Hamilton Street; thence running
easterly along the center line of Hamilton Street a distance of 476 plus
or minus to the point of beginning.
H. The following described property was rezoned by Ordinance No. 86-3,
effective March 5, 1986, from an existing industrial designation to a R2
District designation:
Beginning at a point in the center line intersection of North Exchange
Street and Willard Avenue; thence running westerly along the center
line of Willard Avenue a distance of approximately 735 feet to a point;
thence running northerly a distance of approximately 275 feet to a
point; thence running easterly a distance of approximately 738 feet to
the center line of North Exchange Street to a point; thence running
southerly along the center line of North Exchange Street a distance
of approximately 128 feet to a point, said point being the point of
beginning.
I. The following described property was rezoned by Ordinance No. 87-13,
effective May 6, 1987, from an existing B1 District designation to that of
an LF-2 District and LF-3 District as set forth in Article III:
All those lands lying west of the Railroad property and being more
generally described as a parcel of land bounded on the east by the
lands of the Railroad; on the south by the south line of the lands of the
City of Geneva; on the west by the west line of South Exchange Street
extended and running along the west line of South Exchange Street
to Franklin Street; on the north by the south line of Franklin Street
running easterly to the lands of the Railroad.
The properties described in the Lakefront District Planned Unit
Development Ordinance were designated and zoned by Ordinance No.
87-14, effective May 6, 1987, to be that of the district designations
contained in the Lakefront District Planned Unit Development
Ordinance.
J. The following described property was rezoned by Ordinance No. 87-20,
effective June 3, 1987, from an existing designation to that of an R2:
§ 350-4 WIRES AND POLES § 350-4
346:657
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the west
street (R.O.W.) line of Roosevelt Street extended and the north (R.O.W.)
line of Bell Avenue; thence running westerly along the street (R.O.W.)
line of Bell Avenue a distance of approximately 30 to a point; thence
running northerly a distance of approximately 249 to a point; thence
running south-easterly a distance of approximately 220 to a point;
thence running northerly a distance of approximately 155 to a point;
thence running south-easterly a distance of approximately 162 to a
point, said point being in the west street (R.O.W.) line of Sherrill Street;
thence running southerly along the west street line of Sherrill Street
a distance of approximately 160 to a point; thence running westerly a
distance of approximately 250 to the point of beginning. (Originally in
industrial district.)
K. The following described property was rezoned by Ordinance No.
1-2000, adopted January 5, 2000, from F Industrial and/or X Open
Space to MR Multiple Residential:
BEGINNING at a P.K. nail in concrete on the apparent north street
line of Lyceum Street at the southwest corner of Eric H. & Coleen
A. Sonntag (Liber 772 Page 239), said point being westerly along the
apparent north street line of Lyceum Street a distance of 621 feet
more or less from the intersection of the apparent north street line of
Lyceum Street with the apparent west street line of Brook Street, said
point being the southeast corner of premises to be conveyed.
THENCE running N 13° 39 38 E along the west line of Sonntag and
along a chain link fence a distance of 150.96 to an iron pin on line,nn
continuing along the same course and the west line of other lands of
the City of Geneva (Liber 702 Page 489) a distance of 9.93 feet further
to a point marked by a metal fence post, said point being an angle in
the west line of other lands of the City of Geneva.
THENCE running N 64° 04 14 E along the west line of other lands of
the City of Geneva and along said chain link fence a distance of 12.83
feet to a point marked by a metal fence post, said point being an angle
in the west line of other lands of the City of Geneva.
THENCE running N 14° 23 24 E along the west line of other lands of
the City of Geneva and along said chain link fence and a continuation
thereof a distance of 2.58.38 feet to an iron pin on line, continuing
along the same course a distance of 30 feet more or less to a point in
the center line of Castle Creek, for a total distance of 288.38 more or
less.
THENCE running northwesterly along the center line of Castle Creek
as it winds and turns to a point, said point being a continuation of a
north - south chain link fence, said course being on a Chord of N 56°
00 25 W a distance of 769.34 feet and being the northwest corner of
premises to be conveyed and being the northeast corner of other lands
of the City of Geneva (Liber 702 Page 489).
§ 350-4 GENEVA CODE § 350-4
346:658
THENCE running S 13° 02 25 W along the east line of other lands of
the City of Geneva a distance of 26 feet more or less to an iron pin on
line, continuing along the same course a distance 100.91 feet further
to a metal fence post on line, continuing along the same course and
along a chain link fence a distance of 598.94 feet further to a point
marked by an iron pin on the apparent north street line of Lyceum
Street, for a total distance of 725.85 feet more or less.
THENCE running S 76° 25 45 E along the apparent north street line
of Lyceum Street a distance of 200.00 feet to an iron pin on line,
said point being the east street line of Nursery Avenue extended,
continuing along the same course a distance of 500.00 feet further to
the point of BEGINNING and containing 10.142 acres of land more or
less.
L. The following described property, currently zoned MR Multiple-Family
Residential and R-1 One-Family Residential, is hereby rezoned to C-R
College-Residential: [Added 11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
§ 350-4 WIRES AND POLES § 350-4
346:659
Beginning at a point at the northeast corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-5 and the corner
of Hamilton Street and Cloverleaf South, and proceeding westerly along Hamilton
Street approximately 2,702 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.18-3-27.1;
thence proceeding southerly approximately 941 feet to the northeast corner of Lot
No. 104.18-3-28; thence proceeding westerly approximately 266 feet to the northwest
corner of Lot No. 104.18-3-28; thence proceeding southerly approximately 550 feet to
the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.13-3-28 and the north side of Saint Clair Street;
thence proceeding easterly along Saint Clair Street approximately 266 feet to the
southeast corner of Lot No. 104.18-3-28; thence proceeding southerly across Saint
Clair Street approximately 66 feet to a point on the north side of Lot No. 104.19-1-59;
thence proceeding easterly along Saint Clair Street approximately 210 feet to the
northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-57; thence proceeding southerly approximately
240 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-57; thence proceeding westerly
approximately 385 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-56; thence
proceeding southerly approximately 362 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No.
104.19-1-56; thence proceeding easterly approximately 663 feet to the southeast
corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-56; thence proceeding northerly approximately 40 feet
to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-54.3; thence proceeding easterly
approximately 397 feet to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-54.1; thence
proceeding southerly approximately 40 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No.
104.19-1-63; thence proceeding easterly approximately 50 feet to the southeast corner
of Lot No. 104.19-1-63; thence proceeding northerly approximately 30 feet to the
southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-53 (south parcel); thence proceeding easterly
approximately 300 feet to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-53 (south parcel);
thence proceeding northerly approximately 310 feet to the southeast corner of Lot
No. 104.19-1-53 (north parcel); thence proceeding easterly approximately 340 feet
to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-45 and the corner of Verplanck Street
and College Avenue; thence proceeding northerly approximately 100 feet to a point
south of Saint Clair Street; thence proceeding easterly approximately 150 feet to the
southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-22.1; thence proceeding northerly approximately
25 feet to a point on the south side of Lot No. 104.19-1-23; thence proceeding
easterly approximately 50 feet to the northeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-41; thence
proceeding southerly approximately 64 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No.
104.19-1-24; thence proceeding easterly approximately 50 feet to the southeast corner
of Lot No. 104.19-1-24; thence proceeding northerly approximately 64 feet to the
northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-40; thence proceeding easterly approximately
400 feet to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-30; thence proceeding southerly
approximately 180 feet and across Verplanck Street to the northeast corner of Lot
No. 104.19-2-42; thence proceeding westerly along Verplanck Street approximately
25 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-42; thence proceeding southerly
approximately 55 feet to a point south of Verplanck Street; thence proceeding westerly
approximately 25 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-42; thence
proceeding southerly approximately 641 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No.
119.07-1-14, on the north side of Jay Street; thence proceeding easterly along Jay
Street approximately 621 feet to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-15; thence
proceeding northerly approximately 180 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No.
104.19-2-11; thence proceeding easterly approximately 100 feet to the southwest
corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-59; thence proceeding northerly approximately 157 feet
to a point on the western side of Lot No. 104.19-2-58 and the southern side of Lot
§ 350-4 GENEVA CODE § 350-4
346:660
No. 104.19-2-57; thence proceeding westerly approximately 68 feet to the southwest
corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-57; thence proceeding northerly approximately 190 feet
to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-57; thence proceeding easterly
approximately 103 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-56; thence
proceeding northerly approximately 111 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No.
104.19-2-55; thence proceeding westerly approximately 110 feet to the southwest
corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-54; thence proceeding northerly approximately 301 feet
to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-52; thence proceeding easterly
approximately 141 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-51; thence
proceeding northerly approximately 100 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No.
104.19-2-51, on the south side of Saint Clair Street; thence proceeding northerly
approximately 896 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-24; thence
proceeding northerly approximately 99 feet to the northeast corner of Lot No.
104.15-3-40; thence proceeding westerly approximately 71 feet to the southwest
corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-25; thence proceeding northerly approximately 100 feet
to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-25; thence proceeding easterly
approximately 55 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-26; thence
proceeding northerly approximately 187 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No.
104.15-3-27, on the south side of the Cloverleaf South; thence proceeding westerly
approximately 84 feet to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-35; thence
proceeding northerly approximately 321 feet along the Cloverleaf South to the point
of beginning.
M. The following described property, currently zoned MR Multiple-Family
Residential, is hereby rezoned to H-R Historic-Residential: [Added
11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
§ 350-4 WIRES AND POLES § 350-4
346:661
Beginning at a point approximately 415 feet east of South Main Street,
along the high-water mark of Seneca Lake and east of the northeast
corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-15, and proceeding westerly approximately
415 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-15, on the east
side of South Main Street; thence proceeding westerly along Hamilton
Street approximately 498 feet to the northeast corner of Lot No.
104.15-3-5; thence proceeding southerly approximately 321 feet along
the Cloverleaf South to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-35;
thence proceeding easterly approximately 84 feet to the northwest
corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-27, on the south side of the Cloverleaf
South; thence proceeding southerly approximately 187 feet to the
southwest corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-26; thence proceeding westerly
approximately 55 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-25;
thence proceeding southerly approximately 100 feet to the southwest
corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-25; thence proceeding easterly
approximately 71 feet to the northeast corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-40;
thence proceeding southerly approximately 99 feet to the southwest
corner of Lot No. 104.15-3-24; thence proceeding southerly
approximately 896 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-51
on the south side of Saint Clair Street; thence proceeding southerly
approximately 100 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-51;
thence proceeding westerly approximately 141 feet to the northwest
corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-52; thence proceeding southerly
approximately 301 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-54;
thence proceeding easterly approximately 110 feet to the northwest
corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-55; thence proceeding southerly
approximately 111 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-56;
thence proceeding westerly approximately 103 feet to the northwest
corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-57; thence proceeding southerly
approximately 190 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-57;
thence proceeding easterly approximately 68 feet to a point on the
western side of Lot No. 104.19-2-58 and the southern side of Lot
No. 104.19-2-57; thence proceeding southerly approximately 157 feet
to the southwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-59; thence proceeding
westerly approximately 100 feet to the northwest corner of Lot No.
104.19-2-11; thence proceeding southerly approximately 180 feet to
the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-15, on the north side of Jay
Street; thence proceeding easterly along Jay Street approximately 246
feet to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-12 and the corner of
Jay Street and South Main Street; thence proceeding easterly across
South Main Street approximately 100 feet to the southwest corner of
Lot No. 104.19-2-10; thence proceeding 400 feet to the high-water
mark of Seneca Lake; and thence proceeding northerly along said
high-water mark of Seneca Lake approximately 2,000 feet to the point
of beginning.
N. The following described property, currently zoned MR Multiple-Family
Residential, is hereby rezoned to R-1 One-Family Residential: [Added
11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
§ 350-4 GENEVA CODE § 350-4
346:662
§ 350-5. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any aforesaid
districts as shown on the Zoning Map,59 the following shall apply:
Beginning at a point approximately 125 feet south of Saint Clair Street,
at the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-40; thence proceeding
easterly approximately 400 feet to the southeast corner of Lot No.
104.19-1-30; thence proceeding southerly approximately 180 feet and
across Verplanck Street to the northeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-42;
thence proceeding westerly along Verplanck Street approximately 25
feet to the northwest corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-42; thence proceeding
southerly approximately 55 feet to a point south of Verplanck Street;
thence proceeding westerly approximately 25 feet to the northwest
corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-42; thence proceeding southerly
approximately 641 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 119.07-1-14,
on the north side of Jay Street; thence proceeding westerly
approximately 200 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 119.07-1-12;
thence proceeding northerly approximately 590 feet to the northwest
corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-28; thence proceeding easterly
approximately 50 feet to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-2-35;
thence proceeding northerly approximately 246 feet and across
Verplanck Street to the southeast corner of Lot No. 104.19-1-24;
thence proceeding northerly approximately 64 feet to the point of
beginning.
O. The following described property currently zoned F Industrial is hereby
rezoned to B2 Business District: [Added 4-2-2003 by Ord. No.
1-2003]
Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-14, 279 Exchange Street; Tax Parcel No.
104.35-1-22, 281 Exchange Street; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-21, 293
Exchange Street; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-20, 297 Exchange Street;
Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-19, 303 Exchange Street; Tax Parcel No.
104.35-1-18, 307 Exchange Street; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-17, 313
Exchange Street; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-16, 43-45 Lake Street; Tax
Parcel No. 104.35-1-15, 41 Lake Street; and alley off of Lake Street.
P. The following described property currently zoned F Industrial is hereby
rezoned to B2 Business District: [Added 9-14-2005 by Ord. No.
4-2005]
Tax Parcel No. 104.8-3-53200; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-1; Tax Parcel
No. 104.35-1-2; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-3; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-4;
Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-5; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-6; Tax Parcel No.
104.35-1-7; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-8; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-9; Tax
Parcel No. 104.35-1-10; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-11; Tax Parcel No.
104.35-1-12; Tax Parcel No. 104.35-1-13.
59.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the City offices.
§ 350-4 WIRES AND POLES § 350-5
346:663
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center lines or right-of-way lines of streets, highways, public utility
easements, or watercourses, said boundaries shall be construed to be
coincident with such lines. Such boundaries shall be deemed to be
automatically moved if a center line or right-of-way line of such street,
highway, public utility or watercourse is moved a maximum of 50 feet.
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
City boundary line, property lines, lot lines, or projections thereof, said
boundaries shall be construed to be coincident with such lines or
projections thereof.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the City boundary line, property lines, lot lines, right-of-way
lines, or projections thereof, said boundaries shall be construed as
being parallel thereto and at such distances therefrom as indicated on
the Zoning Map or as shall be determined by the use of the scale shown
on the Zoning Map.
D. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in a single or joint
ownership of record at the time such line is established, the regulations
for the less restricted portion of such lot shall extend not more than 30
feet into the more restricted portion.
E. In all other cases, where not dimensioned, the location of boundaries
shown on the map shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
thereon, but in no instance will a district depth be less than the
specified minimum lot depth required for each district.
§ 350-5 GENEVA CODE § 350-5
346:664
ARTICLE II
Use Regulations
§ 350-6. Permitted uses. [Amended 11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
No building or premises shall be erected, altered, or used except for one
or more of the uses designated for any district as hereinafter set forth in
Schedule I,60 and except for one or more of the uses designated for the
Lakefront District PUD as hereinafter set forth in § 350-9, or for the College-
Residential District as hereinafter set forth in § 350-26.1, or for the Historic-
Residential District as hereinafter set forth in § 350-26.2.
§ 350-7. Prohibited industrial uses. [Amended 5-6-1981 by Ord. No.
8-1981]
In the F and F1 Industrial Districts, where manufacturing or light industry
is permitted, no manufacturing use nor any trade, industry, use or purpose
that is noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke,
toxic or noisome fumes, radiation, gas, noise, vibration or excessive light,
or any combination of the above, which is dangerous and prejudicial to
the public health, safety and general welfare shall be permitted, and this
includes but is not limited to the uses specified in Schedule II hereinafter
set forth.61
60.Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
61.Editor's Note: Schedule II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 350-6 WIRES AND POLES § 350-7
346:665

ARTICLE III
Lakefront District Planned Unit Development
[Added 5-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-10]
§ 350-8. Intent; objectives; procedures; definitions.
A. Intent. The intent of this planned unit development (PUD) provision is
to encourage a greater degree of flexibility for development and to
provide a variety of residential and nonresidential activities in a
planned, controlled environment in a manner blending all land uses into
a functionally and aesthetically complementary whole. A planned unit
development proposal may contain both individual building sites and
common property which are proposed for development as an integrated
land use unit. A mix of light manufacturing/research development and
commercial uses may be included to provide employment opportunities
and enhancements to the tax base. Retail and service uses may be
included to provide for shopping needs.
(1) This article recognizes that while the standard zoning function (use
and bulk) and the subdivision function (platting and design) are
appropriate for the regulation of land use in areas or
neighborhoods that are already substantially developed, these
controls represent a type of preregulation, regulatory rigidity and
uniformity which may be inimical to the techniques of land
development contained in the planned unit development concept. A
rigid set of space requirements along with bulk and use
specifications would frustrate the application of this concept. Thus,
where PUD techniques are deemed appropriate through the
rezoning of land to a planned unit development district by the City
Council, the use and dimensional specifications elsewhere in the
codes of the City of Geneva are replaced by an approval process in
which an approved PUD plan becomes the basis for continuing land
use controls.
(2) As presented in this article, the planned unit development concept
is subdivided into two types of districts: a planned residential
development (PRD) and a planned commercial development (PCD),
each of which is subject to specific development requirements and
limitations. For purposes of interpretation, the term "planned unit
development" or "PUD" can be taken to mean planned residential
development or planned commercial development, as appropriate.
(3) While public lands in the Lakefront District do not qualify for
regulation under this article, it is the intent of the City that the site
planning criteria and guidelines which constitute the substance of
this article apply to any and all development on public lands in the
Lakefront Zoning District.
(4) This article is augmented and supplemented by Article IV,
Appearance Code for Lakefront Zoning District, which sets
standards and offers guidelines for architectural and site-related
§ 350-8 WIRES AND POLES § 350-8
346:667
aspects of appearance for development in both private parcels
and public lands within the Lakefront District as shown in the
attached Lakefront District Zoning Master Plan.62 The criteria of
the Appearance Code are applicable to the site plan review process
inherent in this article.
B. Objectives. To implement the intent of the planned unit development
provision, the following objectives must be met:
(1) A maximum choice in the types of environment, occupancy tenure
(e.g., cooperative, individual, condominium, or leasing), types of
housing, lot sizes and community facilities available to persons at
all economic levels.
(2) Provision of usable open space and recreation areas and
convenience in location of retail sales and service areas.
(3) A development pattern which preserves trees, enhances important
vistas and views, outstanding natural topography and geographic
features, and prevents soil erosion.
(4) A creative use of land and related physical development which
allows an orderly transition of land from rural areas.
(5) An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and
streets.
(6) A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of this
chapter.
(7) A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other articles of this chapter.
(8) A mixture of land uses to enhance job creation and retention,
increase of tax base, and variety of settings.
C. Procedures overview.
(1) The classification of a property as a planned unit development
(PUD) requires the undertaking of a two-step process involving the
approval of both the Planning Board and the City Council.
(2) In the first step, the Planning Board responds initially to the
applicant's submission of a conceptual sketch plan and a general
outline that discusses the contemplated development for the PUD.
The Planning Board ensures compliance with the general
requirements of this article and directs the preparation of the
project plan narrative and graphic documentation.
(3) Upon approval of the concept sketch plan, the second step involves
application for the establishment of a planned unit development
62.Editor's Note: The Lakefront District Zoning Master Plan is on file in the City offices.
§ 350-8 GENEVA CODE § 350-8
346:668
district. This step is governed by the City Council and requires
a public hearing. In the case where the Planning Board files an
unfavorable advisory report with the City Council, the applicant
may request a separate review by the City Council.
(4) Subsequent to these first two approvals classifying the PUD, the
site plan review process requires that the applicant prepare
detailed preliminary and final site development plans which
conform to any conditions of approval established in the approval
of the initial concept sketch. All interpretation of land use
regulations related to the proposed PUD shall be determined by the
Planning Board.
D. District boundary definition.
(1) It is the intent of this article that planned unit development apply
only to the Lakefront Zoning District as delineated on the Official
Zoning Map63 of the City of Geneva.
(2) Modifications to the Lakefront Zoning District may be subsequently
determined and established by City Council.
(3) Generally, the boundaries of the Lakefront Zoning District are as
follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of the shoreline of
Seneca Lake and the Conrail right-of-way east of Hamilton Street,
north to the intersection of Linden and Washington Streets, east to
Exchange Street, north to Franklyn Street, east to the Conrail
right-of-way, north and east along the Conrail right-of-way to the
Ontario County line, south along the county line to a point 1,000
feet off shore in Seneca Lake, and thence along a line generally
1,000 feet from the high water mark to the point of beginning.
E. Master Plan. All references in this article to an official master plan
pertain to the attached Lakefront District Zoning Master Plan dated
March 27, 1987, which defines the permitted uses on a parcel-by-parcel
basis.64
F. Definitions. Terms used in this article shall generally have the meanings
indicated in Article I, § 350-2 of this chapter. The following definitions
take precedence over the intent of any similar terms found in this
chapter.
AREA — The extent of surface contained within the boundaries or
extremities of land or building.
CARPORT — A covered parking structure enclosed on three sides but
without doors.
COMMUNITY CENTER — Any building, room, or area designed or
utilized primarily for indoor recreational, educational and civic pursuits
63.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the City offices.
64.Editor's Note: The Lakefront District Zoning Master Plan is on file in the City offices.
§ 350-8 WIRES AND POLES § 350-8
346:669
and purposes by the owners and residents of the planned unit
development, but not including any retail, service, or other commercial
activities.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building arranged, intended or
designed to provide three or more dwelling units independent of each
other but having common hallways and entrances.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A building designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for one family and one of a group
of three or more attached dwellings, placed side by side, separated
by party walls, each containing one or two stories and each having
separate front and rear or side and rear or front and side entrances
from the outside.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings.
The floor area of a building is restricted to those levels above the
surface of the ground and shall not include any basement or garage
spaces under the surface. Garage facilities above the surface shall be
included. Where the ground level changes a full story height or more
along a building line, the floor area of such story shall be prorated in
proportion to the average story height above grade.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The floor area of a building, but excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts at each floor, parts of floors devoted
exclusively to vehicular loading or parking, and all space devoted to
mechanical services.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio between total site area and maximum
floor area of principal and accessory structures permitted in a PCD
district. Total site area shall be the entire site within the property
lines of any development. In determining the floor area ratio, the gross
building floor area shall be calculated based on parking and open
space requirements according to type of land use or mix of uses. See
§ 350-9E(2)(a) of this article.
FRONT YARD — The setback distance from the principal building line
and street right-of-way in the case of dedicated City streets or
pavement edge in the case of private drives or parking lots.
GARAGE — Covered parking enclosed on three sides and provided
with doors and located as an accessory structure or incorporated into
principal structures.
GROSS AREA — Total of all land within the planned unit development,
used in calculating the base density of development in the PRD.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING/RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT — The
manufacture, assembly or packing of products not objectionable or
injurious due to smoke, noise, odors, glare, dust, or the release of
hazardous materials. Such products would include cloth, metal, plastic,
paper, wood, electronic instruments or devices, pharmaceutical, optics,
§ 350-8 GENEVA CODE § 350-8
346:670
§ 350-9. General requirements.
precision instruments, laboratories, research and development and
similar activities conducted completely within a building.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Outdoor property, not occupied by
structures, roads, or service areas, set aside for the recreational use
and enjoyment of the owners and residents of the planned unit
development and intended to enhance the present or potential value of
the remaining lands in the planned unit development.
OPEN SPACE, DEVELOPED — Open space which contains structures,
improvements and/or landscaping necessary and appropriate for the
benefit and enjoyment of the owners and residents of the planned unit
development for active and passive recreation purposes.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — A commercial
development in accordance with a single plan for compatible land uses
and the placement of buildings which may not correspond to the intent
of the existing City Zoning Ordinance for similar uses.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A residential
development (as above, "planned commercial development").
PROFESSIONAL AND BUSINESS OFFICES — Include but are not
limited to the following services: planner, architect, landscape
architect, doctor, dentist, insurance agency, lawyer, engineer,
accountant, realtor, art and photography studios, and travel agencies.
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE FACILITIES — Those commercial
facilities which may serve the residents living within or in the vicinity
of the planned unit development. Retail sales and service facilities
include the following: retail business or service establishments, banks,
restaurants, hotels, conference centers, convenience stores,
drugstores, barbershops, beauty salons, dry cleaners, data processing
services, theaters, sporting goods, clothing and jewelry stores,
professional and business offices or laundromats.
A. Minimum area.
(1) The minimum area required in the Lakefront District to qualify for
a planned unit development (PUD) shall be five contiguous acres of
land, exclusive of areas to be dedicated to the City for public
purposes and with the exception of parcels L-1, L-2, L-3, L-4 and
L-6 as shown in the Lakefront Zoning District Master Plan. Where
the applicant can demonstrate that the characteristics of his
holdings will meet the objectives of this section, the City Council
may consider projects with less acreage.
(2) All development parcels eligible for classification to PUD status are
shown on the Lakefront Zoning District Master Plan. A PUD district
may be enlarged to include other contiguous areas regardless of
their size. Such areas, if separated by a public or private right-of-
§ 350-8 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:671
way, may be considered contiguous if in the opinion of the City
Council the continuity of development of the original PUD district
is maintained.
B. Ownership. The tract of land for a PUD may be owned, leased or
controlled either by a single person or corporation or by a group of
individuals or corporations. An application must be filed by the owner,
or jointly by the owners, of all property included in the project. In the
case of multiple ownership, the approved PUD plan is binding on all
owners.
C. Permitted uses. This subsection sets forth the uses approved for a
planned unit development. Such uses include and shall be limited to the
following, according to type of district:
(1) Planned residential development (PRD).
(a) Single-family attached dwellings.
(b) Multifamily dwellings.
(c) Noncommercial community center facilities.
(d) Common, public or private open space, park, or recreation
areas, including playgrounds, walkways, swimming pools,
tennis courts, marinas, and other similar recreational
activities.
(e) Accessory uses on the same parcel with, and customarily
incidental to, any of the foregoing land uses, including offstreet
parking facilities, garages, storage facilities for
landscape and building maintenance equipment, and satellite
signal receiving equipment.
(f) Model home exhibits, temporary sales and construction offices
and uses accessory thereto, solely in conjunction with the
planned unit development.
(g) Under special authorization by the Planning Board, and
consistent with the objectives of this article, the following
retail sales and service uses may be allowed in a PRD:
[1] Convenience store.
[2] Drugstore.
[3] Laundromat.
(2) Planned commercial development (PCD).
(a) Retail sales and service uses.
(b) Business and professional offices.
(c) Light manufacturing.
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-9
346:672
(d) Research and development facilities.
(e) Municipal uses.
(f) Educational uses.
(g) Marinas, marine services (not including boat storage), and
water-related recreation and commercial uses.
(h) Common public or private open space, park or recreation
areas, including walkways, sitting areas, courtyards and
plazas, arcades, shelters and similar recreational uses.
(i) Accessory uses on the same parcel with, and customarily
incidental to, any of the foregoing land uses, including offstreet
parking and loading areas, garages for commercial
vehicles, and storage areas for trash and refuse.
D. Mix of uses. The mix of permissible uses, scale of any such use, density
and general design standards shall be determined by the Planning
Board in its review of the project plan and pursuant to the provisions
set forth in this article.
E. Area limitations. Within the planned unit development, the following
percentage of the gross land area shall be devoted to specific uses:
(1) In a planned residential development, a maximum of 30% for all
residential uses, including all principal and accessory structures
but excluding any open space and recreation uses as defined in this
article and the space devoted to streets and required off-street
parking lots within the parcel.
(2) In a planned commercial development, a maximum of 70% for retail
sales and service, business offices, light manufacturing, research
facilities or a combination thereof. Said maximum shall include all
principal and accessory structures, and the parking and service
areas exclusively servicing such facilities within the parcel.
(a) On certain nonresidential development parcels shown on the
Lakefront Zoning District Master Plan, a minimum floor area to
gross lot area ratio shall be established by the Planning Board.
Such a minimum ratio will be calculated by the Board on the
basis of the applicant's proposed mix of uses as they relate to
parking and open space requirements and other general
requirements of this article.
[1] The following chart will be useful in calculating maximum
building coverage on a development site as it relates to
variable parking space requirements per 1,000 square feet
net floor area (refer to Subsection H of this section which
lists required parking according to type of land use) and as
it relates to various building scenarios in number of stories
(refer to height limitations in this article). Divide the
§ 350-9 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:673
appropriate factor in the chart into the gross land area in
square feet to find the number of thousands of square feet
of allowable gross floor area, then divide by the number of
stories to find the actual building footprint square footage.
[2] In cases where parking requirements are related to
number of employees, the applicant must determine the
number of employees per 1,000 square feet net floor area
and convert to the appropriate parking count.
Number of Stories
Number of
Parking
Spaces per
1,000
Square Feet
Net Floor
Area 1 2 3 4 5 6
1 1,895 1,101 943 824 752 704
2 2,363 1,648 1,410 1,291 1,220 1,171
3 2,830 2,116 1,877 1,758 1,687 1,638
4 3,297 2,583 2,344 2,226 2,154 2,106
5 3,764 3,049 2,811 2,693 2,621 2,573
6 4,231 3,517 3,278 3,160 3,088 3,040
7 4,698 3,984 3,746 3,627 3,556 3,507
8 5,166 4,451 4,213 4,095 4,022 3,974
9 5,633 4,919 4,680 4,561 4,490 4,441
10 6,100 5,386 5,147 5,029 4,957 4,908
1 1,895 1,101 943 824 752 704
2 11 2,363
6,567
1,648
5,853
1,410
5,614
1,291
5,495
1,220
5,424
1,171
5,376
12 7,034 6,320 6,081 5,963 5,891 5,842
13 7,501 6,787 6,548 6,430 6,358 6,310
14 7,969 7,254 7,015 6,897 6,826 6,777
15 8,436 7,721 7,483 7,364 7,293 7,244
(3) A minimum of 20% for developed and unimproved common or
public open space and recreational uses as defined in this article.
This area shall exclude all streets, roads, and required parking
spaces within the parcel.
F. Density. This subsection pertains to the density of development of
residential land uses in the planned residential development. The base
residential unit density within the parcel shall be eight dwelling units
per acre in the case of single-family attached dwellings and 12 dwelling
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-9
346:674
units per acre in the case of multifamily development. The maximum
average unit density should not exceed 10.8 dwelling units per acre.
To encourage development which meets the objectives of this article,
densities beyond the base density shall be permitted when additional
recreational improvements, open space, architectural character and
siting considerations are included in the project plan by the developer.
(See Appendix A.)
(1) The mix of residential units among single-family attached dwellings
and apartment buildings shall be determined by the Planning
Board, but no single type of residential use shall comprise more
than 65% of the total residential units.
(2) Additional requirements that apply to single-family attached
dwellings:
(a) There shall be no continuous group of more than eight dwelling
units or of more than 200 feet in total length.
G. Geometric controls. The following controls or standards shall apply
uniformly in the PRD and PCD districts:
(1) Distance between buildings.
(a) Residential. Front, rear and side yards for residential areas
shall be designed so that a single-family building is no closer
than 20 feet to any other single-family building and 50 feet to
any nonresidential buildings. A multifamily building may be no
closer than 40 feet to any single-family dwelling unit or other
multifamily unit and no closer than 50 feet to any
nonresidential building.
(b) Nonresidential. Front, rear and side yards for nonresidential
uses shall be designed so that a building is no closer than 40
feet to any other nonresidential building and 50 feet to any
residential building. For purposes of interpretation, a structure
which contains both residential and nonresidential uses shall
comply with nonresidential requirements.
(c) Accessory structures shall be no closer than 10 feet to the
principal structure with which they are associated and no
closer than 20 feet to any other principal structure and five
feet to any other accessory structure.
(2) Distance from parcel boundaries, streets and other paved areas.
The minimum distance between any point on a building and a
parcel boundary, a dedicated street right-of-way, private driveway
or parking lot shall not be less than 20 feet or the height of the
building, whichever is greater, in a residential district and 20 feet
or 1/2 the height of the building, whichever is greater, in a
nonresidential district.
§ 350-9 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:675
(3) Height.
(a) Residential. The maximum height of single-family dwellings
and multifamily dwellings shall not exceed 36 feet (three
floors) and 72 feet (six floors), respectively, and accessory
structures shall not exceed 15 feet.
(b) Nonresidential. The maximum height of all principal structures
shall not exceed 72 feet (six floors) in any parcel nor be less
than 36 feet (three floors) in height in parcels so designated on
the Lakefront District Master Plan. Accessory structures shall
not exceed 36 feet in any parcel.
(c) All heights specified do not include necessary rooftop
mechanical equipment or enclosures.
H. Parking and loading. Off-street automobile parking spaces and truck
loading areas for the various permitted uses in planned unit
development districts shall be provided as follows:
(1) Planned residential development.
(a) Single-family attached dwellings: 1.5 spaces per dwelling,
including one space in the driveway of each dwelling unit. In
addition to required off-street parking, all single-family
attached dwelling units shall be provided with a garage of
sufficient dimension to accommodate a single automobile.
(b) Multifamily: one space per efficiency or one-bedroom unit; 1.2
spaces per two-bedroom unit; and 1.5 spaces per threebedroom
unit. Carport and garage parking may be provided for
multifamily residential units on the basis of one space per
dwelling unit.
(c) Community center: one space per 200 square feet net floor
area.
(2) Planned commercial development.
(a) Retail sales and services: two spaces per 1,000 square feet net
floor area on site and one space per 1,000 square feet net floor
area off site.
(b) Business and professional offices: one space per 1,000 square
feet net floor area on site and one space per 1,000 square feet
net floor area off site.
(c) Light manufacturing: one space for each two employees.
(d) Research and development facilities: one space for each two
employees.
(e) Marinas and marine services: two spaces per 1,000 square feet
net floor area retail space plus two spaces for every four slips.
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-9
346:676
(3) Additional parking requirements for specific uses are as follows:
(a) Banks: 16 spaces per 1,000 square feet net floor area.
(b) Restaurants.
[1] Carry-out: seven spaces per 1,000 square feet net floor
area.
[2] Drive-in: 32 spaces per 1,000 square feet net floor area.
[3] Sit-down/high turnover: 16 spaces per 1,000 square feet
net floor area.
[4] Sit-down/low turnover: 13 spaces per 1,000 square feet
net floor area.
(c) Conference center: one space per 100 square feet assembly
space.
(d) Theaters: one space per five seats.
(e) Hotel: one space per sleeping unit.
(f) Bar or nightclub: 13 spaces per 1,000 square feet net floor
area; 16 spaces per 1,000 square feet net floor area with live
entertainment.
(4) Additional general requirements.
(a) In cases where parking requirements are proposed to be
accommodated both on and off site, a parking plan must be
submitted. The development of such a parking plan will be a
joint effort of both the applicant and the City. Existing on-street
parking may not be considered in any parking plan. Proposals
for joint use of City-owned parking must be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board.
(b) When parking spaces are required on the basis of number of
staff or employees, the maximum number present at any one
time shall govern.
(c) A perimeter open space at least 10 feet wide, planted with
deciduous trees and turf grass, or a durable and wellmaintained
solid wall, fence, compact evergreen hedge or
other screening device three to four feet in height shall be
provided along every dedicated street right-of-way. A screening
device not less than six feet in height and not more than eight
feet in height shall be provided where a nonresidential parking
lot adjoins a residential use.
(5) Design standards. The following standards apply in both PRD and
PCD districts:
§ 350-9 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:677
(a) Each off-street parking space shall have the following
maximum dimensions, width to length:
[1] Parallel parking: eight feet by 24 feet.
[2] Perpendicular parking: nine feet by 18 feet.
(b) There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all
parking areas.
(c) All parking areas, except driveways serving individual singlefamily
attached dwellings, shall be designed to permit cars to
exit without backing onto any street or sidewalk.
(d) Each parking space shall be provided with a sufficient backup
area to permit egress in one maneuver, consisting of one
backward and one forward movement.
(e) Every off-street parking lot shall be constructed in such a
manner so as to provide an all-weather, durable and dustless
surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of all
surface water accumulation by means of a subsurface storm
sewer system. The surface and drainage system shall be
approved by the City Engineer.
(f) Individual parking stalls shall be clearly identified by markings
four inches to six inches in width.
(g) Fixed lighting shall be so arranged to prevent direct glare of
beams onto any public or private property or streets.
(h) Car stops shall be provided, located and designed to protect
required screening devices and landscaping from damage by
vehicles.
(i) Trees located in paved areas shall be provided with tree pits
protected by curbing.
(j) No area of any parking lot, excluding access ramps, shall have
excessive slopes unless approved by the City Engineer.
(k) All parking lots shall provide for snow removal. No parking on
City streets, or traffic lanes, will be allowed. Disposal of snow
in Seneca Lake is prohibited.
(l) A minimum of 5% of total available spaces shall be designed to
be accessible to the handicapped and shall be conveniently
located.
(6) Special standards. The following standards shall apply to any
accessory parking area located in a residential front yard of singlefamily
attached dwelling units:
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-9
346:678
(a) Each space shall be accessory to, and permanently assigned to,
a single dwelling unit and be located in the front yard of such
unit.
(b) No more than one space shall be located in the front yard of
any dwelling unit, and no more than two spaces shall be
contiguous with each other.
(c) Areas between driveways shall be landscaped in an
appropriate manner so as to minimize the visual impact of the
automobiles' presence. Plantings shall include a minimum of
one two-inch caliper deciduous tree or one five-foot minimum
height conifer, plus one small flowering tree of one-and-onehalf-
inch caliper and five ornamental shrubs of eighteen-inch
minimum height.
(d) Every parking space and driveway shall be designed and shall
be of sufficient length and width to prevent the parked auto
from encroaching on any street or sidewalk.
(e) The grade of driveway pavement to street shall not exceed 5%.
(f) The width of any single driveway or parking space shall not be
less than nine feet nor greater than 12 feet.
(7) Loading requirements. For uses not expressly listed in this article
for planned unit developments, loading spaces shall be provided on
the same basis as required for the most similar listed use or as
determined by the Planning Board.
(a) Loading spaces shall be located on the same parcel as the
building or structure to which they are accessory.
(b) The duty to provide and maintain off-street loading and
unloading spaces shall be the joint and several responsibilities
of the owner, operator and lessee of the use for which off-street
loading and unloading spaces are required.
(c) Loading spaces may be located anywhere on a lot, except that
no part of any loading space shall extend into any required
front yard.
(d) Loading spaces shall be provided in sufficient number and of
sufficient size so that no loading or unloading operations
infringe upon any street or sidewalk.
(e) A minimum of one loading space shall be provided for each
commercial, industrial and institutional use unless a legal
instrument, approved as to form and manner of execution by
the City Council, is executed by the owners of two or more such
uses requesting the joint use of the off-street loading spaces
and is filed with the application for planned unit development
zoning.
§ 350-9 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:679
(f) Sufficient screening, in the form of berms and planting or
fencing, shall be provided along all lot lines abutting any
residentially zoned or developed property to visually insulate
the residential use from all operations, materials and vehicles
within any loading space.
(g) Loading areas accessory to commercial uses, or planned
commercial developments, shall be located and screened so as
to minimize public awareness.
(h) Each loading space shall have the following minimum
dimensions, in feet:
Size
Type Width Length Height
Tractor-trailer 12 55 14
Other 12 35 14
(i) Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to provide
access to a street or alley in a manner which will create the
least possible interference with traffic movement. Access to
and from loading spaces shall be approved by the City
Engineer.
(j) Every loading space shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or
portland cement binder pavement providing an all-weather,
durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained
to dispose of surface water accumulation by means of a
positive stormwater drainage system connected to a public
sewer system. Individual stalls shall be clearly identified by
markings four to six inches in width.
(k) Fixed lighting shall be so arranged to prevent direct glare of
beams onto any public or private property or streets.
(l) No signs shall be displayed in any loading area except such
signs as may be necessary for the orderly use of the loading
space.
I. Sign controls. The regulation of signs by this article is intended to
promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by creating
signage compatible with the physical environment and land uses, by
creating a more attractive economic and business climate within the
commercial and industrial areas of the City, by enhancing and
protecting the physical appearance of all areas of the City and by
reducing the distractions, obstructions and hazards to pedestrian and
auto traffic caused by the indiscriminate placement and use of signs.
(1) Scope. The requirements of this article are in addition to the
regulations found in § 350-30 of this chapter and are to be
supplemented by the applicable portions of the Appearance Code
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-9
346:680
for planned unit developments, which is appended to this article.65
Any sign not expressly permitted by these regulations shall be
prohibited. The regulations of this article relate to the location
of signs, by function and type, within planned commercial and
planned residential developments and shall be in addition to the
provisions of the Building Code and Electrical Code of the City as
they apply to the construction and maintenance of signs.
(2) Site plan review. Every application for preliminary site plan
approval shall be accompanied by a copy of the plans and
specifications showing the method of construction, illumination and
support of any sign, as well as a sketch drawn to scale showing sign
faces, exposed surfaces, and the proposed message and design,
accurately represented as to size, area, proportion and color, and
by a calculation of the total sign area in relation to the appropriate
building facade.
(3) General definitions and classifications of signs. For the purposes of
this article, signs shall be defined and classified in the following
manner:
ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE — Any pennant, flag, valance,
banner, propeller, spinner, streamer, searchlight, flashing light,
balloon or similar device or ornamentation designed for the
purposes of attracting attention, promotion or advertising.
DISPLAY SURFACE — The area made available by a sign structure
for the purpose of displaying the message.
FLASHING SIGN — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign
which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by
any means whatsoever.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial
lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the
sign.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify,
display, or direct or attract attention to an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, event or
location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs,
symbols, fixtures, colors, or illumination, or project images. "Sign"
does not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization
of nations, state or City or of any fraternal, religious or civic
organization; merchandise, pictures or models of products or
services incorporated in a window display; works of art which in no
way identify a product; graffiti; or scoreboards located on athletic
fields.
65.Editor's Note: See Art. IV of this chapter.
§ 350-9 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:681
(4) Functional definitions. For the purposes of this article, the function
of signs shall be as defined and classified in the following manner:
ADDRESS SIGN — A sign containing only the name or symbol of an
owner, occupant or use and/or the street number of the building or
premises as required by the City.
ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is
located.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered
or manufactured, or to an entertainment offered, on the premises
where the sign is located.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign erected on the
premises on which construction is taking place during the period
of such construction indicating the names of the architects,
engineers, landscape architects, contractors and similar artisans,
and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors and similar persons
or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or
project.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN — A sign erected and maintained pursuant
to and in discharge of any governmental regulation.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS — Signs in the nature of decorations,
clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly associated with
any national, local or religious holiday. Any other provision of this
section to the contrary notwithstanding, such signs may be of any
type, number, area, height, location, illumination or animation.
JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which serves as a common
or collective identification for two or more commercial business
or industrial uses sharing space in a planned commercial
development and which is located on such premises. Joint
identification signs shall be permitted as provided by this article
so long as the total area of each sign does not exceed either 100
square feet or the restrictions of the district in which such sign is
located, whichever is smaller.
MEMORIAL SIGN — A sign or table memorializing a person, event,
structure or the like.
ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL SIGN — A sign commonly associated
with, and limited to, information and directions necessary for
persons coming on the property, including signs marking entrances
and exits, parking areas, one-way drives, rest rooms, pickup and
delivery areas and the like.
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign announcing or supporting
political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state
or local election.
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-9
346:682
PUBLIC SERVICE INFORMATIONAL SIGN — A sign capable of
transmitting by intermittent lighting variable information to the
public, such as date, time, and temperature, stock report, storm
warnings, weather information, traffic control messages, news
stories, etc. Public service messages do not include advertising,
announcements of private events, promotional messages or
political campaign promotions.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the
premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SIGN — A permanent sign announcing
the name of a planned residential development and located at the
principal points of entry to the development.
WARNING SIGNS — Signs limited to messages of warning, danger
or caution.
(5) Structural types. For purposes of this article, signs shall be
identified and classified according to the structure in the following
manner:
AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN — A sign that is mounted or painted
on or attached to an awning or canopy that is otherwise permitted
by this chapter.
GROUND SIGN — Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or
supported by the ground independently of any other structure.
POLE SIGN — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or
other supports so that the top edge of the sign face is more than
eight feet above grade.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign that is not permanently affixed to a
building, a structure or the ground, but not including identification
lettering on vehicles and advertising on buses.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent
upon a building for support and which projects more than 12 inches
from such building. A banner made of fire-resistant material and
meeting the foregoing standards shall be considered a projecting
sign.
ROOF SIGN — A sign that is mounted upon the roof of a building or
which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which
projects more than 12 inches above the roof peak.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign or advertising display constructed of
cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, plywood or other light material and
intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
WALL SIGN — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a
building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the
supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the
sign and which does not project more than 12 inches from such
building or structure.
§ 350-9 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:683
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is applied or attached to the
exterior or interior of a window.
(6) General standards. The following general standards shall apply to
all signs:
(a) Sign measurement.
[1] Area to be included. The area of a sign shall include all
lettering, wording, designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed. The supporting structure or bracing of a sign
shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign unless
such structure or bracing is made part of the message or
face of the sign.
[2] Signs attached to the walls. Where a sign consists of
individual letters, words or symbols attached to a surface,
building, canopy, awning, wall or window, the sign area
shall be the area of the smallest rectangle which
completely encompasses all such letters, words or symbols
and any accompanying background of a color different
than the natural color of the wall.
(b) Height of signs. Sign height shall be measured between grade
and the highest point of the highest element of the sign face.
(c) Illumination. In no event shall an illuminated sign be placed or
directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom
to be directed or beamed upon any adjacent public or private
premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute
a nuisance or traffic hazard. No illuminated sign located
adjacent to, or across the street from, any residential district
shall be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. unless the use to which the sign pertains is open for
business.
(d) Electrical elements. All wiring, fittings and materials used in
the construction, connection and operation of electrically
illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the provisions of
the City Electrical Code. All Underwriters' Laboratories labels
shall be affixed to any sign having an electrical component, or
proof of the New York State Board of Fire Underwriters'
approval shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
(e) Structural elements. The construction and structural
components of all signs shall be in accordance with the
standards and regulations of the City Building Code.66
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Construction.
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-9
346:684
(f) Obstruction of accessways. No sign or sign structure shall
obstruct free ingress or egress from a fire escape door, window,
or other required accessway.
(g) Obstruction of light and air. No sign shall be erected or
maintained within the zone of light obstruction for any window
opening into any habitable room of any residential unit.
(h) Obstruction of window surface. No sign shall project over,
occupy or obstruct any window surface required for light or
ventilation by the applicable code.
(i) Traffic safety. No sign shall be maintained at any location
where, by reason of its position, size, shape, content or color, it
may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of or be
confused with any traffic control sign, signal or device or
where it may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(j) Signs in rights-of-way. No sign, except publicly owned signs,
shall be placed in or extend into or over any public right-of-way
unless the sign owner has received the written approval of the
City Engineer regarding the adequacy of the sign owner's
liability insurance program.
(k) Sign maintenance.
[1] The owner of a sign and the owner of the premises on
which such sign is located shall be jointly and severally
liable to maintain such sign, including its illumination
sources, in a neat and orderly condition and good working
order at all times and to prevent the development of any
rust, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the
physical appearance or safety of such sign.
[2] Unsafe signs or unsightly, damaged, or deteriorated signs
or signs in danger of falling shall be put in order or
removed upon written notice. Immediate compliance is
expected for the repair or removal of unsafe signs. If
compliance is not achieved within the time period
specified in such notice, the sign shall be repaired or
removed by the City and the costs assessed to the property
owner.
[3] Unsafe temporary signs or unsightly, damaged, or
deteriorated signs or signs in danger of falling shall be put
in order or removed upon written notice. Immediate
compliance is expected for the repair or removal of unsafe
temporary signs.
(7) Signs specifically prohibited. The following signs are prohibited in
all PRD and PCD districts and shall not be erected, maintained or
permitted to continue in any district:
§ 350-9 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:685
(a) Attention-getting devices, except as expressly authorized by
City permit.
(b) Temporary signs, except as expressly authorized in this
section.
(c) Signs on vehicles. No person shall park any vehicle or trailer
on any street, on any public property or on any private
property so as to be visible from any street, which vehicle or
trailer has attached thereto or located thereon any portable or
temporary sign or advertising device intended primarily to
provide advertisement of products or direction to any business
or activity located on the same or any other premises.
(d) Portable signs. No portable sign shall be allowed unless the
City Engineer shall have issued a temporary permit for the
display and use thereof. Under no circumstances shall the City
Engineer issue such temporary permit except for special
occasions or events, such as festivals, bazaars and temporary
sales of temporary duration. Such temporary permit shall
contain such restrictions on the size and location of portable
signs as he deems to be appropriate.
(e) Any outdoor sign which advertises, identifies or pertains to a
business no longer conducted or a product no longer sold on
the premises where such sign is located. Such signs shall be
removed within 30 days following cessation of the relevant
activity.
(f) Any sign on a tree or utility pole or painted on or otherwise
directly affixed to any rock, ledge or other natural feature,
whether on public or private property.
(8) Signs permitted in any district. Except as expressly prohibited in
this article, the following signs may be erected and maintained in a
PCD or PRD district:
(a) Address signs. Address signs, provided that such signs are
limited to no more than one sign per occupancy. Such signs
shall be attached to or mounted on the building, may not
exceed one square foot in area and may be illuminated only by
an indirect source of light (no internally illuminated sign).
(b) Construction signs. Not more than one construction sign of no
more than 50 square feet in area per construction site. No such
sign shall be maintained for more than 14 days following the
conclusion of the construction in question.
(c) Flags and emblems. Flags or emblems of a government or of a
political, civic, philanthropic, educational or religious
organization.
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-9
346:686
(d) Governmental signs. Governmental signs, provided that the
content and size of any such sign shall not exceed the
requirements of the law, ordinance or regulation pursuant to
which such sign is erected.
(e) Holiday decorations. Holiday decorations, provided that such
signs shall be displayed for a period of not more than 30
consecutive days nor more than 15 days following the holiday
in connection with which they are displayed.
(f) Home occupation signs. Not more than one sign per
occupancy, not to exceed one square foot in area, identifying a
home occupation. Such sign shall be attached flat against the
dwelling, shall not be lighted and shall contain only the
occupant's name and occupation.
(g) Memorial signs. Memorial signs, provided that such signs are
integral with the building and are made of durable materials
such as bronze, stone or concrete.
(h) On-site informational signs. On-site informational signs,
provided that each such sign is limited to a wall, window or
ground sign of not more than five square feet in area and not
more than eight feet in height above grade.
(i) Political signs. Political signs, provided that such signs are not
more than 32 square feet in area if located in a PCD district or
eight square feet in area if located in a PRD district; are limited
to not more than one per lot; are located entirely on private
property pursuant to the owner's consent; are clearly marked
with the name, address and telephone number of the person
responsible for the removal of such sign; are erected not more
than 45 days prior to such election; and are removed within
seven days following such election.
(j) Private sale signs. Private sale signs, provided that such signs
are no more than five square feet in area; are located entirely
on the premises where such sale is to be conducted or on other
private property pursuant to the owner's consent; are clearly
marked with the name, address and telephone number of the
person responsible for the removal of such sign; are erected
not more than 12 hours in advance of such sale; and are
removed on the day following the conclusion of such sale.
(k) Not more than one "for sale or rent" or "sold or rented by" real
estate sign of not more than eight square feet in area per
residential lot or 50 square feet in area per commercial or
industrial lot. "For sale" signs shall be removed within 24 hours
of the removal of all contingencies in any purchase agreement.
"Sold by" signs may be erected on the property for not more
than 14 contiguous days thereafter. The owner of each such
sign or signs, and any person named on the sign or signs, shall
§ 350-9 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:687
be responsible for removal of the sign or signs. The name and
telephone number of the person responsible for such removal
shall be marked on the sign.
(l) Temporary community signs. Temporary nonilluminated signs
advertising coming events, special sales, contests and
promotional activities sponsored by a nonprofit organization.
The name, address and telephone number of the person
responsible for removal of the sign shall be clearly marked on
the sign.
(m) Warning signs. Warning signs, provided that such signs are
wall or ground signs, are no more than three square feet in
area each and are illuminated only by an indirect source of
light (no internally illuminated signs).
(9) District regulation for planned residential developments. Signs
shall be permitted as follows:
(a) All functional types permitted in Subsection I(8) above.
(b) Residential district entry signs.
(c) Business signs when accessory to a specially permitted
commercial use in a PRD and subject to the district regulations
for a planned commercial development.
(d) Structural types permitted: ground signs and wall signs.
(e) Number of signs permitted will be as allowed in Subsection
I(8), one wall or ground sign when accessory to a specially
permitted commercial use, and a maximum of two residential
district entry signs.
(f) Maximum gross surface area shall be 24 square feet for a wall
or ground sign. No sign shall have more than two faces.
(g) Maximum height of signs shall be six feet for ground signs.
Wall signs shall be no higher than the second floor windowsill
or the roof eave if no windows or openings occur in the facade.
(h) Minimum setback shall be 10 feet from all parcel boundaries or
right-of-way lines.
(i) Indirect or internal illumination with white light is permitted.
No flashing, animated, moving or bare bulb signs are
permitted.
(10) District regulations for planned commercial developments. Signs
shall be permitted as follows in a planned commercial
development:
(a) All functional types of signs listed in this article are permitted
except advertising signs.
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-9
346:688
(b) Structural types permitted include awning or canopy signs,
wall signs, projecting signs, and window signs. Ground signs
may be permitted under special authorization by the City
Council under the recommendation of the Planning Board.
Roof signs, pole signs, and projecting signs are specifically
prohibited in a planned commercial development.
(c) The number of signs permitted shall be limited to one per
occupant per facade facing a public right-of-way, except that a
window sign may be used in concert with either a projecting
sign, wall sign or an awning or canopy sign.
(d) The maximum gross surface area shall be limited to 24 square
feet for a wall sign and 20% of window area for window signs.
When authorized, ground signs shall be limited to 24 square
feet in area. Under special authorization of the City Council
under the recommendation of the Planning Board, wall signs
may be increased in gross surface area to 10% of the facade
area facing a public right-of-way. Such signs may have only
indirect illumination (no internally illuminated signs). Under
special authorization to increase the surface area of a wall
sign, the Planning Board shall approve the maximum mounting
height.
(e) Maximum height of signs permitted:
[1] Awning or canopy signs: 10 feet.
[2] Wall and projecting signs: 15 feet.
[3] Ground signs: six feet.
(f) Minimum setback required for ground signs shall be five feet
from right-of-way lines and 10 feet from any parcel boundary.
(g) Type of illumination permitted shall be limited to indirect and
internal white light for wall signs and ground signs. Neon and
other gas tube illumination is permitted for window signs. No
flashing, animated, moving or bare bulb signs are permitted.
No internally illuminated projecting signs are permitted.
(h) Projecting signs shall be limited to 10 square feet in surface
area and shall be limited in materials to wood, wrought iron,
brass and copper, and plastics. Plastic signs shall be sculpted
or molded into forms related to the commercial purpose.
(i) Where two or more separately owned enterprises are located
in a single building or buildings connected or adjacent which
have been developed as part of a planned commercial
development, a joint identification sign referring to the
businesses may be erected under special authorization of the
City Council and by recommendation of the Planning Board.
§ 350-9 WIRES AND POLES § 350-9
346:689
§ 350-10. Application procedure and approval process.
Such sign may be either a wall sign or a ground sign. The
maximum gross sign area shall not exceed 100 square feet in
size and shall be subject to all other requirements of signs in a
planned commercial development.
J. Open space requirements. Developed and undeveloped open space in a
planned unit development may be one or more sites for use in common
by all of the occupants within the project area or by the residents of the
City as a whole, depending upon dedication of such sites. In all cases,
such open space devoted to recreation improvements and common park
area as delineated and designated by the applicants as common open
space shall not be less than 20% of the gross area of a proposed
planned unit development.
(1) Such common open space may be retained in private ownership or
received in dedication by the City. If the open space remains in
private ownership, arrangements for the operation, maintenance,
improvement and liability of such common property and facilities
must be approved by the Planning Board. No common open space
so designated by the proposal and approved by the Planning Board
may be thereafter developed or disposed of except with the
approval of the Planning Board.
(2) All private recreation areas designated on the development plan
shall be improved and equipped initially by the developer in
accordance with plans approved by the Planning Board and shall be
protected by adequate covenants running with the land or by
covenants or dedications of the same to the City.
(3) Open space and recreation areas shall be designated to primarily
benefit the residents of the planned unit development, and to this
end the applicant shall have as many dwelling units (all types) as is
feasible abut or be near an open space area.
A. General. Whenever any planned unit development is proposed, before
any permits for the erection of permanent buildings in such planned
unit development shall be granted and before any subdivision plat or
any part thereof may be filed in the office of the Ontario County Clerk,
the developer or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure
approval of such planned unit development in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this chapter. These procedures shall supersede
any inconsistent procedures or regulations set forth elsewhere in the
City codes within the Lakefront Zoning District Master Plan or any
future additions/amendments.
B. Application for sketch plan approval.
(1) The applicant shall arrange to meet with the City Planning Board to
discuss his proposals regarding design, mix and density of uses,
§ 350-9 GENEVA CODE § 350-10
346:690
location, layout, procedural requirements and other matters
required by the Planning Board prior to submittal of his PUD
zoning application.
(2) Plan requirements. A concept sketch, setting forth the applicant's
ideas and design intent, shall be provided to the Planning Board.
Such sketch need not include engineering details but must include
topographic information and drainage concepts, general utility
locations and roadway layouts, pertinent natural features, and
general location and character of all land uses, including elements
of common open space.
(3) Planning Board review. The Planning Board shall review the sketch
plan and any related documents and shall render either a favorable
or an unfavorable report in writing to the City Council and to the
applicant. The Planning Board may call upon any public or private
consultants that it feels are necessary to provide a sound review of
the proposal at this stage.
(a) A favorable report shall be based on the following findings
which shall be included as part of the report:
[1] The proposal conforms to the City Master Plan.
[2] The proposal meets the intent and objective of the planned
unit development as expressed in this article.
[3] The proposal meets all the general requirements of this
article.
[4] The proposal is conceptually sound in that it meets a
community need and it conforms to accepted design
principles in the proposed functional roadway system, land
use configuration, open space system, drainage system,
and the like.
[5] There are adequate services and utilities available or
proposed to be made available in the construction of the
development.
(b) An unfavorable report shall state clearly the reasons therefor
and, if appropriate, point out to the applicant what might be
necessary in order to receive a favorable report. The applicant
may, within 10 days after receiving an unfavorable report,
request a review by City Council.
(c) The Chairman of the Planning Board shall certify to the Mayor
in writing when all of the necessary application material has
been presented, and the Planning Board shall submit its report
to the City Council within 60 days of such certification unless
an extension of time is approved by the City Council. If no
§ 350-10 WIRES AND POLES § 350-10
346:691
report has been rendered after 60 days, the applicant may
proceed as if a favorable report were given to the City Council.
(d) Upon favorable report by the Planning Board, the developer
may proceed to prepare his planned unit development (PUD)
zoning application for submission to the City Council.
C. PUD zoning application procedure. In order to provide for an orderly
method of processing a proposed planned unit development zoning
application, four copies of an application shall be provided to the City
Council with the required application fee. The City Council, upon
receipt of the proposal, shall send one copy to the City of Geneva
Planning Board, one copy to the City Engineer and one copy to the
Ontario County Planning Board for review and recommendation. All
zoning matters relating to the proposed planned unit development shall
be determined and established by the City Council after
recommendation by the City Planning Board, City Engineer, and the
County Planning Board.
(1) Documentation. In addition to the concept sketch plan, revised or
updated as required by the Planning Board, the following
documentation shall be presented:
(a) Location and extent of all proposed land use, including open
space, and an area map showing the parcel under
consideration and all properties, subdivisions, streets, zoning
classifications and easements within 500 feet of the parcel.
(b) Documentation that the applicant's particular mix of land uses
meets existing community demands. Documentation may be in
the form of specific studies or reports initiated by the applicant
or in the form of references to existing studies or reports
relevant to the project in question.
(c) All interior streets, roads, easements and their planned public
or private ownership, as well as all points of access and egress
from existing public rights-of-way.
(d) Specific definition of all uses, indicating the number of
residential units and the density of each residential housing
type, as well as the overall project density.
(e) The overall water and sanitary sewer system with proposed
points of attachment to existing systems, and the proposed
stormwater drainage system and its relation to existing
systems.
(f) Description of the manner in which any areas that are not to
become publicly owned are to be maintained, including open
space, streets, lighting and others, according to the proposals.
§ 350-10 GENEVA CODE § 350-10
346:692
(g) If the development is to be phased, a description and graphic
representation of the phasing of the entire proposal in terms of
length of time, type and number of units or activities
completed per phase.
(h) A description of any covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings or structures, including proposed easements for
public utilities.
(i) Documentation as required by the City Council of the
applicant's ability to complete the proposed planned unit
development. The applicant should be aware that at all
subsequent stages, plans must be prepared by professionally
competent site planners.
(j) A draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) and/or
environmental assessment form where required by operation
of the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA). Such
application shall not be considered complete until any DEIS
required shall have been accepted by the lead agency.
(2) Public hearing.
(a) Within 60 days after receipt of a completed PUD zoning
application, the City Council shall hold one or more public
hearings, public notices of which shall have been given in
accordance with § 83 of the General City Law, to determine the
advisability of the proposal. The City Council shall, within 45
days following the conclusion of the hearings and receipt of a
final environmental impact statement, if required, either grant
zoning approval of the planned unit development district,
subject to specified written conditions imposed by the City
Council, or deny zoning of the PUD proposal.
(b) In the event that PUD zoning approval is granted, either of the
proposal as submitted or with modifications and conditions,
the City Council shall, as part of its resolution, specify the
drawings, specifications and performance guaranty that shall
be required to accompany any subsequent application for site
plan/subdivision approval. The applicant (and all owners of
land within the PUD) shall, within 30 days, notify the City
Council of the acceptance of or refusal to accept all specified
conditions. If the developer refuses to accept the conditions
outlined, the City Council shall be deemed to have denied PUD
zoning approval. If the applicant accepts, the proposal shall
stand as granted.
(c) PUD zoning approval shall not qualify a proposal for recording
nor authorize development or the issuance of building permits.
§ 350-10 WIRES AND POLES § 350-10
346:693
D. Application for preliminary site development plan approval. The site
plan review provided for is pursuant to the City Code and Charter
requirements. Preliminary site plan approval is a detailed submission
relatively near to construction. It would be advisable for the applicant
to have several information sessions with the Planning Board during the
preparation of these plans, analogous to pre-preliminary proceedings
encountered in subdivision review, so as to minimize the potential
conflicts that might arise upon the formal submission of application for
preliminary approval.
(1) Application for preliminary site plan approval shall be to the
Planning Board and shall be accompanied by the following
information prepared by a licensed engineer, architect and/or
landscape architect:
(a) An area map showing the applicant's entire holding, that
portion of the applicant's property under consideration, and all
properties, subdivisions, streets, and easements within 500
feet of the applicant's property.
(b) A topographic map showing contour intervals of not more than
two feet of elevation.
(c) A preliminary site plan including the following information:
[1] Title of drawing, including name and address of applicant
and person responsible for preparation of such drawing;
[2] North arrow, scale (i.e., one inch equals 50 feet) and date;
[3] Existing watercourses and drainage swales;
[4] Grading and drainage plan, showing existing and proposed
contours;
[5] Location, proposed use and height of all buildings;
[6] Location, design and construction materials of all parking
and truck loading areas, showing access and egress;
[7] Location of outdoor storage, if any;
[8] Location, design and construction materials of all existing
or proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts,
retaining walls and fences;
[9] Description of the method of securing sewage disposal and
location, design and construction materials of such
facilities;
[10] Description of the method of securing public water and
location, design and construction materials of such
facilities;
§ 350-10 GENEVA CODE § 350-10
346:694
[11] Location of fire and other emergency zones, including the
location of fire hydrants;
[12] Location, design and construction materials of all energy
distribution facilities, including electrical, oil, gas and
solar energy;
[13] Location, size and design and construction materials of all
proposed signs;
[14] Location and proposed development of all buffer areas,
including existing vegetative cover;
[15] Location and design of outdoor lighting facilities;
[16] Designation of the amount of building area proposed for
nonresidential uses, if any;
[17] General planting plan and planting schedule;
[18] Other elements integral to the proposed development as
considered necessary by the Planning Board, including
identification of any state or county permits required for
the project's execution;
[19] A map or tracing overlay showing all soil areas and their
classifications and those areas, if any, with moderate to
high susceptibility to flooding and moderate to high
susceptibility to erosion; the overlay shall also include an
outline and description of existing vegetation for areas
with potential erosion problems; and
[20] A map detailing the proposed stormwater drainage
system, including all structures, pipe by type and sizes,
and all rim and invert elevations.
(2) Planning Board review. The Planning Board's review of a
preliminary site plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following considerations:
(a) Adequacy and arrangements of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation, including intersections, road widths,
channelization structures and traffic controls.
(b) Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation, including separation of pedestrian from vehicular
traffic, walkway structures, control of intersections with
vehicular traffic, and pedestrian convenience.
(c) Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of offstreet
parking and loading.
(d) Location, arrangement, size and design of buildings, lighting
and signs.
§ 350-10 WIRES AND POLES § 350-10
346:695
(e) Relationship of the various uses to one another and their scale.
(f) Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and turf
constituting visual and/or a noise-deterring buffer between
adjacent uses and adjoining lands.
(g) Adequacy and distribution of usable open space for
playgrounds and informal recreation.
(h) Adequacy of stormwater and sanitary waste disposal facilities.
(i) Adequacy of structures, roadways and planting in areas with
moderate to high susceptibility to flooding and ponding and/or
erosion.
(j) Protection of adjacent properties against noise, glare,
unsightliness, or other objectionable features.
(k) Overall environmental impact.
(l) Conformance with other specific charges of the City Council
which may have been stated in the zoning resolution.
(3) Referrals to other agencies. The Planning Board shall refer the
application for preliminary site plan approval to the Ontario County
Planning Agency within 30 days of receipt of application. The
Planning Board may call upon any other public or private
consultants that it feels are necessary to provide a sound review of
the proposal.
(4) Action on preliminary site plan application.
(a) Within 90 days of the receipt of the application for the
preliminary site plan approval, the Planning Board shall act on
it. The Planning Board may schedule a public hearing thereon
within 45 days of receipt of the application. If no decision is
made or public hearing scheduled within said forty-five-day
period, the preliminary site plan shall be considered
conditionally approved. Such time limits may be extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and Planning Board or as may
be required to provide for compliance with the State
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA). The Planning
Board's action shall be in the form of a written statement to the
applicant stating whether or not the preliminary site plan is
conditionally approved. A copy of the appropriate minutes of
the Planning Board shall be a sufficient report.
(b) The Planning Board's statement may include conditions that
certain revisions be incorporated in the final site plan. Such
conditions shall be limited, however, to siting and dimensional
details within general use areas and shall not significantly alter
the PUD plan as it was approved in the previous sketch plan
review proceedings.
§ 350-10 GENEVA CODE § 350-10
346:696
(c) If the preliminary site plan is disapproved, the Planning
Board's statement shall contain the reasons for such findings.
In such a case the Planning Board may recommend further
study of the site plan and resubmission after it has been
revised or redesigned.
(d) No modification of existing stream channels, filling of lands
with a moderate to high susceptibility to flooding, grading or
removal of vegetation in areas with moderate to high
susceptibility to erosion, or excavation for and construction of
site improvements shall begin until the developer has received
preliminary site plan approval. Failure to comply shall be
construed as a violation of this chapter, and, where necessary,
final site plan approval may require the modification or
removal of site improvements.
(5) Request for changes in PUD zoning plan. If in the site plan
development it becomes apparent that certain elements of the PUD
plan, as it has been approved at the sketch plan stage, are
unfeasible and in need of significant modification, the applicant
shall then present his solution to the Planning Board as his
preliminary site plan in accordance with the above procedures. The
Planning Board shall then determine whether or not the modified
plan is still in keeping with the intent of the zoning resolution. If a
negative decision is reached, the site plan shall be considered as
disapproved. The developer may then, if he wishes, produce
another site plan in conformance with the recommended
modifications. If an affirmative decision is reached, the Planning
Board shall notify the City Council stating all of the particulars of
the matter and its reasons for feeling the project should be
continued as modified.
E. Application for final detailed site plan approval.
(1) General. After receiving conditional approval from the Planning
Board on a preliminary site plan, and approval for all necessary
permits and curb cuts from state and county officials, the applicant
may prepare his final detailed site plan and submit it to the
Planning Board for final approval, except that if no more than 12
months have elapsed between the time of the Planning Board's
report on the preliminary site plan and if the Planning Board finds
that conditions have changed significantly in the interim, the
Planning Board may require a resubmission of the preliminary site
plan for further review and possible revision prior to accepting the
proposed final site plan for review.
(2) Conformance. The final detailed site plan shall conform
substantially to the preliminary site plan that has received
preliminary site plan approval. It should incorporate any revisions
or other features that may have been required at the preliminary
§ 350-10 WIRES AND POLES § 350-10
346:697
review. All such compliances shall be clearly indicated by the
applicant on the appropriate submission.
(3) Final site plan contents. In addition to the requirement for
preliminary site plan approval, an application for final site plan
approval shall also contain:
(a) The final site plan at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet. Where
more than one sheet is required to show the entire
development, a key map shall be provided.
(b) The lines of existing and proposed streets and sidewalks
immediately adjoining and within the PUD.
(c) The names of existing and proposed streets.
(d) Typical cross sections of proposed streets and sidewalks.
(e) Profiles of proposed streets at suitable vertical scale showing
finished grades in relation to existing ground elevation.
(f) Layouts of proposed lots, including lot numbers and proposed
numbering system for buildings.
(g) The location and size of any existing and proposed sewers
(stormwater and/or sanitary), water mains, and pipes on the
property or into which any connection is proposed.
(h) Provisions for water supply and sewage disposal and evidence
that such provisions have received approval of the Department
of Health.
(i) Locations of survey monuments.
(j) A complete grading and drainage plan showing all existing and
proposed contours and elevations and the complete storm
drainage plan.
(k) A planting plan indicating locations, varieties, and minimum
sizes of trees to be planted and of existing trees to be
preserved. Existing wooded areas need not be itemized but
should be generally described.
(l) Brief specifications, or reference to City standards, for all
public facilities to be constructed or installed within the PUD.
(4) Documentation. The applicant shall prepare and submit all
documentation consistent with SEQRA guidelines and regulations,
as required by the Planning Board.
(5) Action of the final detailed site plan application. Within 45 days of
the receipt of the application for final site plan approval, the
Planning Board shall render a decision to the applicant. If no
§ 350-10 GENEVA CODE § 350-10
346:698
§ 350-11. Other regulations applicable to planned unit
developments.
decision is made within the time period, the final site plan shall be
considered approved.
(a) Upon approving an application, the Planning Board shall
endorse its approval on a copy of the final site plan and shall
forward it to the Building Inspector, who shall then issue a
building permit to the applicant if the project conforms to all
other applicable requirements.
(b) Upon disapproving an application, the Planning Board shall so
inform the Building Inspector. The Planning Board shall also
notify the applicant and the City Council in writing of its
decision and its reasons for disapproval. A copy of the
appropriate minutes may suffice for this notice.
(6) Staging. If the applicant wishes to stage the PUD development,
then he may submit only those stages he wishes to develop for site
plan approval in accordance with his staging plan. Any plan which
requires more than 24 months to be completed shall be required to
be staged and a staging plan must be developed. It is the intent of
this article that individual stages of the PUD will have an integrity
of use in their own right so that if for any reason the entire PUD
would not be completed, those portions of the PUD already
constructed will be an asset to the community by themselves.
Staging plans must take account of this objective, and developers
proposing individual stages that deviate significantly from the
overall character of the PUD should present convincing evidence
that such a stage is in keeping with this section.
A. Regulation after initial construction and occupancy.
(1) For the purposes of regulating development and use of property
after initial construction and occupancy, any changes other than
use changes shall be processed as a special permit request to the
Planning Board. Properties lying in planned unit development
districts are unique and shall be so considered by the Planning
Board when evaluating these requests, and maintenance of the
intent and function of the planned unit shall be of primary
importance.
(2) All changes in floor area of a principal or accessory structure will
require a building permit.
B. Site plan review. Site plan review under the provisions of this article
shall suffice for Planning Board review of subdivisions under the City
Subdivision Regulations,67 subject to the following conditions:
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Subdivision of Land.
§ 350-10 WIRES AND POLES § 350-11
346:699
(1) The applicant shall prepare sets of subdivision plats suitable for
filing with the office of the Ontario County Clerk in addition to
those drawings required above.
(2) The applicant shall plat the entire development as a subdivision;
however, planned unit developments being developed in stages
may be platted and filed in the same stages.
(3) Final site plan approval under this article shall constitute final plat
approval under the City Subdivision Regulations and provisions of
the City Law.
C. District amendments and modifications.
(1) Modifications. Except as otherwise may be provided by the
Planning Board, all land use activities situated within and in
existence on the effective date of a final site plan approval or
developed in accordance with an approved project plan as provided
herein shall be subject to the issuance of a project plan amendment
by the Planning Board in the event of the following:
(a) Change in or location of enumerated land uses.
(b) Demolition of a principal structure, except where mandated by
the building official in the interest of public safety.
(c) Establishment of new streets or other public/common areas.
(d) Any changes which may otherwise be regulated by the
adoption of controls made specifically applicable to such
district, either at its inception or subsequently.
(2) District amendments and miscellaneous modifications. Except as
otherwise provided, any modification not addressed above shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board prior to the issuance
of permits for construction.
§ 350-11 GENEVA CODE § 350-11
346:700
ARTICLE IV
Appearance Code for Lakefront Zoning District
[Added 5-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-11]
§ 350-12. Statement of intent and objectives.
§ 350-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES — Facilities incidental to the principal
structures on a site, including garages and carports, storage facilities,
A. Intent.
(1) The purpose of this code and these criteria is to establish a
checklist of those items that affect the physical aspect of the
Lakefront District's environment. Pertinent to appearance is the
design of the site, buildings and structures, planting, signs, street
hardware, and miscellaneous other objects that are observed by
the public.
(2) These criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation,
or variety but rather to assist in focusing on design principles
which can result in creative solutions that will develop a
satisfactory visual appearance within the City, preserve taxable
values, and promote public health, safety, and welfare.
B. Objectives. To implement the intent of this code, the following
objectives must be considered:
(1) To establish a positive and compatible relationship with the
character of the physical environment of downtown Geneva.
(2) To promote a strong sense of internal unity and organizational
coherency within the Lakefront District site planning and
architectural details.
(3) To capitalize upon and celebrate the relationship of new
development to the lake, particularly in terms of visual connections
and access to the water's edge.
(4) To enhance the quality of experience of public spaces in the
Lakefront District through attention to the visual character of new
development adjacent to public ways.
C. Related ordinances. This code is intended to augment and supplement
Article III, Lakefront District Planned Unit Development. The criteria of
this code are applicable to the site plan review process mandated in
that article and, in particular, to § 350-9I, which pertains to sign
controls.
§ 350-12 WIRES AND POLES § 350-13
346:701
swimming pools and other recreation improvements and satellite signal
receiving equipment.
APPEARANCE — The outward visible aspect.
APPROPRIATE — Sympathetic, or fitting, to the context of the site and the
whole community.
APPURTENANCES — The visible, functional objects accessory to and part
of buildings.
ARCHITECTURAL CONCEPT — The basic aesthetic idea of a building,
or group of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape
development, that produces the architectural character.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — A prominent or significant part or element
of a building, structure, or site.
ARCHITECTURAL STYLE — The characteristic form and detail, as of
buildings of a particular historic period, or school of architectural thought.
ATTRACTIVE — Having qualities that arouse interest and pleasure in the
observer.
BERM — A raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the
aesthetic character.
CITY — The City of Geneva.
CODE — The Appearance Code of the Lakefront District Planned Unit
Development Ordinance.
COHESIVENESS — Unity of composition between design elements of a
building or a group of buildings and the landscape development.
COMPATIBILITY — Harmony in the appearance of two or more external
design features in the same vicinity.
CONSERVATION — The protection and care that prevent destruction or
deterioration of historical or otherwise significant structures, buildings, or
natural resources.
EXTERIOR BUILDING COMPONENT — An essential and visible part of the
exterior of a building.
EXTERNAL DESIGN FEATURE — The general arrangement of any portion
of a building, sign, landscaping, or structure and including the kind, color,
and texture of the materials of such portion, and the types of roof, windows,
doors, lights, attached or ground signs, or other fixtures appurtenant to
such portions as will be open to public view from any street, place or way.
GRAPHIC ELEMENT — A letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia, or
other device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof.
HARMONY — A quality that represents an appropriate and congruent
arrangement of parts, as in an arrangement of varied architectural and
landscape elements.
§ 350-13 GENEVA CODE § 350-13
346:702
LANDSCAPE — Plant materials, topography, and other natural physical
elements combined in relation to one another and to man-made structures.
LOGIC OF DESIGN — Accepted principles and criteria of validity in the
solution of the problem of design.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT — Equipment, devices, and accessories, the
use of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, and similar purposes.
PLANT MATERIALS — Trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass,
perennials, annuals, and bulbs.
PROPORTION — Balanced relationship of parts of a building, landscape,
structures, or buildings to each other and to the whole.
SCALE — Proportional relationship of the size of parts to one another and
to the human figure.
SHRUB — A multi-stemmed woody plant other than a tree.
SIGHT BREAK — A structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas
and create visual interest in a site development.
STREET FURNITURE — Man-made objects other than buildings that are
part of the streetscape. Examples are lampposts, utility poles, traffic lights,
traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes,
and fire hydrants.
STREETSCAPE — The scene as may be observed along a public street or
way composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings,
paving, planting, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground.
UTILITARIAN STRUCTURE — A structure or enclosure relating to
mechanical or electrical services to a building or development.
UTILITY HARDWARE — Devices such as poles, crossarms, transformers and
vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo boxes that
are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or a
project.
UTILITY SERVICE — Any device, including wire, pipe, and conduit, which
carries gas, water, electricity, oil, and communications into a building or
development.
§ 350-14. Site planning and design.
A. Relationship of buildings to sites.
(1) The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition from
buildings to the lake and to the streetscape and to provide for
adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and parking areas.
§ 350-13 WIRES AND POLES § 350-14
346:703
(2) Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning
restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship
between buildings.
(3) Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building
wall extensions, plantings, berms, or other innovative means to
minimize views from public walkways, streets, drives and park
areas.
(4) Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning
district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible
with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings.
(5) Buildings should be sited to capitalize on views of the lake while at
the same time preserving visual access to the lake from Routes 5
and 20 as much as practicable.
(6) Building siting should consider building massing with respect to
the existing skyline of the City as viewed from the lake and from the
opposite shore.
(7) Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated
by exterior alterations, shall be underground.
B. Relationship of buildings and site to adjoining area.
(1) Adjacent buildings of significantly different architectural styles
should be made compatible by such means as screens, sight breaks,
and plant materials.
(2) Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties should be
provided.
(3) Harmony in texture, lines, and masses is required. Monotonous
repetition of forms and materials shall be avoided.
C. Landscape and site treatment. Landscape elements included in these
criteria consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms,
rock groupings, water patterns, and all visible construction except
buildings and utilitarian structures.
(1) Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to
beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and
developed. Modification to topography is encouraged where it
contributes to attractive spatial and architectural composition.
(2) Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas
shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and,
where seating is provided, for sitting.
(3) Landscape planting shall be provided to enhance architectural
features, strengthen vistas and important axes, and provide shade.
Spectacular effects shall be reserved for special focal points.
§ 350-14 GENEVA CODE § 350-14
346:704
(4) Unity of site design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant
varieties and forms, paving materials, and site furniture, and by
correlation with adjacent developments.
(5) Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture,
and color and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to
the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design,
and of well-grown form shall be used.
(6) In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian
or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs or
other devices.
(7) Interior parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with
landscaped spaces containing trees or tree groupings for shade and
to add visual interest, except the public right-of-way of Routes 5
and 20.
(8) Where building sites limit planting space, the placement of trees in
walkways or paved areas is encouraged.
(9) Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be
unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting,
or combinations of these. Screening shall be equally effective in
winter and summer.
(10) In areas where general planting will not prosper, such as the north
side of buildings, other materials such as fences, walls, and pavings
of wood, brick, stone, gravel, and cobbles shall be used. Carefully
selected plants shall be combined with such materials where
possible.
(11) Exterior lighting shall enhance the building design and relate in
form, height, and style to lighting in adjacent public spaces.
Building-mounted fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible
with the building and shall be directed to minimize glare when
viewed from adjacent areas. Illumination and lamping standards
are as follows:
(a) Pedestrian walkways and sitting areas:
[1] Maximum height: 14 feet.
[2] Average maintained illumination: 1.2 footcandles.
[3] Lamping: High-pressure sodium.
(b) Parking lots:
[1] Maximum height: 30 feet.
[2] Average maintained illumination: 1.0 footcandle.
[3] Lamping: High-pressure sodium.
§ 350-14 WIRES AND POLES § 350-14
346:705
(c) Building entrances:
[1] Maximum height: varies.
[2] Average maintained illumination: 5.0 footcandles.
[3] Lamping: Incandescent preferred.
(12) Pedestrian pavements shall be of durable quality and shall relate to
the general palette of building materials in the downtown area. In
planned commercial developments, a minimum of 20% of the total
area of pedestrian pavements used in entry courts and sitting areas
shall be devoted to brick or other acceptable unit masonry
materials, preferably used in a decorative or focal manner. Asphalt
pedestrian pavements shall not be constructed in planned
commercial or planned residential developments.
(13) Site furniture in the form of benches, litter containers, bollards,
and other pedestrian-scale features shall be selected on the basis of
stylistic relationship to furniture used in adjacent public spaces and
development parcels and in the downtown area. Generally,
furniture which incorporates a combination of cast iron and
hardwood materials is preferred.
D. Building design.
(1) Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance
of a project by the Planning Board and other advisory authorities
shall be based on the quality of its design, relationship to
surroundings, and consistency with the character of downtown.
(2) Buildings shall be of such scale and form so as to be in harmonious
conformance with permanent neighboring development within the
Lakefront District.
(3) Materials required.
(a) Materials shall have visually interesting architectural
character and shall be selected for harmony with adjoining
buildings.
(b) Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of
buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings
shall have similar materials, or those that are visually
harmonious in color and texture, used for all building walls and
other exterior building components wholly or partly visible
from public ways.
(c) Materials shall be of durable quality and shall be detailed so as
to provide long-term service.
§ 350-14 GENEVA CODE § 350-14
346:706
(d) In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view,
the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves
and harmonious with their surroundings.
(e) Materials shall be of low reflective or specular quality.
(f) In planned commercial developments, brick veneer and
masonry materials are preferred.
(g) In planned residential developments, a mixture of brick or
masonry materials and wood is preferred.
(h) Exposed concrete block, split-faced block, aluminum or vinyl
siding should be limited. No exposed texture "111" plywood is
permitted.
(4) Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets,
shall have proportions and detailing consistent with adjacent
buildings and with the general visual themes in the downtown area.
(5) Colors shall be harmonious with the lakefront environment and
shall use only compatible accents. Darker color values in earthtone
neutrals are preferred for all extensive color fields. It is preferred
that accents be in the same hue range as the general building color
but of lighter value or increased intensity.
(6) Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on the roof,
ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with
materials harmonious with the building, or it shall be so located as
not to be visible from any public ways.
(7) Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept.
Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be
harmonious with building design.
(8) Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and
exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways,
using materials as stated in criteria for equipment screening.
(9) Monotony of design in single- or multiple-building projects should
be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to
provide visual interest. In multiple-building projects, variable siting
of individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous
appearance.
E. Signs. This section is intended to provide general design guidelines for
signage in addition to the requirements of the sections of Article III,
Lakefront District Planned Unit Development, dealing with sign
controls.
(1) Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in
its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
§ 350-14 WIRES AND POLES § 350-14
346:707
(2) Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of
the building and site to which it principally relates.
(3) The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained
and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally
relates.
(4) The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be
composed in proportion to the area of the sign face.
(5) Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and
shall not compete for attention.
(6) Identification signs and corporation logos shall conform to the
criteria for all other signs.
F. Accessory structures.
(1) Accessory structures shall be designed to be part of the
architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be
compatible with buildings, scale shall be appropriate, and colors
shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings.
(2) Lighting in connection with accessory structures shall meet the
criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings and signs.
G. Maintenance; planning and design factors.
(1) Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of
maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with
the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be
conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep.
(2) Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and
wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall
be incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect,
damage, and abuse.
(3) Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures, and
control of dirt and refuse, should be included in the design.
Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves,
trash, dirt, and rubbish should be avoided.
(4) All driveways, parking lots, and walkways shall be designed to
facilitate snow removal. Provisions should be made for on-site snow
storage.
H. Submittal requirements.
(1) The requirements cited below are intended to provide more detail
to the general requirements for preliminary site plan submission in
Article III, Lakefront District Planned Unit Development.
§ 350-14 GENEVA CODE § 350-14
346:708
(2) All exhibits required for the permanent review file must be able to
be reduced to legal size (8 1/2 inches by 14 inches) by folding or
photo reduction. However, larger mounting boards, material
samples, or other exhibits not meeting this criteria may be used for
presentations to the Planning Board. An adequate number of color
photographs are required to illustrate the site, including buildings
and other existing features. Photos may also be used to illustrate
installations on other sites that are similar to the applicant's
proposal.
(a) Site plan package. Per Article III, Lakefront District Planned
Unit Development.
(b) Architectural drawings. Complete color-rendered elevations
drawn to scale of all proposed construction and related
elevations of any existing structures are required. A minimum
of two section elevations through the major site features and
one perspective sketch are required with the intent of
demonstrating spatial and scale relationships. Site details
should be included to the extent practicable to the scale of the
drawing.
(c) Material samples. Material samples and product literature are
required for all major exposed materials and site features.
(d) Sign submission. The location, dimensional setbacks, and
functional types of all signs shall be shown on the site plans. In
addition, the following submission requirements apply
according to sign type:
[1] Ground signs. Provide an elevation and detailed drawings
of each face of the proposed sign showing the size and
layout of all letters and graphics; sign and frame materials
and color; foundation and planter box details, as
appropriate; lighting details; and an electrical wiring
diagram.
[2] Wall signs and awning or canopy signs. Provide an
elevation and detailed drawings as for ground signs,
substituting wall anchorage details for foundation design,
and including an elevation drawn to scale of the entire
building wall to which the sign is to be fixed, correctly
locating the sign. If the facade is not continuous, depict
adjoining buildings and any relevant signs.
[3] Window signs. Provide an elevation drawn to scale of the
entire building wall in which the window is situated,
including any other awning or canopy signs or wall signs.
(e) Lighting submissions. A scaled drawing is required of all
proposed lighting standards and fixtures showing all size
specifications; information on lighting intensity (number of
§ 350-14 WIRES AND POLES § 350-14
346:709
watts, isofootcandle diagram, etc.); materials and colors; and
ground or wall anchorage details.
§ 350-14 GENEVA CODE § 350-14
346:710
ARTICLE V
Area and Bulk Regulations; Density Control
§ 350-15. Purpose.
In order to provide adequate open spaces for access of light and circulation
of air, to facilitate the prevention and fighting of fires, to prevent undue
concentration of population, and to lessen congestion in streets, no building
or premises shall be erected, altered or used except in accordance with the
standards set forth in this article.
§ 350-16. Density Control Schedule.
The following schedule titled "Schedule III" sets forth the density control
regulations that shall apply to all construction and uses in the City.68
§ 350-17. Corner lots.
Wherever a side or rear yard is adjacent to a street, the standards for front
yards shall apply.
§ 350-18. Projections into required yards.
§ 350-19. Height exceptions. [Amended 1-2-1980 by Ord. No. 80-1]
District building height regulations shall not apply to commercial
broadcasting, radio, citizen band or television antennas, spires or cupolas,
chimneys, elevator or stair bulkheads, parapets or railings or any similar
structures, provided that such structures in their aggregate coverage
occupy no more than 10% of the roof area of the building. Height exceptions
not covered by this section to be referred to the Planning Board for
approval.
A. The following projections into required yards may be permitted:
(1) Open fire escape: four feet into side or rear yards.
(2) Awnings or movable canopies: six feet into any yard.
(3) Cornices, eaves and other similar architectural features: three feet
into any yard.
B. Any open or enclosed porch or carport shall be considered a part of the
building in the determination of the size of the required yard or lot
coverage. Nonroofed paved terraces shall not be considered a part of
the building.
C. Accessory uses not enclosed in a building may be located in a rear yard
in accordance with § 350-24D.
68.Editor's Note: Schedule III is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 350-15 WIRES AND POLES § 350-20
346:711
§ 350-20. Compliance with minimum average residential density.
§ 350-21. Side yards for semidetached houses or townhouses.
Side yards for semidetached houses or townhouses shall be required at the
ends of the total structure only.
§ 350-22. Distance between principal buildings on same lot.
No detached principal building shall be closer to any other principal
building on the same lot than the average heights of said buildings.
§ 350-23. Handicapped ramps. [Added 5-5-1993 by Ord. No. 4-93]
Handicapped ramps shall be exempt from setback requirements. However,
handicapped ramps shall not encroach on any public way or adjoining lot.
In no event shall handicapped ramps be constructed in such a manner as to
create a hazard to the general public.
A. In all districts where residences are permitted, a lot held in single
ownership may be improved for residential use according to the
minimum lot size per family and bulk regulations for each district as set
forth in the Density Control Schedule, provided that there shall be no
more than one principal building and use on each lot. If two or more
principal residential structures are located on the same lot, the
minimum average density requirement must be complied with. No more
than one single-family detached house shall be permitted on a lot.
B. A residential lot of required or larger than required size as set forth in
this chapter shall not be reduced in size for transfer of ownership if
such lot so subdivided will form two or more lots which shall not be in
compliance with the requirements for the minimum average residential
density for the district in which such lot or lots are situated.
§ 350-20 GENEVA CODE § 350-23
346:712
ARTICLE VI
Supplementary Regulations
§ 350-24. General provisions. [Amended effective 8-4-1971 by Ord.
No. 71-15; 1-3-1973 by Ord No. 73-1; 2-6-1974 by Ord. No. 74-4;
7-3-1974 by Ord. No. 74-18; 7-3-1974 by Ord. No. 74-19; 12-3-1980
by Ord. No. 80-29; 6-2-1993 by Ord. No. 5-93]
A. Excavations.
(1) Any proposed excavation adversely affecting natural drainage or
structural safety of adjoining buildings or lands shall be prohibited.
Excavations shall not create any noxious or injurious substance or
condition or cause public hazard.
(2) In any district, excavation relating to the construction, on the same
lot, of a building or structure for which a building permit has been
issued shall be permitted. In the event that construction of a
building or structure is stopped prior to completion and the
building permit is allowed to expire, the premises shall immediately
be cleared of any rubbish or building materials, and any excavation
with a depth greater than two feet below existing grade shall
immediately be filled in and the topsoil replaced, or all such
excavations shall be entirely surrounded by a substantial fence at
least six feet high that will effectively block access to the area in
which the excavation is located.
B. Activity standards. In any district, the following standards for activities
shall apply:
(1) No offensive or objectionable vibration, odor, or glare shall be
noticeable at or beyond the property line.
(2) No activity shall create a physical hazard by reason of fire,
explosion, radiation, or other such cause to persons or property in
the same or adjacent district.
(3) There shall be no discharge of any liquid or solid waste into any
stream or body of water or any public or private disposal system or
into the ground of any materials or nature that may contaminate
any water supply, including groundwater supply.
(4) There shall be no storage of any material either indoors or outdoors
in such a manner that it facilitates the breeding of vermin or
endangers health in any way.
(5) The emission of smoke, fly ash, or dust which can cause damage to
the health of person, animals, or plant life or to other forms of
property shall be prohibited.
C. Planned new streets. After the planned right-of-way line for future
streets, for future extensions of existing streets, or for future street
§ 350-24 WIRES AND POLES § 350-24
346:713
widening is established on the Official Map, if any, buildings and
structures shall be set back from such line as though it were a street
line.
D. Accessory buildings and uses.
(1) Accessory buildings not attached to principal buildings shall be
located no closer to the principal building than 12 feet or a distance
equal to the height of each accessory building, whichever is
greater. Such accessory buildings shall be located no closer than
four feet to any side or rear property line.
(2) A detached garage shall be deemed to be an accessory building;
provided, however, that a detached garage shall be located no
closer than six feet to any side or rear property line.
(3) Accessory uses not enclosed in a building, including swimming
pools and tennis courts, shall be located no closer than 10 feet to
any rear or side property line, except that no such use shall be
constructed in the front yard of any lot. Such uses shall also
conform to any regulations provided elsewhere in this chapter for
said uses.
E. Fences, hedges and walls.
(1) In any residence district, fences, hedges and walls up to four feet in
height shall be permitted anywhere on a lot except where corner
clearances are required for traffic safety, as provided in Subsection
E(4) hereinbelow; provided, however, that a fence, hedge or wall up
to six feet in height shall be permitted on the rear property line and
on the side property line from the rear line of the principal building
to the real property line.
(2) In any business or industrial district there shall be no height
restriction on fences, hedges or walls except as provided in
Subsection E(4) hereinbelow, and except that on a boundary line
between a business or industrial district and a residence district
fences, hedges or walls shall be limited to eight feet in height, and,
except where corner clearances are required by Subsection E(4)
hereinbelow, no fence, hedge or wall in excess of three feet in
height shall be constructed, maintained or permitted within 30 feet
of the curbline.
(3) In any industrial district, property that is adjacent to a residential
or business district shall be provided, along such property lines,
with a wall, fence, compact evergreen hedge or a landscaped strip
of trees and shrubs so designed as to form a visual screen not less
than six feet high at the time of planting. Except for landscaped
areas and parking areas, a use which is not conducted within a
completely enclosed building shall be screened by a solid masonry
wall, chain link fence covered with an evergreen vine, or compact
evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height. Where a front yard
§ 350-24 GENEVA CODE § 350-24
346:714
§ 350-25. Off-street parking and loading regulations. [Amended
3-7-1973 by Ord. No. 4-1973; 2-6-1974 by Ord. No. 2-1974; 5-5-1982
by Ord. No. 21-1982; 6-3-1992 by Ord. No. 8-1992; 12-2-1992 by
Ord. No. 13-1992; 11-3-1993 by Ord. No. 17-1993; 2-18-1997 by
Ord. No. 3-1997; 9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 11-1998; 2-3-1999 by Ord.
No. 2-1999]
adjoins a street, the wall, fence, or hedge shall be located no closer
to the street than the depth of the required yard.
(4) For the purpose of minimizing traffic hazards at street
intersections, no fence, hedge, wall or other obstruction of a height
greater than 2 1/2 feet above the top of the adjacent curb or street
center-line elevation shall be permitted to be planted, placed or
maintained on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by
the intersection of the pavement lines, or their projection when
corners are rounded, and a straight line joining the pavement lines
at points 50 feet distant from their point of intersection.
(5) No gate shall be placed, erected or maintained which shall swing
outward over any sidewalk within the City.
(6) No fence or wall shall be erected or maintained which shall be
equipped with or have barbed wire spikes or any similar device
within seven feet of the ground level or which shall have any
electric charge sufficient to cause shock.
(7) In any business district, the owners of property that is adjacent to a
residential district shall cause the property line adjacent to such a
residential district to be properly landscaped so as to reasonably
protect the residential character of such district. All such
landscaping must be approved by the Planning Board of the City of
Geneva.
F. Commercial parking lots. Commercial parking lots shall comply with
the provisions of § 350-25.
G. Residential storage facility. In any residential district the utilization of
any residence, apartment building or townhouse exclusively for storage
or warehouse purposes only is prohibited.
A. Required off-street automobile parking spaces. The minimum
cumulative number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined by
the amount of dwelling units, bedrooms, floor area, members,
equipment, employees and/or seats contained in such new buildings or
structures, or added by alteration of existing buildings or structures,
and such minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be
maintained by the owners of such buildings or structures, as follows:
§ 350-24 WIRES AND POLES § 350-25
346:715
Permitted Uses Minimum Spaces Required
Detached single-family residential
dwellings
1 per dwelling unit
Two-family residential dwellings 1 per dwelling unit
Multiple-family residential
dwellings
1 per dwelling unit
Boardinghouses 1 per bedroom
Funeral homes 1 per 5 seats of seating capacity
Churches, synagogues or other
places of worship, including parish
houses and convents
1 per 6 seats of seating capacity
Public utility services for the
immediate vicinity, including only
minor structures totaling not more
than 500 square feet in area
0
Garages no more than 500 feet in
area
0
Home occupations as defined in
§ 350-2
1 per employee
Storage buildings or sheds not
more than 200 square feet in area
0
Swimming pools, including decks
attached thereto
0
Cultural facilities, such as
libraries, art galleries and
museums
1 per 800 square feet of floor
area
Bed-and-breakfasts 1 per guest room, plus 1
Day-care centers 1 per employee (maximum shift),
plus 1 per 10 children
Garages more than 500 feet in
area, unless accessory to a
building consisting of 3 or more
dwelling units, except that all
garages over 1,000 feet in area
shall require a special use permit
To be determined as a condition
of the special use permit
Lodges and fraternal organizations 1 per 6 seats of seating capacity
Public, private and not-for- profit
recreational and educational
facilities
1 per employee (maximum shift),
plus 1 per 10 children or other
enrollees
Banks 1 per 400 square feet of floor
area
§ 350-25 GENEVA CODE § 350-25
346:716
Permitted Uses Minimum Spaces Required
Banks, drive-in 4 (in a waiting line) per teller
window or ATM
Bowling alleys 3 per lane
Dance halls 1 per 6 occupants, based on
posted permitted capacity
Convenience stores 1 per 300 square feet of floor
area
Government and public facilities 1 per 400 square feet of floor
area
Health-care services and clinics,
ambulatory
1 per 400 square feet of floor
area
Newspaper offices, including
printing operations accessory
thereto
1 per 400 square feet of floor
area
Offices, single-use, either public,
general or professional
1 per 400 square feet of floor
area
Personal services, such as beauty
and barber shops, seamstresses,
tailors, shoe repair, florists and
laundromats and dry cleaners
1 per 300 square feet of floor
area
Printing shops not more than 7,000
square feet in area
1 per 1,000 square feet of floor
area
Restaurants 1 per 6 occupants, based on
posted permitted capacity
Retail businesses or services,
single-use
1 per 300 square feet of floor
area
Retail businesses or services more
than 5,000 square feet in area
1 per 400 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Skating rinks 1 per 250 square feet of floor
area
Theaters or concert halls 1 per 6 seats of seating capacity
Apartments, either one-bedroom or
studio, except on the ground floor
1 per dwelling unit
Automobile storage in an enclosed
facility
1 per 2,000 square feet
Motor vehicle salesrooms and/or
repair shops
1 per service bay (which bay shall
not count as a space), plus 1 per
2,000 square feet, plus 1 per
employee (maximum shift)
§ 350-25 WIRES AND POLES § 350-25
346:717
Permitted Uses Minimum Spaces Required
Bars or nightclubs 1 per 6 occupants, based on
posted permitted capacity
Hotels 1 per guest room
Post offices 1 per 300 square feet of floor
area
Shopping centers 1 per 300 square feet of floor
area, except places of public
assembly shall be calculated at a
rate of 1 per 6 occupants, based
on posted permitted capacity
Veterinary offices and animal
hospitals, including kennel
(boarding) facilities
1 per 500 square feet, plus 1 per
employee (maximum shift)
Warehousing and distribution 1 per 10,000 square feet, plus 1
per employee (maximum shift)
Wholesale businesses 1 per 10,000 square feet, plus 1
per employee (maximum shift)
Light industrial uses, such as light
assembly, research and
development facilities and
warehousing without distribution,
occupying no more than 30,000
square feet, as the same are
further defined in § 350-2
1 per 5,000 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Bus stations Motor vehicle service
stations
1 per 300 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift) 1 per fuel pump,
plus 1 per employee (maximum
shift)
Agricultural uses, such as farms,
greenhouses, nurseries and
gardens
1 per 5,000 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Gymnasiums and related athletic
facilities
1 per 200 square feet of floor
area, or 1 per 6 seats of capacity,
whichever is less
Hospitals 1 per 4 beds, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Institutions of higher learning
(where other use descriptions do
not apply)
1 per 200 square feet of floor
area, or 1 per 6 seats of seating
capacity, whichever is greater
Nursing homes 1 per 4 beds, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
§ 350-25 GENEVA CODE § 350-25
346:718
Permitted Uses Minimum Spaces Required
Research and development
facilities
1 per 1,000 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Residential dwellings/dormitories 1 per dwelling unit or, in
dormitories, 1 per bedroom
Printing shops 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Railroad facilities, including
tracks, terminals, yards and
equipment-servicing facilities
1 per 5,000 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Open (outdoor) storage areas
accessory to a use on the same lot
1 per employee (maximum shift)
Manufacturing facilities, including
the processing, manufacture,
fabrication, extraction, assembly,
packaging, warehousing and/or
other handling of materials,
components and/or products from
previously manufactured materials
and/or raw materials, in
compliance with §§ 350-24B and
350-26, excluding prohibited
industrial uses listed in § 350-7,
not more than 30,000 square feet
in area
1 per 5,000 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Recycling centers and stations 1 per 5,000 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Transportation and trucking
facilities
1 per 5,000 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 per employee
(maximum shift)
Adult use establishments 1 per 200 square feet of floor
area, or 1 per 6 occupants, based
on posted permitted capacity,
whichever is greater
B. Additional requirements.
(1) For uses not listed in Subsection A above, requirements shall be as
established by the Planning Board, if Planning Board review is
required, or otherwise by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) For uses within the B2 Business District and the boundaries of the
Business Improvement District, spaces in municipal parking lots,
§ 350-25 WIRES AND POLES § 350-25
346:719
where provided, may be credited toward 100% of the parking and
truck loading requirements of any permitted use, provided that:
(a) In the case of new construction, the size of the area of the use
shall be less 5,000 square feet.
(b) In the case of rehabilitation or redevelopment of an existing
building, the size of the area of the use shall be less than
10,000 square feet.
(c) For uses over the thresholds established in Subsection B(2)(a)
and (b) above, as an alternative to providing the required
parking and truck loading spaces, a development fee equal to
1/2 of 1% of the total project cost may be contributed by the
developer to a dedicated fund for the purpose of acquiring and
constructing additional municipal parking. Said contribution
shall be subject to the approval of the City Council, which may
in its discretion accept such a contribution but shall not be
required to do so.
(3) Required off-street automobile parking spaces for nonpermitted
uses requiring a variance from this chapter will be established by
the Zoning Board of Appeals as a condition of any variance granted.
(4) Calculation of required spaces. In the case of a combination of
uses, the total requirements for off-street auto parking spaces shall
be the sum of the requirements for the various uses, unless it can
be proven that staggered hours of use and/or shift employment
would permit modification. Whenever a major fraction of a space is
required, a full space shall be provided.
C. Dimensions of off-street automobile parking spaces. Off-street
automobile parking spaces shall be no smaller than nine feet by 18 feet.
Every such space shall have direct and usable driveway access to a
street or alley with minimum maneuver area between spaces as follows:
(1) Parallel curb parking: five feet end to end, with an aisle width of 12
feet for one-directional flow and an aisle width of 24 feet for twodirectional
flow.
(2) Thirty-degree parking: an aisle width of 13 feet for one-directional
flow and an aisle width of 26 feet for two-directional flow.
(3) Forty-five-degree parking: an aisle width of 16 feet for onedirectional
flow and an aisle width of 26 feet for two-directional
flow.
(4) Sixty-degree parking: an aisle width of 21 feet for one-directional
flow and an aisle width of 26 feet for two-directional flow.
(5) Perpendicular parking: an aisle width of 26 feet for one-directional
and two-directional flow.
§ 350-25 GENEVA CODE § 350-25
346:720
D. Location of required spaces.
(1) In any residential district, required automobile parking spaces
shall be provided on a buildable portion (taking into account the
required setbacks) of the same lot or an immediately adjacent lot.
(2) In all other districts, such spaces shall be provided on the same lot
or not more than 500 feet therefrom.
(3) No open or enclosed parking area shall encroach on any required
front yard or required open areas. Open parking may encroach on a
required side or rear yard to within three feet of a property line.
(4) No entrance and exit drives connecting the parking area and the
street shall be permitted within 25 feet of the intersection of two
public rights-of-way.
(5) In all multiple-residential, commercial and industrial
developments, entrance/exit drives connecting a parking area to a
street, and private roads connecting any part of a multipleresidential,
commercial or industrial development to a street, must
be at least 26 feet wide. All drives and roads must be paved.
E. Required off-street truck loading areas.
(1) Off-street truck loading areas shall be required as follows:
(a) For permitted general uses, one berth shall be required for
10,000 square feet to 25,000 square feet of floor area, and one
additional berth for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor
area, unless it can be proven that truck deliveries shall not
exceed one vehicle per day.
(b) For funeral homes, one berth for each chapel.
(c) For hotels, motels and vacation resorts, one berth for floor area
in excess of 10,000 square feet.
(d) For retail and commercial uses, one berth for 10,000 square
feet to 25,000 square feet of floor area, and one additional
berth for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area.
(e) For manufacturing and permitted industrial uses, one berth for
the first 10,000 square feet of floor area, and one additional
berth for each additional 40,000 square feet of floor area.
(2) Dimensions for off-street loading berths. Each required loading
berth shall have the following minimum dimensions: 35 feet long,
12 feet wide and 14 feet high, except that berths for funeral homes
may be 20 feet long, 10 feet wide and eight feet high.
(3) Location of required berths. All off-street loading areas shall be
located on the same lot as the use for which they are permitted or
required. Open off-street loading areas shall not encroach on any
§ 350-25 WIRES AND POLES § 350-25
346:721
required front or side yard, accessway or off-street parking area,
except that in business districts off-street parking areas, where
they exist, may be used for loading and unloading, provided that
such spaces shall not be so used for more than three hours during
the daily period that the establishment is open for business. Within
the F1 Industrial District (Geneva Industrial Park), off-street
loading areas shall be permitted to be located within the required
front or side yard.
F. Construction and landscaping of parking areas.
(1) Parking areas shall be paved with an all-weather surface of asphalt
or concrete. The individual spaces shall be visibly marked with
paint or other durable material no less than four inches in width.
(2) At least 8% of the area of the lot usable for a parking area [the lot
area, minus the square footage taken by the required setbacks and
minus the area taken by the building(s) footprint, times .08] shall
be devoted to landscaping with lawn, trees, shrubs or other plant
materials. All loading berths and parking areas of three or more
spaces that abut or are directly across the street from a residential
property or any property within a residential district, and any
parking areas of more than 20 cars, shall be properly screened by
any one of the following:
(a) A solid masonry wall a minimum of four feet high, where the
same is not otherwise prohibited by § 350-24 of this chapter.
(b) A visually opaque fence (in no case of chain link material) a
minimum of four feet high, where the same is not otherwise
prohibited by § 350-24 of this chapter.
(c) A continuous and compact evergreen hedge, or landscaped
strip of evergreen trees and shrubs, so designed as to form a
continuous visual screen when viewed from the adjoining
property at any time of the year. Said screen shall be a
minimum of four feet high at the time of planting and shall
consist of plants no more than three feet apart, on center.
(d) Some combination of visual screening as provided in
Subsection F(2)(a), (b) and (c) above. In no case shall a berm of
any dimension or height be used to satisfy the maximum height
requirements.
(3) All parking areas and landscaping shall be properly maintained
thereafter in a sightly and well-kept condition.
(4) All of the above requirements shall be met prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy and commencement of the use, or, in the
event that weather or other circumstance makes this impossible,
the property owner shall post a bond or letter of credit, in form
acceptable to the City Attorney, for an amount sufficient to ensure
§ 350-25 GENEVA CODE § 350-25
346:722
§ 350-26. Industrial district regulations.
The enforcement officer shall not issue a permit for the development of
a parcel of land for industrial use until after a public notice and hearing
before and approval by the Planning Board, and every industrial
development shall be subject to the following conditions:
completion of the work, prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and commencement of the use. No part of said bond or
letter of credit shall be refunded until such time as all work has
been completed.
A. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) Any use permitted by right in the F and F1 Industrial Districts.
(b) Any use permitted by special permit in the F and F1 Industrial
Districts subject to the favorable approval thereof by the Board
of Appeals. [Amended 5-6-1981 by Ord. No. 10-1981]
(2) Prohibited uses:
(a) Residential uses, except dwellings of caretakers. Any and all
residential uses made and permitted prior to the establishment
of such F or F1 Industrial District in accordance with this
section shall be allowed to continue as so permitted
heretobefore. [Amended 5-6-1981 by Ord. No. 12-1981]
(b) All prohibited industrial uses as so listed in § 350-7.
(c) Any use, although expressly allowed as a permitted use, shall
be prohibited if the particular application or adaptation of such
use is or shall become or cause a nuisance.
B. Performance standards.
(1) General standards. The following general standards are hereby
adopted for the control of uses in any industrial district, and no use
shall be permitted, established, maintained or conducted therein
which shall cause or be likely to cause:
(a) Excessive smoke, fumes, gas, dust, odor or any other
atmosphere pollutant beyond the boundaries of the lot
whereon such use is located. What smoke is excessive shall be
determined according to the Ringelmann Scale for Grading the
Density of Smoke, published by the United States Bureau of
Mines, when the shade or appearance of such smoke is darker
than No. 2 on said Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
(b) Noise perceptible beyond the boundaries of the lot occupied by
such use causing the same.
§ 350-25 WIRES AND POLES § 350-26
346:723
(c) Any pollution by discharge of any waste material whatsoever
into any watercourse, open ditch or land surface.
(d) Discharge of any waste material whatsoever into any sanitary
disposal system or sewerage system, except only in accordance
with the rules of and under the control of public health
authorities or the public body controlling such sewerage
system. Any chemical or industrial waste which places undue
loads, as determined by the Director of Public Works, shall not
be discharged into any municipal system and must be treated
by the industrial use.
(e) Storage or stocking of any waste materials whatsoever.
(f) Glare or vibration perceptible beyond the lot lines whereon
such use is conducted.
(g) Hazard to person or property by reason of fire, explosion,
radiation or other cause.
(h) Any other nuisance harmful to persons or property.
(2) Specific standards. The following specific standards are hereby
adopted and must be complied with for and by any use in any
industrial district and before the same is permitted, established,
maintained or conducted: [Amended effective 7-3-1974 by Ord.
No. 74-18]
(a) Storage facilities. Materials, supplies, or semifinished products
shall be stored on the rear 1/2 of the property and shall be
screened from any existing or proposed street.
(b) Loading docks. No loading docks shall be on any street
frontage. Provisions for handling of all freight shall be on those
sides of any building which do not face on any street or
proposed streets. This requirement shall not apply within the
F1 Industrial District (Geneva Industrial Park). [Amended
9-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-11]
(c) Landscaping. It is hereby declared that all areas of the plot not
occupied by buildings, parking, driveways or walkways or
storage shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees,
shrubs or other plant material. Such landscaping shall take
into consideration the natural growth presently on the
premises and the nature and condition of the terrain as well as
the situation of the lands and premises themselves and with
regard to adjoining lands and premises.
(d) Off-street parking and loading. Refer to § 350-25.
(e) Signs. Refer to § 350-30.
§ 350-26 GENEVA CODE § 350-26
346:724
§ 350-26.1. College-Residential District regulations. [Added
11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
(f) Buffer strip. In addition to the fences and walls, the entire
district must be separated along its outside boundary from any
adjoining residential zones by a buffer strip, suitably
landscaped, at least 100 feet wide.
(3) Proper and adequate water supply, sewage and waste disposal,
other utility services, and accessibility to and from public streets
must be provided.
(4) Special consideration must be given to the traffic generated by
each proposed use in an industrial district, and no undue traffic
volumes shall be permitted on residential streets. Such data is to be
submitted with each application. No access drive for any F District
shall be within 300 feet of and on the same side of the street as a
school, public library, theater, church or other public gathering
place, park, playground, or fire station unless a street 50 feet or
more wide lies between such access drive and such building or use.
C. Area and bulk regulation. Area and bulk requirements shall be in
compliance with those for the F or F1 District as set forth in the Density
Control Schedule of this chapter.69 [Amended effective 5-6-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-12]
D. Additional conditions prescribed by Planning Board. The Planning
Board, upon review of the proposed development, may prescribe such
additional conditions as are in its opinion necessary to secure the
objectives of this chapter.
A. Purpose. This district is intended to protect surrounding residential and
commercial uses from the impacts of Hobart and William Smith
Colleges uses and expansion, and to provide for the orderly, rational,
and predictable expansion of Hobart and William Smith Colleges and
affiliated organizations and institutions. These objectives are derived
from the larger goals of conserving the value of land and buildings in
the City of Geneva, and thus protecting the City's tax base.
B. The following principal uses are permitted:
Administrative and faculty offices
Bed-and-breakfast businesses, meeting the definition of and
requirements for a boardinghouse
Cafeterias for student, faculty, and staff use
Churches, synagogues, or other places of worship, including parish
houses and convents
69.Editor's Note: Schedule III, Density Control Schedule, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 350-26 WIRES AND POLES § 350-26.1
346:725
Concert halls
Cultural facilities such as libraries, art galleries, and museums
Detached single-family residential dwellings
Gymnasiums and related athletic facilities
Health-care services and clinics serving students of the colleges
Instructional facilities, including classrooms, lecture halls, drafting
and art studios, laboratories, and greenhouses
Multiple-family residential dwellings
Public utility services for the immediate vicinity, including only minor
structures not more than 500 square feet in area
Student and faculty centers, including other uses directly associated
with or complementary to college operations, such as college
bookstores
Student housing, including dormitories and college fraternities and
sororities
Theaters
Two-family residential dwellings
C. The following accessory uses are permitted:
Day-care facilities
Garages not more than 500 square feet in area
Home occupations (Type I and Type II), as defined in § 350-2
Storage buildings or sheds not more than 1,000 square feet in area
Surface parking, subject to the applicable requirements of § 350-25 of
this chapter.
D. The following uses shall require a special use permit:
Garages and parking structures more than 500 square feet in area
Storage buildings or sheds more than 1,000 square feet in area
Uses similar in purpose and scale to those permitted, but not
specifically identified
E. Uses not permitted above are prohibited.
F. Dimensions:
(1) Where the property abuts a public right-of-way, the minimum front
setback shall be 25 feet.
(2) Where the property abuts any adjacent zoning district, the
minimum setback from the boundaries of said adjacent district
shall be 40 feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater;
however, this restriction shall not apply in the case of the boundary
§ 350-26.1 GENEVA CODE § 350-26.1
346:726
of an overlay district such as the South Main Street-Pulteney Park
Historic District.
(3) Within 100 feet of a non-college-related residential use:
(a) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 40 feet.
(b) The minimum side yard setback shall be 12 feet or 1/2 of the
height of the building, whichever is greater.
(c) The maximum lot coverage shall be 50%.
(d) The maximum height shall be four stories, but in no case more
than 45 feet.
(4) Maximum height shall be six stories, but in no case more than 75
feet, except as described in Subsection F(3)(d) above.
(5) Additional dimensional requirements may be determined as part of
the site plan review process. This process shall be governed by the
goal of creating a campus environment consistent with existing
land use patterns and density, encouraging compatibility with
residential properties within the district, and with the general
purpose of this district.
G. Site plan review shall be required as provided in § 350-44 of this
chapter.
H. Architectural review shall be required as provided in § 350-45 of this
chapter.
I. The number, arrangement, and buffering for off-street parking spaces
shall comply with the applicable parking and loading requirements
specified in § 350-25 of this chapter. It is the express intention of this
district to allow required parking to be provided off-site, where
determined to be appropriate by the Planning Board as part of site plan
review.
J. Signs shall not be erected without first obtaining a building permit and
shall comply with the requirements in § 350-30 of this chapter.
K. Fences, landscaping and buffering shall comply with all applicable
requirements specified in §§ 350-24, 350-25, and 350-25.2 (buffers) of
this chapter.
L. Hobart and William Smith Colleges shall submit a campus plan
indicating current and proposed uses to City Council and file this plan
with the City Clerk. Permit applications for uses that are not in keeping
with the plan shall require the colleges to revise the plan on file.
M. Lighting design shall comply with the following requirements.
(1) Exterior offset illumination of facades and landscape elements is
encouraged. However, any building or landscape illumination
§ 350-26.1 WIRES AND POLES § 350-26.1
346:727
§ 350-26.2. Historic-Residential District regulations. [Added
11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
should be direct so that there is no overspill to adjacent buildings
or properties.
(2) The placement of freestanding lighting fixtures shall be in
accordance with all required setbacks.
N. All uses shall be conducted in such a manner so as to preclude any
nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive condition,
including creation or emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors,
vibrations, particulate matter, chemical compounds, electrical
disturbance, humidity, heat, cold, glare, or night illumination. Prior to
issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy, the Code
Enforcement Officer may require evidence that adequate measures
have been provided to protect the public health, comfort, convenience,
safety, and general welfare from any such nuisance, hazard, or offensive
condition.
A. Purpose. This district is intended to emphasize the role of private
investment in historic preservation efforts by allowing mixed uses to
create the most economically viable environment in which to maintain
and/or improve upon the unique character of Geneva's historic districts.
B. The following principal uses are permitted:
Administrative and faculty offices
Bed-and-breakfast businesses, occupying not more than 6,000 square
feet in area, or the existing building area, whichever is smaller, and
meeting the definition of and requirements for a boardinghouse
Cafeterias for student, faculty, and staff use
Churches, synagogues, or other places of worship, including parish
houses and convents
Concert halls
Cultural facilities such as libraries, art galleries, and museums
Detached single-family residential dwellings
Gymnasiums and related athletic facilities
Health-care services and clinics serving students of the colleges
Instructional facilities, including classrooms, lecture halls, drafting
and art studios, laboratories, and greenhouses
Multiple-family residential dwellings
Public utility services for the immediate vicinity, including only minor
structures not more than 500 square feet in area
Student and faculty centers, including other uses directly associated
with or complementary to college operations, such as college
bookstores
§ 350-26.1 GENEVA CODE § 350-26.2
346:728
Student housing, including dormitories and college fraternities and
sororities
Theaters
Two-family residential dwellings
C. The following accessory uses are permitted:
Day-care facilities
Garages not more than 500 square feet in area
Home occupations (Type I and Type II), as defined in § 350-2
Parking for not more than two vehicles
Storage buildings or sheds not more than 1,000 square feet in area
D. The following uses shall require a special use permit:
Garages and parking structures more than 500 square feet in area
Professional offices, occupying not more than 6,000 square feet in
area, or the existing building area, whichever is smaller
Storage buildings or sheds more than 1,000 square feet in area
Surface parking consisting of three or more parking spaces, subject
to the applicable requirements of § 350-25 of this chapter
Uses similar in purpose and scale to those permitted, but not
specifically identified
E. Uses not permitted above are prohibited.
F. Dimensions:
(1) Where the property abuts a public right-of-way, the minimum front
setback shall be 25 feet.
(2) Lot area and setbacks:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 9,240 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot width at the building line shall be 70 feet.
(c) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 40 feet.
(d) The minimum side yard setback shall be 12 feet or 1/2 of the
height of the building whichever is greater.
(e) The maximum lot coverage shall be 50%.
(f) The maximum height shall be four stories, but in no case more
than 45 feet.
(3) Additional dimensional requirements may be determined as part of
the site plan review process. This process shall be governed by the
goal of creating an environment consistent with existing land use
§ 350-26.2 WIRES AND POLES § 350-26.2
346:729
§ 350-26.3. Agricultural Technology District. [Added 11-20-2002 by
L.L. No. 5-2002]
patterns and density, encouraging compatibility with residential
properties within the district, and with the general purpose of this
district.
G. Site plan review shall be required as provided in § 350-44 of this
chapter.
H. Architectural review shall be required as provided in § 350-45 of this
chapter. In the event that architectural review is required, review by
the Historic Districts and Structures Commission shall take place
before the Planning Board's architectural review.
I. The number, arrangement, and buffering for off-street parking spaces
shall comply with the applicable parking and loading requirements
specified in § 350-25 of this chapter. It is the express intention of this
district to allow required parking to be provided off-site, where
determined to be appropriate by the Planning Board as part of site plan
review.
J. Signs shall not be erected without first obtaining a building permit and
shall comply with the requirements in § 350-30 of this chapter.
K. Fences, landscaping and buffering shall comply with all applicable
requirements specified in §§ 350-24, 350-25, and 350-25.2 (buffers) of
this chapter.
L. Lighting design shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Exterior offset illumination of facades and landscape elements is
encouraged. However, any building or landscape illumination
should be direct so that there is no overspill to adjacent buildings
or properties.
(2) The placement of freestanding lighting fixtures shall be in
accordance with all required setbacks.
M. All uses shall be conducted in such a manner so as to preclude any
nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive condition,
including creation or emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors,
vibrations, particulate matter, chemical compounds, electrical
disturbance, humidity, heat, cold, glare, or night illumination. Prior to
issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy, the Code
Enforcement Officer may require evidence that adequate measures
have been provided to protect the public health, comfort, convenience,
safety, and general welfare from any such nuisance, hazard, or offensive
condition.
A. Purpose. This district is created to recognize the economic
development opportunities of the proposed Cornell Agriculture and
§ 350-26.2 GENEVA CODE § 350-26.3
346:730
Food Technology Park on the grounds of the New York State
Agricultural Experiment Station. The district is intended to facilitate
the reconfiguration of the Agricultural Experiment Station campus, and
to promote the orderly, rational, and predictable development of the
proposed Cornell Agriculture and Food Technology Path and its lessees
while protecting surrounding residential and commercial uses from
the impacts of technology park uses and expansion. These objectives
are derived from the larger goal of conserving the value of land and
buildings in the City of Geneva, and thus protecting the City's tax base.
Regardless of any specific mention in the permitted uses below, the
permitted and special permit uses are to be Intrinsically related to the
purpose and mission of the Cornell Agriculture and Food Technology
Park Corp., the Agricultural Experiment Station, or related activities of
its parent institution, Cornell University.
B. The following principal uses are permitted:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as greenhouses, but excluding facilities for
livestock, and excluding (on-site) outdoor crop cultivation, subject
to the nuisance regulations stipulated in Subsection N below.
(2) Facilities intended for production or light assembly and
warehousing of agricultural and food products and bio-based
products produced by plants and microorganisms, for testing or
distribution, excluding prohibited industrial uses listed in § 350-7,
and subject to the nuisance regulations stipulated in Subsection N
below.
(3) Laboratories and related facilities intended for basic and applied
research, development of technology-based products and services,
or testing of technology-based products and services.
(4) Offices.
(5) Public, private, and charitable agriculture-related and foodtechnology-
related research and educational facilities, and
agricultural and food service organizations and consultants, as well
as biotechnology research leading to bio-based products produced
by plants and microorganisms.
(6) Public utility services for the immediate vicinity, including only
minor structures not more than 500 square feet in area.
(7) Technology-dependent and/or computer-based facilities dedicated
to the processing of data or analysis of information, provided that
these information services support on-site research or product
development.
C. The following accessory uses are permitted:
(1) Surface parking, subject to the applicable requirements of § 350-25
of this chapter. No farm or agriculture-related vehicle or equipment
§ 350-26.3 WIRES AND POLES § 350-26.3
346:731
(including tractors, cultivators, sprayers, and similar equipment)
may be parked in this district.
D. The following uses shall require a special use permit:
(1) Garages or storage buildings or sheds.
(2) Services and retail uses incidental to, and in support of, the
permitted uses such as limited food-service facilities in support of
principal permitted uses, conference centers, day-care facilities
and athletic facilities, provided that these uses are in support of a
permitted principal use, but in no case Larger than 2,000 square
feet.
(3) Uses similar in purpose and scale to those permitted, but not
specifically identified, subject to confirmation by the Planning
Board.
E. Uses not permitted above are prohibited.
F. Dimensions.
(1) Where the AT District abuts an adjacent district (other than the
New York State Agriculture Experiment Station) on a side or rear
lot line, the minimum setback shall be 150 feet.
(2) Where the AT District abuts the New York State Agriculture
Experiment Station, on a side or rear lot line, the minimum setback
shall be 10 feet.
(3) Where the AT District abuts a public right-of-way, excluding the
interior roads (both public and private) and driveways of the New
York State Agriculture Experiment Station, the minimum setback
shall be 75 feet.
(4) The minimum setback for interior public roads, excluding roads or
driveways at the New York State Agriculture Experiment Station,
shall be 40 feet from the right-of-way.
(5) Buildings situated along interior public roads, with the exception of
the northernmost entry road, shall, to the extent practicable, be
situated such that the fronts of the buildings are aligned with the
roadway and with other buildings facing that roadway.
(6) The maximum height shall be 35 feet including any stacks, airhandling
units or other building appurtenances.
(7) Additional dimensional requirements may be determined as part of
the site plan review process. This process shall be governed by the
goal of creating a campus environment consistent with existing
land use patterns and density and with the purpose of this district.
G. Site plan review shall be required as provided in § 350-44 of this
chapter.
§ 350-26.3 GENEVA CODE § 350-26.3
346:732
H. Architectural review shall be required as provided in § 350-45 of this
chapter. In addition to the applicable design guidelines in § 350-45,
buildings must comply with the following regulations:
(1) Buildings should be compatible and harmonious with those
existing, not by mimicking the architectural style or building
materials, but by compatibility of styles, materials, shape, height,
massing, orientation, and siting.
(2) Buildings shall be constructed of substantial and permanent
materials. Materials shall be sufficiently durable and lowmaintenance
and have a reasonable life span. The use of masonry
materials, such as brick, precast panels, and exterior insulation and
finish systems, shall be strongly encouraged.
(3) Buildings should be well-designed and visually interesting in terms
of both massing and detail.
(a) Unfenestrated walls are not permitted and shall be disallowed
by the Planning Board during architectural review.
(b) Stepped-back buildings and modulated rootlines are
encouraged.
(c) Flat roofs are not permitted.
(d) Building entries shall be clearly visible and readily obvious to
the first-time visitor.
(4) Prefabricated metal buildings are not permitted.
(5) Use of extensive landscaping shall be encouraged in order to
screen and buffer the buildings and parking areas, and any lighting
in and around same, from adjacent residential areas.
I. The number, arrangement, and buffering for off-street parking spaces
shall comply with the applicable parking and loading requirements
specified in § 350-25 of this chapter, or in the alternative, a parking plan
may be submitted per the requirements of the Urban Land Institute
Standards for research and development parks, subject to the approval
of the Planning Board. No contiguous surface parking area shall exceed
10,000 square feet without being subdivided by landscaped islands at
intervals of no more than 300 feet. Parking areas within required
setbacks shall be screened from the street and from adjacent properties
by a landscaped berm between 36 and 42 inches high and no less than
six feet wide. Larger berms are permitted with approval from the City
of Geneva Planning Board.
J. Signs shall not be erected without first obtaining a building permit and
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) A coordinated signage plan for the Cornell Agriculture and Food
Technology Park is required, subject to the approval of the Planning
§ 350-26.3 WIRES AND POLES § 350-26.3
346:733
Board. Signage shall be consistent throughout the Cornell
Agriculture and Food Technology Park and consistent with said
plan.
(2) Dimension and number of signs.
(a) One freestanding identification and/or directional sign no
greater than 40 square feet in area is permitted at each
primary entrance to the Cornell Agriculture and Food
Technology Park.
(b) One freestanding identification sign not greater than 24 square
feet in area is permitted per building.
(c) In addition to the one freestanding sign permitted per building,
a facade-mounted identification sign, no more than 12 square
feet in area, and not projecting above the roofline, is allowed
for each use in each building. There may be no more than one
facade-mounted identification sign on each facade. If there is
more than one use in a building to be identified on a single
facade, the facade-mounted sign may be up to, but not
exceeding 15 square feet in area. This facade-mounted sign
shall be flush to the facade.
(3) Location of signs.
(a) Signs shall not extend more than six feet above the ground
level, or eight feet above ground level for joint identification
signs and district entrance signs.
(b) No sign, except publicly owned signs, shall be placed in or
project into the public right-of-way.
(c) The minimum front setback for freestanding signs shall be 10
feet from any exterior or interior roadway, loading area, or
driveway.
(d) Banners, canopies, marquees, and roof signs are not
permitted.
(4) Materials and lighting of signs.
(a) Self-illuminated signs are not permitted.
(b) Signs shall be front lit by offset lighting only.
(c) Permitted materials are wood, stone. etched brass and
enameled metal.
K. Fences, landscaping and buffering shall comply with all applicable
requirements specified in §§ 350-24, 350-25, and 350-26B(2)(f) (buffers)
of this chapter.
§ 350-26.3 GENEVA CODE § 350-26.3
346:734
L. The Cornell Agriculture and Food Technology Park shall submit a
campus plan indicating current and proposed uses, including a site plan
showing intended ingress and egress, internal parking and traffic
circulation, and proposed building sites, to City Council and shall file
this plan with the City Clerk. Permit applications for uses that are not in
keeping with the plan shall require the Cornell Agriculture and Food
Technology Park to revise the plan on file.
M. Lighting design shall comply with the following requirements.
(1) A coordinated lighting plan for the campus is required, subject to
the approval of the Planning Board. Lighting shall be consistent
throughout the park and consistent with said plan.
(2) Exterior offset illumination of facades and landscape elements is
encouraged. However, any building or landscape illumination
should be directed so that there is no overspill to adjacent buildings
or properties.
(3) The placement of freestanding lighting fixtures shall be in
accordance with all required setbacks.
N. All uses shall be conducted in such a manner so as to preclude any
nuisance, hazard, or commonly recognized offensive condition,
including creation or emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors,
vibrations, particulate matter, chemical compounds, electrical
disturbance, humidity, heat, glare, or night illumination, or any other
adverse impact on public health. Prior to issuance of a building permit
or a certificate of occupancy, the Code Enforcement Officer may require
evidence that adequate measures have been provided to protect the
public health, comfort, convenience, safety, and general welfare from
any such nuisance, hazard, or offensive condition. If required, said
evidence shall include specific documentation of compliance with:
(1) Chapter 232, Noise, and the maximum permissible sound levels
specified therein;
(2) Chapter 294, Smoke Abatement, and the maximum permissible
smoke emissions specified therein;
(3) Chapter 277, Sanitary Sewers, and the applicable Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, as well as any additional local
discharge limitations (prior to disposal, all drain-disposable wastes
must be treated for disposal consistent with these regulations);
(4) The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act [42 U.S.C. 6901 et
seq. (1976)], if hazardous waste regulated by the Environmental
Protection Agency is used or generated.
(5) Applicable requirements for proper deactivation, recycling or
disposal, if waste is not regulated by the Environmental Protection
§ 350-26.3 WIRES AND POLES § 350-26.3
346:735
§ 350-27. Procedure for rezoning.
Agency, but poses a potential threat to human health and natural
environment as generated.
(6) And such other local, state and federal regulations as may be
applicable.
O. Storage areas shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) All storage, including that for waste products (i.e., sanitation
dumpsters, recycling collection points), shall be within completely
enclosed buildings or effectively screened with visually opaque
screening not less than eight feet, nor more than eight feet, in
height, and no storage shall exceed the height of such screening.
(2) Storage areas and the required enclosure shall be in accordance
with all setback requirements.
(3) Storage areas may not be located in front of a primary structure.
A. Filing of application. Application for rezoning the classification of a site
shall be filed by the owner, or several owners jointly, or the holder of a
written option to purchase the site with the City Clerk in writing in a
form required by the City Council and shall be accompanied by a
certified check in the amount of $50 to help defray the cost of
advertising the hearing on said petition and incidental disbursements.
The applicant shall also submit the following:
(1) A plan of the site and surrounding areas drawn to scale and
accurately dimensioned, showing the location of existing and
proposed land use areas, lots, buildings, structures, parking and
loading areas and access roads and streets, community facilities
and topography.
(2) The use and height of each proposed building or structure, yard
lines, lot coverage, and the number of parking spaces in each
proposed parking area and the expected flow of traffic in and out of
the area.
(3) Any additional data as may be requested by the Planning Board in
order to determine the suitability of the tract for the proposed
development.
B. Referral to Planning Board. Each application shall be referred to the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall report its recommendations
thereon to the City Council, accompanied by a full statement of the
reasons for such recommendations. If the Planning Board fails to report
within a period of 45 days from the date of receipt of notice or such
longer time as may have been agreed upon by it and the City Council,
the City Council may act without such report.
§ 350-26.3 GENEVA CODE § 350-27
346:736
§ 350-28. Motor vehicle service stations.
In any district where permitted, a motor vehicle service station shall be
subject to the following regulations:
§ 350-29. Adult use establishments. [Added 6-18-1996 by Ord. No.
96-3]
In any district where permitted, adult use establishments shall be subject to
the following regulations:
C. Action by City Council. The City Council by resolution shall fix the time
and place of a public hearing and cause notice thereof to be published
in the official newspaper not less than 10 days prior to the date of the
public hearing. All other procedures before the City Council shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Geneva City
Charter, the General City Law and all other applicable laws.
A. Service stations shall be permitted only on lots of 10,000 square feet or
more, with 100 feet minimum frontage.
B. The area for use by motor vehicles, except access drives thereto, as well
as any structures shall not encroach on any required yard area.
C. No fuel pump shall be located closer than 20 feet to any side lot line nor
closer than 35 feet to any street line, measured from the outside edge of
the fuel island.
D. No access drive shall be within 200 feet of and on the same side of the
street as a school, public library, theater, church, or other public
gathering place, park, playground or fire station unless a street 50 feet
or more wide lies between such service station and such building or
use.
E. All repair work and storage shall be within a completely enclosed
building which has a maximum height of 15 feet. Such repair work shall
not include any body repair work or spray painting.
A. Legislative findings; purpose and intent.
(1) The regulation of adult use establishments, as hereinafter defined,
is found to be necessary in light of the operational characteristics
of such uses which, without the enactment and enforcement of
appropriate regulations, would have documented adverse,
detrimental and harmful impacts and effects within the City of
Geneva, and particularly on residential neighborhoods and
community business areas. Such impacts and effects include but
are not limited to decreased property values; creation of traffic
and/or parking problems due to the attraction of transients;
potential increases in criminal activities; loss of business by nonadult-
use commercial establishments in the vicinity, and
deterioration within residential neighborhoods.
§ 350-27 WIRES AND POLES § 350-29
346:737
(2) It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish appropriate
and reasonable regulations and restrictions regarding the location
and operation of adult use establishments, as hereinafter defined,
so as to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the residents of the City of Geneva, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious impacts and effects
identified above which may result from the location and operation
of such establishments.
(3) It is neither the purpose nor intent of this section to impose a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually explicit or sexually oriented materials,
nor is it the purpose or intent of this section to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually explicit or sexually oriented materials,
activities, performances or depictions protected by the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution, or to deny access by
distributors and/or exhibitors of sexually explicit or sexually
oriented materials or entertainment to their intended market.
However, it is also not the purpose or intent of this section to
condone or legitimize the display or distribution of obscene
materials.
B. Such a use may not be established except in accordance with the
provisions of the City of Geneva Municipal Code, and subject to the
following conditions and criteria, which shall be in addition to and
supplementary to those matters which the Planning Board is to
consider in reviewing a site plan application under § 350-44 of this
chapter, and which shall also be in addition to and supplementary to
those matters which the Zoning Board of Appeals is to consider in
reviewing a special use permit application under § 350-53 of this
chapter.
C. Such a use shall be permitted only on lots of two acres or more.
D. Such a use may not be established or maintained within 500 feet of:
(1) A church, synagogue or regular place of worship.
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school.
(3) Any child-care institution or day-care center, as defined herein and
in the Education Law.
(4) A residence, or the boundary of any residential zoning district.
(5) A public park, playground, playing field, governmental office or
facility or other similar area where large numbers of persons may
travel or congregate.
(6) A municipal boundary.
E. No two adult use establishments may be established or maintained
within 1,000 feet of each other.
§ 350-29 GENEVA CODE § 350-29
346:738
F. Only one such use may be established or maintained on any lot or in any
building or structure.
G. For the purposes of this section, measurement of the distances
specified above shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used or operated for such a use to the nearest
property line or boundary of an affected use, as listed in Subsection
D(1) through (6) above, provided that for purposes of Subsection E
above, the distance between any two adult use establishments shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, between the closest exterior walls of the structures in which
each such use is located.
H. All such uses:
(1) Shall be conducted in an enclosed building.
(2) Shall be conducted in such a manner that, regardless of location or
distance, no one who is passing by or who is at any point outside of
the enclosed building occupied by such a use shall be able to
observe or perceive any performance, conduct, image, printed
matter, visual representation, instrument, device or paraphernalia
displaying, depicting or otherwise presenting any specified
anatomical area or specified sexual activity regulated hereunder,
including but not limited to any sign or advertisement or any
window or other opening permitting the view of the interior of the
premises from the exterior of the premises.
(3) Shall not employ loudspeakers or sound equipment as part of the
adult use establishment in such a way as may be audible to or
discerned by the public from public or semipublic areas.
(4) Shall provide for the parking of vehicles on the site only during the
hours of operation and shall provide for a parking space for each
and every employee, in addition to those parking requirements
specified in § 350-25.
(5) Shall provide for no more than a single building-mounted sign, no
larger than 30 square feet, that shall identify only the name of the
establishment and shall contain no graphic representation of any
material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
I. Final approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals of any special use permit
application for such a use shall only be made contingent upon the
applicant also satisfying all conditions and requirements of approval by
the Planning Board of any site plan application for such a use.
J. Inspection requirements.
§ 350-29 WIRES AND POLES § 350-29
346:739
(1) Prior to the commencement of any adult use establishment
business, or upon any transfer of ownership or control of such a
business, the premises on which such establishment is located
must be inspected and found to be in compliance with all laws,
rules and regulations of or enforced by the New York State Health
Department, Fire Department, Code Enforcement Office, Fire
Marshal, and other code enforcement officials of the City and
county.
(2) The New York State Health Department, Fire Department, Code
Enforcement Office, Fire Marshal and other code enforcement
officials shall complete their certification that the premises is in
compliance, or not in compliance, within 20 days of the inspection
of the premises by such officials. The certification shall be promptly
presented to the Code Enforcement Office and shall be a
precondition to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy,
certificate of compliance or any other certificate evidencing
conformance with governmental laws, regulations, codes, rules or
requirements.
(3) An applicant, or permittee and/or licensee, shall permit
representatives of the Police Department, New York State Health
Department, Fire Department, Code Enforcement Office, or other
City or county departments or agencies to inspect the premises of
an adult use establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with applicable laws, rules and regulations at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
(4) While code enforcement officials shall have the right to inspect the
premises for the purpose of ensuring compliance with all applicable
laws, rules and regulations, the owner, agent or person in charge
thereof shall have the right to insist upon the procurement of a
search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction in order to
enable such inspection. The officials charged with conducting the
inspection pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain a
search warrant whenever an owner, agent or person in charge
refuses to permit a warrantless inspection of the premises after
having been advised that he or she has a constitutional right to
refuse entry of the officials without a search warrant.
K. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
(1) Any person committing an offense against any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation pursuant to
the Penal Law of the State of New York punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Continuation of an
offense shall constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a
separate and distinct violation.
§ 350-29 GENEVA CODE § 350-29
346:740
§ 350-30. Sign regulations.
No sign or other device for advertising purpose of any kind may be erected
or established in the municipality except and provided as follows:
(2) In addition to the penalties provided in Subsection K(1) above, any
violation under this section shall be punishable by suspension of
the right to conduct or operate such adult use for a period not to
exceed 30 days for each separate and distinct violation.
(3) In addition to the penalties provided above, the Code Enforcement
Office may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the
City of Geneva in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or to restrain by injunction any violation of this
article.
A. Signs in residential districts. No sign or other device for advertising
purposes of any kind may be erected or established in any residential
district except and provided as follows:
(1) Permitted nonresidential uses and legal nonconforming
nonresidential uses, but not including home occupations or day
nurseries, may display signs pertaining to the use of property
having an aggregate total face area of not more than 30 square feet
and not projecting beyond the principal building of such use to
which they are attached more than 24 inches, except that where
such nonresidential uses are set back from property lines, one sign
may be erected in the ground, provided that such ground signs
shall not exceed 15 square feet in total face area, shall not exceed
five feet in height, shall be parallel to the lot frontage and shall be
no nearer than 10 feet to any property line. If such freestanding
signs face substantially at right angles to the road and/or display in
more than one direction, they shall have a face area of not more
than eight square feet per side, with no more than two sides.
(2) Dwellings for five or more families may display nonilluminated
signs identifying the premises, having an aggregate total face of
not more than 12 square feet, and not projecting beyond the
principal building on the lot more than 24 inches.
(3) Any dwelling unit in a detached, attached or townhouse structure
may display one name or professional sign not exceeding four
square feet in area.
(4) Any boardinghouse may display one sign not exceeding five square
feet in area and not projecting more than 24 inches from the
principal building on the lot.
B. Signs in B1, B2 and H Districts and F and F1 Industrial Districts. Two
signs having an aggregate total face area of not more than 100 square
feet may be displayed for each establishment, provided that such signs
shall be located no nearer than 10 feet to any property line and
§ 350-29 WIRES AND POLES § 350-30
346:741
provided further that such signs shall not extend more than 20 feet
above ground level or more than five feet above the height of the roof
of a building at the point of location of the sign, whichever is less
restrictive. [Amended effective 5-6-1981 by Ord. No. 81-9]
C. Representational signs. No representational sign shall be permitted in
any district except such sign as shall be approved by the Planning
Board. Further, such sign shall not project more than five feet beyond
the principal structure to which it is attached and shall not have a face
area of more than 15 square feet. Only one such sign per establishment
shall be permitted.
D. Billboards. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, signs
not pertaining to the use, sale, rent, or lease of property on the same
lot, and signs not representing construction or subdivision activity as
allowed, are not permitted in any district, except that signs for the
purpose of directing persons to a local business or community
establishment may be erected in any district, providing such signs shall
not exceed four square feet in area per establishment, shall conform
with applicable regulations of the district in which they are located,
shall be grouped on community poles and shall be approved by the
Planning Board.
E. Projecting signs. Signs projecting into a public right-of-way shall have a
clearance of not less than 10 feet above the sidewalk or surrounding
ground and not less than 15 feet above any public driveway or
thoroughfare. No sign may project into any public right-of-way without
written approval from the Director of Public Works, pursuant to
Chapter 288, Signs and Fire Escapes, of this Code. [Amended
effective 7-3-1974 by Ord. No. 74-20]
F. Subdivision signs. Any person offering lots of sale in a subdivision may
erect nonilluminated directional signs within the limits of the
subdivision, or adjoining property in the same ownership, having an
aggregate total face area of not more than 50 square feet. The permit
for such signs shall be issued for a period of one year and may be
renewed for successive periods of one year each following a
determination by the enforcement officer that the signs have been
repainted or are in good condition in each case.
G. Exemption from above regulations. The following are exempt from the
above regulations:
(1) Real estate signs which advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises upon which said signs are located, having an aggregate
total face of not more than six square feet, within any residential,
business and highway districts, or not more than 20 square feet
within any industrial district.
§ 350-30 GENEVA CODE § 350-30
346:742
(2) One professional or business nameplate not exceeding four square
feet in area for any one professional or business establishment
where such signs would not otherwise be a permitted use.
(3) One sign denoting the architect, engineer, and/or contractor when
placed upon work under construction and not exceeding 24 square
feet in area.
(4) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and dates of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze,
stainless steel, or similar material.
(5) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, and such temporary,
emergency, or nonadvertising signs as may be authorized by the
enforcement officer.
(6) The use of sandwich board signage may be permitted by special use
permit when the Planning Board determines that a business is
located in a highly pedestrian-oriented location. The permit may be
conditioned as determined appropriate by the Planning Board, but
in no way (excepting zoning district) shall the regulations outlined
in § 351-7 be further relaxed. [Added 3-5-2014 by Ord. No.
1-2014]
H. Internal/external illuminated signs. [Amended 12-24-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-9]
(1) Internal illumination of signs shall be permitted by special use
permit for properties along Hamilton Street in B1 and H Zones and
in the Downtown Business Improvement District (BID) in the B2
Zone. No more than one internal illuminated sign shall be
permitted for each business. Such signs shall contain the name of
the business only; no product messages or slogans shall be
permitted. All flashing signs shall be prohibited.
(2) In reviewing said application the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
take into consideration various aspects of the sign, including but
not limited to size; color; proximity to street; residences;
businesses; height; intensity of lighting; other signage in the area;
type of lighting; and materials used to construct the sign. In
addition, internally illuminated signs should be low intensity, have
dark or opaque backgrounds, be compatible with other
neighborhood signs or architectural features of the surrounding
area, not block the visibility of other signs or businesses and
needed by the applicant business to assure reasonable visibility.
(3) External illumination of signs is permitted. Lighting shall, however,
focus directly onto the sign and may not create a glare or reflection
to such a degree that lighting shall become a nuisance or interfere
with the public safety.
§ 350-30 WIRES AND POLES § 350-30
346:743
(4) All signs permitted or allowed by special use permit shall be of a
scale, color, texture, and materials that are compatible with the
character of signage in the surrounding area and proportional in
design with the building. Continuity among nearby signs shall be
sought where possible.
(5) All signs permitted or allowed by special permit shall be generally
consistent with the standards and design guidelines in §§ 350-9I(6)
and 350-14E.
(6) Application is incomplete if the proposed sign does not meet the
criteria in this section or the standards and design guidelines in
§§ 350-9I(6) and 350-14E.
I. Banners. Banners and similar devices are prohibited, except
nonpermanent ones displayed for the occasion of special events which
shall be displayed no longer than for a three-week period and subject to
approval of the Director of Public Works. [Amended effective
7-3-1974 by Ord. No. 74-20]
J. Removal of certain signs.
(1) Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a
bona fide business conducted or a product available for purchase
by the public on the premises shall be taken down and removed by
the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the
building or structure or land upon which such sign may be found
within 10 days after written notification from the enforcement
officer, and, upon failure to comply with such notice within the time
specified in such order, the enforcement officer is hereby
authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident
thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure or
land to which such sign is attached.
(2) When, for whatever reason, a sign is removed from a building, pole,
ground support, etc., all supporting devices must also be removed.
This may include, but is not limited to, brackets, pole, chains, posts,
beams, slabs of bases, etc. Such supporting devices shall be
removed at the time that the sign is removed. [Added 11-1-1989
by Ord. No. 89-18]
(3) If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with,
the Superintendent of Public Works shall serve written notice upon
the owner, occupant or any person having the control of any such
property 30 days after receipt of such notice, or, if no person can be
found in the City who either is or claims to be the owner of such
property or who either represents or claims to represent such
owner, the Superintendent of Public Works shall cause such signs
and/or supporting devices on such property to be removed, and the
actual cost of such removal plus a service charge of 50% thereof to
cover cost of supervision and administration shall be certified by
§ 350-30 GENEVA CODE § 350-30
346:744
§ 350-31. Prohibited uses in all zoning districts.
Auto wrecking yards, junkyards, mobile homes, drive-in theaters and
slaughterhouses are specifically prohibited in all zoning districts.
§ 350-32. Cemeteries and crematories.
No burial or memorial plats or buildings shall be located closer than 50
feet to any residential lot line, except that when a dense evergreen hedge
or a wall or landscaped strip at least six feet in height providing complete
visual screening from all adjacent residential property is provided, burial
or memorial plats of less than six feet in height may be located not closer
than 20 feet to any residential lot line. Crematories shall be located only in
cemeteries.
§ 350-33. Conversions and additions in B1 District. [Added
6-3-1992 by Ord. No. 92-8]
the Superintendent of Public Works to the City Comptroller, and
such certified amount shall thereupon become and be a lien upon
the property on which such signs and/or supporting devices were
located and shall be added to and become and form part of the
taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such property and shall
bear interest at the same rate as City real estate taxes and shall be
collected and enforced in the same manner as such taxes. [Added
8-1-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
A. Setbacks. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, any
additions or conversions to an existing building shall not be governed
by the provisions in Schedule III70 relating to minimum yard
dimensions, provided that the setback of any new conversion or
addition does not exceed the setback of the existing building on any
street, but shall be not less than six feet, in the B1 District.
B. Height. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any
conversions or additions to any existing building shall not be governed
by the provisions in Schedule III relating to maximum height of
structures, provided that the height of any new addition or construction
does not exceed the height of the existing building but shall not, on
average, exceed 45 feet in height in the B1 District.
70.Editor's Note: Schedule III is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 350-30 WIRES AND POLES § 350-33
346:745

ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Buildings, Uses and Lots
§ 350-34. Continuation of nonconforming buildings and uses.
Any lawful building, structure or use of premises existing at the time of
enactment of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment thereof applying
to such building, structure or use of premises, may be continued although
such building, structure or use of premises does not conform to the
provisions thereof, except as follows:
§ 350-35. Discontinuance of nonconforming use.
§ 350-36. Necessary maintenance and repairs. [Amended 6-5-1995
by Ord. No. 9-95]
A building or structure of nonconforming use may be repaired or restored
to a safe condition. Any such repair or restoration shall be subject to the
following provisions:
A. Any sign which becomes nonconforming upon the date of enactment of
this chapter shall be removed or altered so as to conform within three
years after such date of enactment, except that existing signs on the
property of a legal nonconforming use may be continued if they
conform to signs in the district where such use is permitted.
B. Any undeveloped lot in a subdivision which was not properly approved
by the Planning Board and/or not filed in the office of the County Clerk
and whose area and/or depth is less than the specified minimum lot
requirements and average density requirements of this chapter shall be
considered a violation of this chapter.
A. Any building or land used for or occupied by a nonconforming use
which is changed to or replaced by a conforming use shall not
thereafter be used for or occupied by a nonconforming use.
B. If for a continuous period of two years either the nonconforming use of
land with minor improvements is discontinued or the active operation of
substantially all the nonconforming uses in any building or other
structure is discontinued, such land or building or other structure shall
thereafter be used only for a conforming use. Intent to resume active
operation shall not affect the foregoing. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply if such discontinuance of active operations is
directly caused by war, strike or other labor difficulties, a governmental
program of materials rationing, or the construction of a duly authorized
improvement project by a governmental body or a public utility
company. [Added effective 4-2-1975 by Ord. No. 75-5]
A. Such repair or restoration shall be permitted only upon the same lot as
was in existence on the date the use became nonconforming.
§ 350-34 WIRES AND POLES § 350-36
346:747
§ 350-37. Extension or change of nonconforming use, building or
structure.
§ 350-38. Construction previously started.
Any building or structure for which construction was begun prior to the
effective date of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment thereof
applying, may be completed and used in accordance with the plans and
specifications for the building or structure.
§ 350-39. Existing undersized lots.
B. Any increase in the volume, area or extent of the nonconforming use
shall not be permitted.
C. If a structure has been damaged or destroyed to the extent of more than
75% of its assessed value, repair or reconstruction of the structure shall
be prohibited except in compliance with all currently effective zoning
regulations, as well as the provisions of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
D. Under no circumstances shall "repaired or restored" be construed to
include the total demolition and rebuilding of a structure. In such an
instance, the provisions of Subsection C above shall apply.
A. A nonconforming use of a building, structure or land or any portion
thereof cannot be extended or expanded in any manner; provided,
however, that such nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming
use or to another nonconforming use more nearly conforming to the
requirements of the district in which it is situated.
B. A nonconforming building or structure cannot be increased in size or
area except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
C. A change of a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use as
provided in Subsection A herein shall require a special use permit
pursuant to and subject to § 350-53 of this chapter. [Amended
2-6-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1]
A. Any lot held in single and separate ownership prior to the adoption of
this chapter and whose area and/or width and/or depth is less than the
specified minimum lot requirements of this chapter for the district may
be considered as complying with such minimum lot requirements and
no variance shall be required, provided that:
(1) Such lot does not adjoin any other lot or lots held by the same
owner whose aggregate area is equal to or greater than the
minimum lot area required for that district.
(2) Such lot has an area of at least 5,000 square feet and a minimum
width of at least 50 feet at the required setback line if it is to be
used for residential purposes.
§ 350-36 GENEVA CODE § 350-39
346:748
§ 350-40. Reduction in lot size.
No lot shall be reduced in area so that it creates a nonconforming bulk or
use in violation of any regulations contained in this chapter.
(3) The following minimum yard dimensions are maintained for
residences:
(a) Side yards: eight feet.
(b) Front and rear yards: 25 feet.
(4) All other bulk requirements for that district are complied with.
B. In any district where residences are permitted, such undersized
nonconforming lots may be used for not more than one single-family
dwelling.
C. A lot of nonconforming size may be subdivided if each and every
subdivision of such lot is purchased by the owner or owners of the
adjoining properties to increase the size of said owner's or owners'
property or properties.
D. The front yard of such lot will be considered that yard upon which the
primary entrance to the dwelling faces. [Added effective 2-6-1974 by
Ord. No. 74-2]
E. Any application for a building permit for an existing undersized lot shall
be referred to the Zoning Board of Appeals for approval prior to
issuance of the building permit. [Added 4-6-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4]
§ 350-39 WIRES AND POLES § 350-40
346:749

ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 350-41. Enforcement officer.
§ 350-42. Powers and duties of enforcement officer.
Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance or regulation,
the enforcement officer shall:
§ 350-43. Application for building permit.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the enforcement officer designated in
Chapter 22, Enforcement Officers, of this Code.
B. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the
enforcement officer, and no permit or license for any other purpose
shall be issued by any other official or employee of the City,if the same
would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Administer and enforce all of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Receive applications and issue permits for the erection, alteration,
removal and demolition of buildings or structures or parts thereof.
C. Issue all appropriate notices or orders to remove illegal or unauthorized
construction or to cease and desist any illegal or unauthorized uses.
D. Examine the premises for which applications have been received or
permits have been issued for the purpose of ensuring compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
E. Maintain permanent official records of all transactions and activities
concerning the enforcement of this chapter, including all applications
received, permits or certificates issued, fees charged and collected,
inspection reports and notices and orders issued.
F. Submit to the City Council a written annual report and summary of all
business conducted by his office.
A. No person shall commence the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, removal, improvement, demolition, conversion or change in
the nature of the occupancy of any building or structure, or cause the
same to be done, without first obtaining a building permit from the
enforcement officer.
B. No building permit shall be required for the performance or ordinary
repairs or improvements which are not structural in nature or if the
total estimated cost including labor is less than $500. If the work is to
be performed by the owner or by another individual without
compensation, the reasonable value of such labor shall be included to
determine the estimated cost.
§ 350-41 WIRES AND POLES § 350-43
346:751
C. Application for a building permit shall be made to the enforcement
officer on forms provided by his office and shall contain the following
information:
(1) A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done.
(2) A statement of the present and proposed use or occupancy of all
parts of the land and of the building or structure.
(3) The valuation of the proposed work.
(4) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant and
the names and addresses of their responsible officers if any of them
are corporations.
(5) A brief description of the nature of the proposed work.
(6) A duplicate set of plans and specifications as set forth in Subsection
E of this section.
(7) Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
enforcement officer to establish compliance of the proposed work
with the requirements of the applicable building and zoning laws,
ordinances and regulations.
(8) An overall plan for proposed landscaping in regard to the site
location of the subject structure or building will be required if the
landscaping causes the alteration of the existing topography of the
land or other environmental features which would have an impact
on neighboring structures or the overall preexisting appearance of
the neighborhood. [Added 3-2-1988 by Ord. No. 88-2]
(9) Where the plans require compliance with the State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQR), the appropriate proceedings must be
completed pursuant to Part 617 of the NYCRR and any other
applicable regulations before approval may be granted. It is the
applicant's responsibility to assure the requirements of the SEQR
process are met. [Added 3-2-1988 by Ord. No. 88-2]
D. Applications shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or
by the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the
proposed work. Where such application is made by a person other than
the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner or
applicant that the proposed work is authorized by the owner and that
the applicant is authorized to make such application.
E. Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
duplicate copies of plans and specifications, including a plot plan,
drawn to scale, showing the location and size of all proposed new
construction and all existing structures on the site, the nature and
character of the work to be performed and the materials to be
incorporated, distance from lot lines, the relationship of structures on
adjoining property, widths and grades of adjoining streets, walks and
§ 350-43 GENEVA CODE § 350-43
346:752
§ 350-44. Site plan review by Planning Board for approval of change
of use. [Amended 3-3-1993 by Ord. No. 293; 6-5-1995 by Ord. No.
8-95]
alleys, and, where required by the enforcement officer, details of
structural, mechanical and electrical work, including computations,
stress diagrams and other essential technical data. Plans and
specifications shall bear the signature of the person responsible for the
design and drawings.
F. The enforcement officer may waive the requirement for filing plans, and
except further that details of structural, mechanical and electrical
work, including computations, stress diagrams and other technical
data, shall not be required for one- and two-family dwellings when a
statement is made that the proposed construction will be in accordance
with the provisions and standards of the State Building Construction
Code applicable to one- and two-family dwellings.
G. Amendments to the application or to the plans and specifications
accompanying the same may be filed at any time prior to the completion
of the work, subject to approval of the enforcement officer.
H. Applications must provide evidence of conforming to the architecture
and character of the neighboring properties in accordance with
§ 350-45. [Added 3-2-1988 by Ord. No. 88-2]
A. In each case where a business or industry expands an existing use; or
when a business or industry plans on developing a new facility; when a
dwelling is built on a lot where none previously existed; when a
residential use expands beyond a one- or two-family dwelling to a
multiple dwelling as defined by the Multiple Residence Law of the State
of New York; or when a multiple dwelling expands to add one or more
dwelling units, in any zoning district within the City of Geneva, the
enforcement officer shall refer the site plan for such proposal to the
Planning Board for review before issuing a building permit. Site plan
review of such residential uses shall not be required in the case of
wholly internal expansions or conversions not involving any expansion
of the building footprint and not involving any exterior site changes,
proposed or required, including but not limited to grading, drainage
improvements and traffic circulation. [Amended 10-4-2000 by Ord.
No. 6-2000]
B. As used in Subsection A above, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUSINESS or INDUSTRY — Any occupancy or use classified as a C1,
C2, C3, C4, C5, C6 or C7 occupancy under the provisions of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
EXPANSION OF USE — Any change in any occupancy or use which
results in an addition to the building footprint or an increase in the
§ 350-43 WIRES AND POLES § 350-44
346:753
total interior square footage or in an increase in the total number of
occupancies or uses contained within the building or structure.
C. The Planning Board shall either approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove such site plan, stating the reasons therefor in writing in its
records, and shall send a written notice of its decision to the
enforcement officer who shall then act accordingly, either issuing a
building permit, postponing issuance of a building permit pending
compliance with the decision of the Planning Board, or denying such
permit. If the enforcement officer does not receive any written
communication from the Planning Board on the application within 45
days after such case is presented to the Planning Board, he or she shall
assume that the site plan meets with its approval.
D. A fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time of submission of any site
plan application to cover the cost of the Planning Board's review of the
application, such fee to be in addition to the regular fee for the issuance
of a building permit. The fee shall be $100 for Planning Board review
involving alterations or additions to existing structures. The fee shall be
$150 for Planning Board review involving new construction. All fees
shall be due and payable at the time the application is made. In the
event that applications for approval of a subdivision and site plan
review are made at the same time, the greater of the two fees shall be
charged, and the lesser fee shall be waived. In the event that
application is also made for architectural review at the same time, no
additional tee shall be charged. [Amended 6-19-2002 by Ord. No.
7-2002]
E. All of the materials listed below must be submitted to the Planning
Board in advance of the meeting at which the applicant desires the
Planning Board to review the submission. The exact deadline for
submission shall be determined by the enforcement officer.
F. A complete site plan application for any building, structure or use shall
include copies of a site plan prepared by competent professionals duly
licensed to prepare such drawings. The drawings shall be submitted in
all cases where a change of use or expansion of an existing use is
proposed. Drawings shall be to a scale of one inch equals 10 feet or one
inch equals 20 feet. The site plan shall display the following
information:
(1) Property lines and related street right-of-way and easement lines as
determined by survey.
(2) Location of existing and/or proposed buildings and structures with
all required setbacks.
(3) Layout of existing and/or proposed off-street parking areas,
showing the details of aisles, driveways and each parking space.
(4) Existing topography of the site and adjacent properties as revealed
by contours or key elevations.
§ 350-44 GENEVA CODE § 350-44
346:754
(5) Proposed final grades, including detailed information relative to
methods to be used during and after construction to retain,
stabilize and/or refurbish regraded areas, e.g., sod, retaining walls,
etc.
(6) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks,
curbs and curb cuts and similar structures.
(7) Existing and proposed landscaping and fences.
(8) Existing and proposed outdoor lighting structures, sign locations,
telephones and electric utility poles.
(9) Names of current property owners as well as those of contract
vendees and names of owners and establishments on adjoining
properties.
(10) Type, size and locations of all dumpsters, waste compactors and
other outdoor mechanical equipment, including screening of them.
G. Copies of building elevations, drawn at a scale of 1/8 inch equals one
foot or 1/4 inch equals one foot, and descriptions of exterior building
materials shall be provided as outlined below:
(1) Front, side and rear elevations.
(2) Front and side elevations of signage, with dimensions and proposed
lighting.
(3) Elevations showing the proposed buildings in relation to adjacent
buildings.
(4) A summary of proposed exterior building materials.
H. The following requirements of Subsections F and G above are hereby
waived, only for applications for approval of the expansion of a
residential use:
(1) The information required by Subsection F(4), regarding existing
topography, F(5), regarding proposed final grades, F(6), regarding
stormwater drainage facilities and sidewalks and curbs, and F(8),
regarding outdoor lighting and sign and utility pole locations, is
hereby waived unless additions or modifications to existing
facilities are proposed.
(2) The information required by Subsection G, regarding a description
of the exterior building elevations, is hereby waived unless
additions or exterior modifications to the existing building or
buildings are proposed.
I. After Planning Board approval, a proposed change or revision either to
the site or to the exterior of any structure on it shall be resubmitted for
further review.
§ 350-44 WIRES AND POLES § 350-45
346:755
§ 350-45. Review for architectural conformity. [Added 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-2; amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 7-95]
A. Legislative findings; purpose. The City Council hereby finds that
inappropriate or poor quality design in the exterior appearance of
buildings or land development adversely affects the desirability of the
immediate area and neighboring areas, impairs the stability and value
of both improved and unimproved real property, retards the most
appropriate development, and creates an improper relationship
between the taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of
municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this section to
prevent these and other harmful effects of such exterior appearance of
buildings and development and thus to promote and protect the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
B. The Planning Board of the City of Geneva (hereinafter referred to as the
"Board") is hereby authorized to act as the Architectural Review
Committee of the City of Geneva.
C. The Planning Board shall review all applications for building permits
and/or site plans in the following categories:
(1) All applications for the construction, reconstruction or exterior
alteration of any commercial, industrial or multiple-dwelling
building or structure.
(2) Applications for new residential structures and/or subdivisions filed
with the Planning Board.
(3) Plans for exterior alterations or additions to residential,
commercial or industrial structures or facilities requiring a
building permit, for which the cost is estimated to be in excess of
$5,000.
(4) All site development applications submitted to the Planning Board.
(5) Petitions for special permit uses, when architectural review advice
on such a petition is requested by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(6) Any building permit applications or proposals which in the opinion
of the enforcement officer violate the spirit and intent of
Subsection A. In the event that such a referral is made, the
enforcement officer shall issue a specific written finding as to why
he or she believes this to be the case.
D. Applications must be accompanied by plans showing all elevations of
new structures, as well as any affected elevations in the case of new
additions or alterations. When required by the enforcement officer or
by the Board, a site plan shall be submitted showing both existing and
proposed contours at five-foot intervals, all existing trees with a trunk
diameter of four inches or more at a height six feet above ground level,
§ 350-45 GENEVA CODE § 350-45
346:756
and whether such trees shall remain or be removed, and/or other
topographical features.
E. Procedures.
(1) Approval of any application referred to the Board shall be by a vote
of at least a majority of the members.
(2) In considering an application, the Board shall take into account
natural features of the site and surroundings, the exterior design
and appearance of existing structures, and the character of the
district and its particular suitability for particular purposes, with a
view to conserving the values of property and encouraging the
most appropriate use of the land.
(3) The Board may approve any application referred to it upon finding,
in writing, that the building or structure for which the permit was
requested, if erected or altered in accordance with the submitted
plan, would be in harmony with the purpose of this section, would
not be visually offensive or inappropriate by reason of poor quality
of exterior design, excessive similarity or striking dissimilarity in
relation to the site or its surroundings, would not mar the
appearance of the area, would not be detrimental to the character
of the neighborhood, would not prevent the most appropriate
development and utilization of the site or of the adjacent lands and
would not adversely affect the functioning, economic stability,
prosperity, health, safety and general welfare of the entire
community.
(4) In approving any application, the Board may impose appropriate
conditions and safeguards designed to prevent the harmful effects
set forth in Subsection E(3).
(5) The Board may disapprove any application, provided that the Board
has afforded the applicant an opportunity to confer upon
suggestions for change of the plan, and provided that the Board
finds and states, in writing, that the structure for which the permit
was requested would, if erected as indicated, provoke one or more
of the harmful effects set forth in Subsection E(3).
F. Standards. The Board shall apply the following standards in the course
of its review:
(1) Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance
of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and
relationship to its surroundings.
(2) The height, width, and general proportions of a building should
conform generally to other buildings in the district. Ratio of wall
surface to openings, and the ratio of width and height of windows
and doors, should also be consistent with the district. The scale and
massing of a structure shall be a primary consideration.
§ 350-45 WIRES AND POLES § 350-45
346:757
(3) Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be
selected for harmony of the building with the adjoining buildings.
Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of building and
the design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same
materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all
building walls and other exterior building elements wholly or partly
visible from public ways. Materials shall be of a durable quality. In
any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the
structural materials shall be compatible within the design and
harmonious with their surroundings.
(4) Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets,
shall have good proportions and relationships to one another.
(5) Colors shall be harmonious and shall use only compatible accents.
(6) Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on the roof,
ground or buildings shall be screened from public view with
materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be located so
as not to be visible from any public ways.
(7) Exterior lighting shall be considered as part of the architectural
concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be
harmonious with the building design.
(8) Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards and
exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways,
using materials harmonious with the building.
(9) Monotony of design in single- or multiple-building projects shall be
avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide
visual interest. In multiple-building projects, variable siting of
individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous
appearance.
(10) Signs. Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design
and in its visual relationship to buildings and the surroundings.
Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of
the building and site to which it principally relates.
(11) The pattern of placement, proportions and materials of windows
and doors shall be considered. Metal or plastic frame windows are
generally unacceptable unless they are anodized or painted.
Shutters should be sized to match windows.
(12) The use of natural materials is to be favored. Imitation or synthetic
materials, such as aluminum or vinyl siding, imitation brick or
stone, or plastic, will generally be deemed inappropriate. Wood or
asphalt shingles are appropriate. Roll roofing, built-up tar and
gravel, plastic or fiberglass roofing materials are not appropriate,
unless utilized on flat roofs that are not visible from public ways.
§ 350-45 GENEVA CODE § 350-45
346:758
§ 350-46. Issuance of building permit.
(13) Where fences are to be used, they are to be of wood, stone, iron or
plant materials. Chain link or similar metal fences, concrete block,
plastic, fiberglass or plywood fences will generally be deemed
inappropriate.
(14) Exposed foundation walls should be of stone-faced or exposed
aggregate concrete and should be as inconspicuous as possible.
(15) Utility lines should be underground whenever possible, and entry
fixtures should be located away from high-use areas and main
entrances or screened in an approved manner. All lighting should
be appropriate to the building and its surroundings in terms of
style, scale and intensity of illumination.
A. The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits and the plans, specifications and documents
filed therewith. He shall approve or disapprove the application within a
reasonable time and subject to all other requirements and procedures
of this chapter and any other ordinance, local law, rule or regulation of
the City.
B. Upon approval of the application and upon receipt of the legal fees
therefor, he shall issue a building permit to the applicant upon the form
prescribed to him and shall affix his signature or cause his signature to
be affixed thereto.
C. Upon approval of the application, both sets of plans and specifications
shall be endorsed with the word "Approved." One set of such approved
plans and specifications shall be retained in the files of the enforcement
officer and the other set shall be returned to the applicant together with
the building permit and shall be kept at the building site open to
inspection by the enforcement officer or his authorized representative
at all reasonable times. The building permit shall be posted upon the
premises in a conspicuous place so as to be visible from the street
throughout the period of construction.
D. If the application, together with the plans, specifications and other
documents filed therewith, describes proposed work which does not
conform to all of the requirements of the applicable building and zoning
regulations, the enforcement officer shall disapprove the same and
shall return the plans and specifications to the applicant. Upon the
request of the applicant, the enforcement officer shall cause such a
refusal, together with the reasons therefor, to be transmitted to the
applicant in writing.
§ 350-45 WIRES AND POLES § 350-47
346:759
§ 350-47. Performance of work under building permit. [Amended
effective 2-6-1974 by Ord. No. 74-3]
Work authorized by a building permit must be started within six months
after the date of the permit and completed within 12 months of the effective
date of the permit. If work is not commenced within six months of the
effective date, the permit shall be considered void. If work is not completed
within 12 months of the effective date of the building permit, the
enforcement officer may allow one six-month extension.
§ 350-48. Building permit charges; penalties for failure to obtain
permit. [Amended 2-6-1974 by Ord. No. 74-3; 5-3-1989 by Ord. No.
89-11; 8-5-1992 by Ord. No. 92-11; 6-19-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
A. Charges for building permits.
(1) Residential construction (one- and two-family dwellings).
(a) The charges for building permits will be based on a per-squarefoot
rate of $0.12 per square foot of building area, with a
minimum charge of $50 except as otherwise provided herein.
(b) A flat fee of $40 shall be charged for permits for minor
residential work, such as storage sheds of no more than 150
square feet, decks or porches of no more than 150 square feet,
electrical or plumbing work in a single room, fences, signs
permitted in residential zoning districts without variances, and
demolition permits.
(2) Nonresidential construction (multiple dwellings and all
nonresidential or commercial construction).
(a) The charges for building permits will be based on a per-squarefoot
rate of $0.15 per square foot of work area or complete
building area where the building or a portion thereof is
classified as a change of use under the Uniform Code, with a
minimum charge of $100, except as otherwise provided herein.
[Amended 9-3-2008 by Ord. No. 6-2008]
(b) A flat fee of $50 shall be charged for permits for minor
nonresidential work, such as storage sheds of no more than
150 square feet, electrical or plumbing work in a single room,
fences, signs that do not require an application to the Zoning
Board of Appeals, and demolition permits.
(c) Where the square footage cannot be readily determined or is
not applicable, the charge shall be based on $1 per $1,000 cost
of work, but the minimum charge shall be $100. The applicant
shall provide written documentation of the cost, including all
labor and materials, with the application.
§ 350-47 GENEVA CODE § 350-48
346:760
(d) An additional surcharge of $1 per $1,000 cost of work shall be
charged for projects or buildings for which the cost of work is
more than $500,000. The applicant shall provide written
documentation of the cost, including all labor and materials,
with the application. [Amended 9-3-2008 by Ord. No.
6-2008]
(3) All fees shall be due and payable at the time the application for the
building permit is made. In the event that construction does not
proceed, fees are nonrefundable.
(4) If a building permit is extended as provided for in § 350-47, the fee
for the six-month extension shall be 1/2 of the original fee. If work
cannot be completed in a total of 18 months as provided in
§ 350-47, the applicant shall be required to obtain anew building
permit and pay the full fee as described above.
(5) There shall be no additional charge for any inspections, unless
requested the applicant outside of the usual working hours (8:30
a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday). In such cases the
applicant shall reimburse the City for the full cost of any overtime
pay, immediately upon receipt of an itemized statement detailing
same. Said reimbursement shall be made on a monthly basis and in
any case shall be paid in full before the issuance of any certificate
of occupancy.
(6) There shall be no additional fee for a certificate of occupancy when
said certificate of occupancy has been issued to document the
proper completion of work for which a building permit has been
obtained.
B. Penalties for failure to obtain building permit.
(1) Whenever the enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to
believe that work on any building or structure is being performed
without a required building permit, he shall notify the owner of the
property, or the owner's agent, or the person performing the work,
to suspend all work, and any such person shall stop such work and
suspend all building activities until submission of the proper
application to obtain a building permit.
(2) Unless good cause is shown, the enforcement officer shall
thereafter be authorized to:
(a) Double fees as set forth in Subsection A of this section, with a
minimum of $250 and a maximum of $1,000 for the following
projects:
[1] Additions.
[2] New construction.
[3] Adding new apartments to existing buildings.
§ 350-48 WIRES AND POLES § 350-48
346:761
§ 350-49. Revocation of building permit.
The enforcement officer may revoke a building permit theretofore issued
and approved in the following instances:
§ 350-50. Stop orders; right of entry.
[4] Parking.
[5] Renovations, for change of use.
(b) Double fees as set forth in Subsection A of this section for the
following projects, with a minimum of $100 and a maximum of
$250:
[1] Decks.
[2] Pools.
[3] Fences.
[4] Sheds.
[5] Signs.
[6] Patios.
[7] Basketball, tennis courts.
[8] Renovations, no change of use.
(c) The above penalties shall be in addition to any building permit
applicable as provided above, and shall be paid before any
permits issued.
A. Where he finds that there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans or
specifications on which the building permit was based.
B. Where he finds that the building permit was issued in error and should
not have been issued in accordance with the applicable law or
ordinance.
C. Where he finds that the work performed under the permit is not being
prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the application, plans
or specifications.
D. Where the person to whom the building permit has been issued fails or
refuses to comply with a stop order issued by the enforcement officer.
A. Stop orders. Whenever the enforcement officer has reasonable grounds
to believe that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted in
violation of the provisions of the applicable building and zoning laws,
ordinances or regulations, or not in conformity with the provisions of an
§ 350-48 GENEVA CODE § 350-50
346:762
§ 350-51. Inspections; issuance of certificate of occupancy.
application, plans or specifications on the basis of which a building
permit was issued, or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, he shall
notify the owner of the property, or the owner's agent, or the person
performing the work to suspend all work, and any such persons shall
forthwith stop such work and suspend all building activities until the
stop order has been rescinded. Such order and notice shall be in
writing, shall state the conditions under which the work may be
resumed and may be served upon a person to whom it is directed
either by delivering it personally to him or by posting the same upon a
conspicuous portion of the building under construction and sending a
copy of the same by registered mail.
B. Right of entry. The enforcement officer or any designated subordinate,
upon the showing of proper credentials and in the discharge of his
duties, may enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable
hour, and no person shall interfere with or prevent such entry.
A. Inspection prior to issuance of certificate.
(1) Before issuing a certificate of occupancy, the enforcement officer
shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and
sites for which an application has been filed for a building permit to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish, or change the
use or occupancy, and he may conduct such inspections as he
deems appropriate from time to time during and upon completion
of the work for which a building permit has been issued.
(2) There shall be maintained in the office of the enforcement officer a
record of all such examinations and inspections together with a
record of findings or violations of the law.
B. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole or
in part until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
enforcement officer.
(2) No building hereafter enlarged, extended, or altered, or upon
which work has been performed which required the issuance of a
building permit, shall continue to be occupied or used for more
than 30 days after the completion of the alteration or work unless a
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the enforcement
officer.
(3) Upon transfer of title to a new owner, execution and recording of a
mortgage or upon said building becoming vacant, no two-family
dwelling, no mixed occupancy containing two or more families and
no multiple dwelling shall be occupied in whole or in part until the
issuance of a current certificate of occupancy by the Building
Inspector certifying that said dwelling conforms to the
§ 350-50 WIRES AND POLES § 350-51
346:763
requirements of the City of Geneva Minimum Housing and/or
Multiple Residence Codes. The certificate of occupancy shall also
certify that the use of such building conforms to this chapter.
A "current certificate of occupancy," as used in this subsection,
shall mean a certificate of occupancy issued within 60 days of the
transfer of title to a new owner or the execution and recording of a
mortgage. [Added effective 10-2-1974 by Ord. No. 74-26]
(a) Certificate of occupancy with conditions. The Building
Inspector in his discretion may issue a certificate of occupancy
with conditions where:
[1] The subject dwelling is in compliance with this chapter;
[2] The subject dwelling is near substantial compliance with
the codes, ordinances and rules; and
[3] The work required to bring the dwelling into full
compliance is not essential to making the building
habitable.
(b) Temporary certificate of occupancy. Upon request of the owner
or his certified agent, the Building Inspector may, in his
discretion, issue a temporary certificate of occupancy provided
there is full compliance with this chapter and such temporary
use or occupancy would not in any way jeopardize life or
property.
(4) No change shall be made in the use or type of occupancy of an
existing building unless a certificate of occupancy shall have been
issued by the enforcement officer.
(5) Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the
application for a building permit, and no building permit shall be
issued until application shall have been made for a certificate of
occupancy.
C. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(1) When, after final inspection, it is found that the proposed work has
been completed in accordance with the applicable building and
zoning laws, ordinances and regulations, and also in accordance
with the application, plans and specifications filed in connection
with the issuance of the building permit, the enforcement officer
shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon the form provided by
him. If it is found that the proposed work has not been properly
completed, the enforcement officer shall refuse to issue a
certificate of occupancy and shall order the work completed in
conformity with the building permit and in conformity with the
applicable building and zoning regulations.
§ 350-51 GENEVA CODE § 350-51
346:764
(2) The certificate of occupancy shall certify that the work has been
completed and that the proposed use and occupancy are in
conformity with the provisions of the applicable building laws,
ordinances and regulations and shall specify the use or uses and
the extent thereof to which the building or structure or its several
parts may be put, except that such certificate of occupancy shall
not be considered as certification of location of lot boundaries or
property division lines.
D. Temporary certificate of occupancy. Upon request, the enforcement
officer may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a building or
structure, or part thereof, before the entire work covered by the
building permit shall have been completed provided such portions as
have been completed may be occupied safely without endangering life
or the public welfare.
E. Tests. Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that any
material, construction, or equipment or the location of a building or
structure does not conform to the requirements of the applicable
building laws, ordinances or regulations, the enforcement officer may
require the same to be subjected to tests and measurements in order to
furnish proof of such compliance prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
F. Fee. The fee for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for residential
property shall be consistent with the inspection fees established in
§ 202-79 and shall be paid to the enforcement officer prior to issuance.
The fee for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for nonresidential
property shall be $25 and shall be paid prior to issuance. If the property
contains both residential and nonresidential occupancies, the charge
shall be the sum of two fees. If the certificate of occupancy is issued in
conjunction with a building permit for new construction work, there
shall be no fee in addition to that charged for the building permit.
[Amended by Ord. No. 82-19, eff. 4-7-1982; 6-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 7-2002]
§ 350-51 WIRES AND POLES § 350-51
346:765

ARTICLE IX
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 350-52. Membership; terms of office; rules and procedures.
[Amended 3-7-1990 by Ord. No. 90-4]
§ 350-53. Special use permits. [Amended 9-15-1998 by Ord. No.
98-13]
Special uses are those uses that have some particular impact or unique
characteristics which require a case-by-case review of their location,
design, configuration and impacts on the surrounding area to determine,
against the following standards, the desirability of permitting their
establishment on a particular site.
A. There shall be a Board of Zoning Appeals consisting of seven members
who shall be appointed by the City Council for a term of three years.
Any vacancy shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired portion
of the term. The Board shall serve without compensation. [Amended
6-5-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
B. The Board shall have power and duties pursuant to the provisions of the
General City Law and prescribed statutes. The Board shall determine
its own rules and procedures and may adopt and promulgate bylaws
and forms as it deems necessary for the proper execution of its duties
and to secure the intent of this chapter. Such rules, procedures, bylaws
and forms shall not conflict with, nor have the effect of waiving, any
provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or local law of the City.
C. Public notice of applications. [Added 9-4-1996 by Ord. No. 96-8;
amended 6-19-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
(1) In addition to such public notice of variance and other applications
to be heard by the Board as is required by the General City Law to
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City,
public notice shall also be given by mail to the last known owners of
the neighboring properties as follows:
(a) Use variances: all neighboring properties within 500 feet of
that property specified in the application.
(b) Area variances and special use permits: all neighboring
properties within 101 feet of that property specified in the
application.
A. Application and review. If a use is only permitted by special use permit,
the applicant shall make a written application for review and approval
to the Planning Board, except that the review of internally illuminated
signs shall continue to be the responsibility of the Zoning Board of
Appeals as specified in § 350-30. The application shall include a written
description of the proposed use, a written statement specifically
addressing each of the standards established in Subsection B below,
§ 350-52 WIRES AND POLES § 350-53
346:767
and a site plan drawn to scale and of sufficient detail, as appropriate, to
allow a thorough evaluation of the proposed use. A public hearing shall
be held after public notice has been given, at which the applicant shall
appear and answer such questions as the Board and/or the public may
have.
B. General standards. The Board may approve a special use permit only if
the proposed use:
(1) Is listed as a special permitted use in the appropriate zoning
district and will be consistent with the purposes and intents of the
Master Plan and the stated purpose of the applicable zoning
district.
(2) Will conform to the standards and conditions specified in this
chapter for that use.
(3) Will obtain from state or other authorities all other necessary
permits and approvals.
(4) Will not have an adverse effect on adjacent properties or
compromise the character and enjoyment of nearby properties by
means of traffic conditions, parking, utility facilities or other
matters affecting the public health, safety, welfare or convenience.
(5) Will not by operating be more objectionable to nearby properties by
reason of noise, fumes, vibration, illumination, outdoor storage, or
disposal of waste material than the operation of any permitted use
not requiring such a special use permit.
(6) Will be served adequately by essential services such as streets and
highways, off-street and on-street parking, police and fire
protection, stormwater drainage, refuse disposal, water and sewer
service, and schools.
(7) Will provide sufficient landscaping and/or other forms of buffering
to protect surrounding land uses.
(8) Will obtain a building permit and a certificate of occupancy within a
reasonable period of time as specified by the Board. Any special use
permit granted which is not exercised within one year shall expire
without further hearing by the Board.
(9) Complies with any additional requirements imposed by this chapter
or as may be deemed necessary by the Board to ensure that the
proposed use is to be conducted in a manner compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood and will not constitute a threat to the
public health, safety, welfare or convenience.
C. Specific standards. In addition to those general standards listed above,
the following specific standards shall apply to the following specific
uses:
§ 350-53 GENEVA CODE § 350-53
346:768
§ 350-54. Fees for appeal. [Amended 6-19-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, a fee shall be paid to the enforcement
officer to defray the expenses of advertising the public hearing and other
expenses incidental thereto. Such fee shall be in addition to the regular fee
for a building permit. The amount of said fee shall be $50 for applications
for area variances related to a single-family residence. The amount of said
fee shall be $150 for all other applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) Light industry/light assembly uses, including research and
development, and warehousing, without distribution, within the B2
District:
(a) The applicant shall supply sufficient information as part of the
written application to verify quantities of truck traffic to and
from the site; number of employee and company vehicles to be
on site; specific nature of any noise, vibration, dust and/or
smoke perceptible from beyond the property line; quantity and
nature of any hazardous or toxic chemicals or substances to be
kept or used on site; quantity, nature and location of any
exterior lighting and/or signage; and daily hours of operation.
(b) The size and nature of the proposed use shall not be
substantially inconsistent with the character of the
surrounding neighborhood and/or jeopardize the continued
use of the surrounding neighborhood for previously existing
uses.
(2) Motor vehicle salesrooms and repair garages, and motor vehicle
service stations, in the B1 and B2 Districts:
(a) The same standards listed in Subsection C(1)(a) and (b) above.
(b) Such uses shall be permitted only on lots of 10,000 square feet
or more, with 100 feet minimum street frontage.
(c) The area for use by motor vehicles, except access drives
thereto, as well as any structures, principal or accessory, shall
not encroach on any setback required.
(d) No fuel pump shall be located closer than 20 feet to any side lot
line, or closer than 35 feet to any front lot line, measured from
the outside edge of the fuel island.
(e) All repair work and overnight storage of vehicles shall be
within the permitted area subject to any buffering
requirements of the Geneva Planning Board.
§ 350-53 WIRES AND POLES § 350-54
346:769

ARTICLE X
Historic Zoning
[Added effective 6-4-1969 by Ord. No. 69-5]
§ 350-55. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is:
§ 350-56. Boundaries.
A. To safeguard the heritage of the City of Geneva by preserving districts
and buildings and structures in the City which reflect elements of its
cultural, social, economic, political and architectural heritage.
B. Stabilize and improve property values.
C. Foster civic pride.
D. Strengthen the local economy.
E. Promote the use of historic districts, buildings and structures for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the City.
A. Districts.
(1) The Historic District to be known as the South Main Street-
Pulteney Park Historic District shall be bounded and described as
follows: Commencing at the southeast corner of South Main and
Seneca Streets, extending south to Conover Street, including all
properties on the east side of South Main Street, crossing South
Main Street due west, extending 400 feet west from the west side
of South Main Street, extending north to include all properties
along the west side of South Main Street to William Street,
including all properties facing Park Place, all properties on the
north side of Washington Street between Park Place and Pulteney
Street, including the properties numbered 135 Washington Street,
129 Washington Street, 128 Washington Street, 144 Pulteney
Street and 35 William Street and the properties on the west side of
Pulteney Street between Washington Street and Worthington
Avenue and crossing South Main Street at the southeast corner of
South Main and William Streets to the place of beginning.
(2) The Historic District to be known as the Genesee Park Historic
District shall be bounded and described as follows: Commencing at
the northeast corner of Genesee Street and Genesee Park, east to
the northeast boundary of 9 Genesee Park, south to property at 44
Lewis Street, crossing Lewis Street to the property at the
southwest corner of Geneva Street and Lewis Street, extended
south along the west side of Geneva Street west along the border of
St. Peters Episcopal Church property, 145 Genesee Street, crossing
Genesee Street, west to the western boundary of 152 Genesee
Street, north along the western boundary of 146, 140 Genesee
§ 350-55 WIRES AND POLES § 350-56
346:771
§ 350-57. Regulation of structures.
No structure or building, including stone walls, fences, steps and paving,
shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, restored, repaired,
moved, or demolished in the historic districts or on the designated historic
buildings and structures, and no sign, light, fence, wall or other
appurtenant fixture, hereafter called "appurtenant fixtures," shall be
erected or displayed on any lands, buildings or structures therein or thereon
unless such action complies with the requirements of this article.
§ 350-58. Historic Districts and Structures Commission.
Street, crossing Lewis Street, going north crossing Goodelle
Terrace, bounded on the west by the properties fronting Genesee
Park on the west, north to the northern boundary of number 112
Genesee Street, then east crossing Genesee Street to the place of
beginning.
B. Buildings and structures. The historic buildings and structures are
designated as follows:
Thomas Folger House 105 Jay Street
Ashcroft House 112 Jay Street
Douglas-Blackwell House William Smith College Campus
Van Brent-Foote (DeLancey) House 46 DeLancey Drive
Greek Revival House 273 Washington Street
Greek Revival House 226 Washington Street
Greek Revival House 218 Washington Street
Victorian Eclectic House 210 Washington Street
Federal Three-Bay House 508 Washington Street
Greek Revival House 143 William Street
Greek Revival House 96 Pulteney Street
Greek Revival House 92 Pulteney Street
Geneva Women's Club 336 South Main Street
Baldridge House 196 Genesee Street
Simpson House 34 Elmwood Place
Former Smith Nursery Office 580 Castle Street
Denton House 643 North Street
Gothic House 165 Washington Street
The Smith Observatory Castle Street
The Smith Opera House for the
Performing Arts [Added
1-24-1990 by Ord. No. 2-1990]
82 Seneca Street
§ 350-56 GENEVA CODE § 350-58
346:772
§ 350-59. Powers and duties of Commission.
A. Creation of Commission. In order to execute the purposes declared in
this article, there is hereby created a commission to be called the
"Historic Districts and Structures Commission."
B. Membership of the Commission.
(1) The Historic Districts and Structures Commission shall consist of
seven members whose residences are located in the City of Geneva.
They shall be appointed by the City Council of the City of Geneva
for terms of office of three years, provided that two of the initial
members shall be appointed for one year, two for two years and
three for three years, and subsequently members shall be
appointed for terms of three years as terms expire. Members of the
Commission may be reappointed after their terms expire. The
terms of office of the members shall begin as of the date of passage
of this article.
(2) Before making said appointments, the City Council shall request
the Board of Directors of the Geneva Historical Society for
recommendations. In no event is the City Council required to
accept any recommendations so made to it. A vacancy occurring in
the membership of the Commission for any cause shall be filled by a
person appointed by the City Council for the unexpired term. The
members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
A. The Commission, in reviewing applications for certificates of
appropriateness, shall consider the appropriateness of proposed
exterior features of buildings, structures and appurtenant fixtures,
location on the lot and removal or demolition of any building or
structure under authority of said Commission, where such exterior
features, buildings, structures and appurtenances are subject to public
view from a public street or way. All plans, elevations and other
information deemed necessary by the Commission to determine the
appropriateness of the exterior features or buildings in question shall
be made available to it by the applicant. In reviewing the plans, the
Commission shall give consideration to:
(1) Historical architectural value and significance of the structure and
its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area;
(2) The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture
and materials proposed to be used; and
(3) Any other factor, including aesthetic, which it deems pertinent.
B. The Commission shall pass only on exterior features of a structure and
will not consider interior arrangements, nor shall it disapprove
applications except in regard to considerations as set forth in the
previous subsection.
§ 350-58 WIRES AND POLES § 350-59
346:773
§ 350-60. Procedures and rules of Commission.
C. It is also the intent of this article that the Commission shall be lenient in
its judgment of plans for new construction or for alteration, repair or
demolition of structures of little historic value, except when such
construction, alteration, repair or demolition would seriously impair the
historic value and character of surrounding structures or the
surrounding area. It is not the intent of this article to limit new
construction, alteration or repair to any one period of architectural
style, but rather to preserve an aesthetic whole.
D. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the
ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in
either the historic districts or on designated structures of historic and
architectural importance which does not involve a change in design,
material, color or the outward appearance thereof.
E. The Commission shall have the power to call in experts to aid in its
deliberations and may ask the Council for appropriations for such
services.
F. The Commission shall have the power to issue a certificate of approval
if it approves of the plans submitted to it for its review. The
Superintendent of Building and Zoning shall not issue a building permit
until such certificate of approval has been issued by the Commission.
A. The Historic Districts and Structures Commission shall elect from its
membership annually a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from its own
number.
B. The Chairman shall preside over the Commission and shall have the
right to vote. The Vice-Chairman shall, in cases of absence or disability
of the Chairman, perform the duties of the Chairman.
C. All Commission members shall have voting rights. The Commission may
adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this
article.
D. The Commission shall adopt rules which shall provide for the time and
place of holding regular meetings. It shall provide for the calling of
special meetings by the Chairman or by at least three members of the
Commission.
E. At least four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of its business.
F. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, and any
person or his duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear
and be heard on any matter before the Commission before it reaches its
decision.
§ 350-59 GENEVA CODE § 350-60
346:774
§ 350-61. Procedure for review of plans.
G. The Commission shall be furnished with a secretary by the City who
shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings and actions of the
Commission. This shall constitute a record which shall be open to public
view. The concurring affirmative vote of four members shall constitute
approval of plans before it for review or for the adoption of any
resolution, motion or other action of the Commission.
A. Application for a building permit to construct, alter, repair, move or
demolish any structure in the historic districts or one of the specific
historic buildings and structures shall be made to the Superintendent of
Building and Zoning. The application shall state whether the property is
in an historic district or listed as an historic designated structure in
§ 350-56B. Plans shall be submitted showing the structure in question
and also showing its relation to adjacent structures.
B. Upon the filing of such application, the Superintendent of Building and
Zoning shall immediately notify the Historic Districts and Structures
Commission of the receipt of such application and shall transmit it
together with accompanying plans and other information to the
Commission unless it pertains solely to the interior of the structure.
C. The Historic Districts and Structures Commission shall meet within 15
days after notification by the Superintendent of Building and Zoning of
the filing, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and
Commission, and shall review the plans according to the duties and
powers specified herein. In reviewing the plans, the Commission may
confer with the applicant for the building permit.
D. The Commission shall approve or disapprove such plans and, if
approved, shall issue a certificate of approval, which is to be signed by
the Chairman, attached to the application for a building permit and
immediately transmitted to the Superintendent of Building and Zoning.
The Chairman shall also stamp all prints submitted to the Commission
signifying its approval.
E. If the Commission disapproves of such plans, it shall state its reasons
for doing so and shall transmit a record of such action and reasons
therefor in writing to the Superintendent of Building and Zoning and to
the applicant. The Commission may advise what it thinks proper if it
disapproves of the plans submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may
make modification to his plans and shall have the right to resubmit his
application at any time after so doing.
F. The failure of the Historic Districts and Structures Commission to
approve or disapprove of such plans within 45 days from the date of
application for the building permit, unless otherwise mutually agreed
upon by the applicant and Commission, shall be deemed to constitute
approval, and the Superintendent of Building and Zoning shall proceed
to process the application without regard to a certificate of approval.
§ 350-60 WIRES AND POLES § 350-61
346:775
§ 350-62. Appeals.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the
Historic Districts and Structures Commission which shall result in the
failure of the Superintendent of Building and Zoning to issue a building
permit shall have the right to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a
variance as provided by this chapter and seek such other remedies as may
be provided for by this chapter or general law.
§ 350-63. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall be in addition to and shall in no manner
supersede or nullify any other provisions contained in this chapter.
G. After the certificate of approval has been issued and the building permit
granted to the applicant, the Commission shall from time to time
inspect the construction, alteration or repair approved by such
certificate and shall take such action as is necessary to force
compliance with the approved plans.
§ 350-61 GENEVA CODE § 350-63
346:776
ARTICLE XI
Swimming Pools
[Added effective 6-2-1971 by Ord. No. 71-10]
§ 350-64. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to establish regulations for the
construction, the use, and the maintenance of swimming pools within the
City of Geneva in order to promote and protect the health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Geneva,
New York, and to promote peace and good order therein.
§ 350-65. Definitions.
When used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — Includes any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or any organization of any kind.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure, located outdoors, which is designated
to contain water to a depth of two feet, or more, which has at least one
horizontal dimension of 12 feet, or more, and the upper side of which is
open. The term "swimming pool" shall include structures constructed, used,
or maintained either on, above, or below the surrounding finished grade.
§ 350-66. Building permit required; regulations.
A. Building permit. No swimming pool shall be constructed or enlarged in
the City of Geneva without a building permit issued by the
Superintendent of Building and Zoning. Each application for a building
permit shall include a plot plan of the lot upon which the swimming pool
is to be built, which plan shall contain existing structures and lot lines.
B. Construction, use and maintenance regulations. No building permit for
the construction of a swimming pool within the City of Geneva shall be
issued except upon compliance with the following regulations:
(1) Private swimming pools may be erected or installed only as an
accessory to a dwelling, private club, community building, or
commercial structure for the use of the owner(s) or occupant(s)
and family(ies), guests and/or invitees. Such swimming pool shall
not occupy more than 10% of the area of the lot on which the same
is located and shall in all other respects comply with this chapter,
particularly setback requirements.
(2) No person, firm or corporation shall maintain a swimming pool
within the City of Geneva without first completely enclosing such
swimming pool with a permanent protective fence. Such fence shall
be a minimum of four feet in height measured from the ground
level. It shall be so constructed as to have no openings, holes or
gaps larger than two inches in any direction. The wall of a dwelling
§ 350-64 WIRES AND POLES § 350-66
346:777
§ 350-67. Existing pools.
The provisions set forth on fencing in Subsection B(2) of § 350-66 of this
article shall not be strictly applied to fences safeguarding swimming pools
existing at the time that this article becomes effective. In such cases the
Superintendent of Building and Zoning is hereby authorized and directed
to approve such existing fences and gates which, in his discretion,
substantially comply with these provisions. If, in his discretion, any such
existing pool fences or gates do not substantially comply with the provisions
of this article, he shall direct the owner or user thereof to erect fences and/
or gates which are in compliance with these sections. Such owners and/
or users shall be given a reasonable time to comply, the time to be given
being chosen in accordance with the magnitude of the change required, but
in no case shall it be more than 30 days. Any person(s) and/or association
or corporation owning or using an existing swimming pool is required to
apply for a certificate of compliance from the Superintendent of Building
and Zoning within 30 days of the date that this article takes effect, such
certificate to be issued only when, in the discretion of the Superintendent of
Building and Zoning, there is substantial compliance with all of the sections
of this article.
or an accessory building may form a part of such fence. Swimming
pools which are constructed completely above grade, at a minimum
height of 42 inches, as measured from the land immediately
adjacent to the outside edge of said structure, shall be exempted
from this fencing requirement if the means of access to the
swimming pool is a ladder, or a device that must be removed when
the pool is not in use or attended.
(3) All gates or doors opening through a fence surrounding a pool shall
be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping
the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use,
except that the door of any dwelling, house or accessory building
which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. Any
such gate or door shall be kept locked while the swimming pool is
not under the direct supervision of a responsible individual who is
18 years of age or older.
(4) All equipment or mechanical devices pertinent to and in the
general vicinity of a pool relying on electrical power sources shall
be of single-phase, one-hundred-twenty-volt, three-wire
construction directly grounded to the ground system of the house
or the source of power.
(5) In the course of pool maintenance the emptying or discharging of
the contents of the pool shall be controlled in such a manner as not
to cause a nuisance to adjacent properties.
§ 350-66 GENEVA CODE § 350-68
346:778
§ 350-68. Health requirements.
A filter recirculating pump and purification system shall be provided so as
to maintain the bacterial standard established by the provisions of the New
York State Sanitary Code relating to public swimming pools.
§ 350-69. Light and noise abatement.
§ 350-70. Variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may vary or adapt the strict application of any
of the requirements of this article pursuant to and in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 350-71. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall be in addition to and shall in no manner
supersede or nullify any other provision contained in this chapter.
A. No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with
any swimming pool presently constructed or installed or hereafter
constructed or installed in such manner as to unreasonably interfere
with the occupants of any neighboring property.
B. The use of megaphones, loudspeakers or public address systems is
prohibited in connection with swimming pools herein regulated, and
the use of any sound producing or reproducing devices, including
human voices, shall not be such as to be objectionable to the occupants
of any nearby property.
§ 350-68 WIRES AND POLES § 350-71
346:779

ARTICLE XII
Amendments and Penalties
§ 350-72. Amendments.
§ 350-73. Penalties for offenses; injunction.
A. Pursuant to the General City Law and the Geneva City Charter and all
applicable provisions of this chapter, this chapter may be amended,
supplemented and repealed.
B. Pursuant to the Geneva City Charter, the Planning Board shall file with
the City Clerk its report on any proposed amendment, supplementation
or repeal of this chapter within 45 days after such proposal has been
referred to the Planning Board or its approval thereof shall be deemed
to have been made.
A. Any violation of either this article or chapter, as the case may be, shall
be punishable as provided in § 1-17 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, of
this Code. [Amended effective 7-5-1972 by Ord. 72-12]
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing and in addition thereto, the City may
bring an action for a mandatory injunction to compel compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. [Amended effective 7-5-1972 by Ord.
No. 72-14]
§ 350-72 WIRES AND POLES § 350-73
346:781
Chapter 351
ZONING APPENDIX
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 350-73 GENEVA CODE § 350-73
346:782
ARTICLE I
Traditional Urban Design District
[Adopted 3-14-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
§ 351-1. Legislative findings; intent.
§ 351-2. Purpose; design elements.
A. Findings.
(1) The City of Geneva is a destination city providing a high quality of
urban life enhanced by cultural, recreational, educational, and
economic opportunities; and
(2) The City's 1998 Master Plan recognizes that among the City's
unique assets is "a spatially and visually defined downtown that
highlights the geographic center of the community;" and that
"Geneva's downtown is the social and functional center of the City .
. . . well-defined and historic in character"; and
(3) The Master Plan recommends that the City of Geneva designate the
core downtown area as a Traditional Urban Design District to
conserve the architectural character of downtown by developing
"methods to preserve existing historic buildings and ensure that
new development conforms to the existing character"; and
(4) A Traditional Urban Design District will promote economic viability,
offer a diverse urban lifestyle, and help position the City as a
regional center;
B. As recommended by the Master Plan, a Traditional Urban Downtown
District (TUDD) shall be created as an overlay zoning district in the core
downtown area.
A. The purpose of the TUDD is to conserve the existing unique assets of
Geneva's historic urban center and to encourage new development that
enhances the traditional urban design and character of its downtown.
B. The elements of a Traditional Urban Design District are as follows:
(1) Pedestrian-oriented: characterized by a concentration of
commercial, office, civic, cultural and residential uses all within
walking distance of one another, which creates a working, growing
and attractive business center full of vitality and pedestrian
activity.
(2) Traditional mid-nineteenth through early-twentieth century urban
streetscape: characterized by zero side and lot line setbacks, zero
sidewalk setbacks, common walls between buildings, and buildings
that are at least two stories high. Lighting, benches, and signage
are geared toward encouraging pedestrian interest by
complementing the building's design. Parking is provided on the
§ 351-1 WIRES AND POLES § 351-2
346:783
§ 351-3. Creation of Traditional Urban Design District as overlay
zoning district.
The boundaries of the TUDD are delineated on the attached map.71 The
boundaries constitute the core area of Geneva's downtown as it developed
in the late nineteenth through early twentieth century.
BEGINNING at a point that marks the intersection of the west line of
Exchange Street and the south line of the railroad tracks; thence
southerly encompassing all properties that front on the west line of
Exchange Street to a point which marks the intersection of the west line
of Exchange Street and the north line of Castle Street;
THENCE westerly encompassing all properties that front the north line of
Castle Street to the southwest corner of property known as 244 Main
Street (the Public Library);
THENCE southerly encompassing all properties that front the west line of
Main Street to a point which marks the intersection of the west line of
Main Street and the north line of William Street;
THENCE easterly across Main Street to the southwest corner of property
known as 357 South Main Street (Civic Center);
THENCE easterly encompassing all properties that front on the south line
of Seneca Street to a point which marks the intersection of the south line
of Seneca Street with the east line of South Linden Street;
THENCE southerly along the east line of South Linden Street to a point
which marks the intersection of the east line of South Linden Street and
the north line of Elizabeth Blackwell Drive;
THENCE easterly encompassing all properties that front the north line of
Elizabeth Blackwell Drive to a point which marks the intersection of the
north line of Elizabeth Blackwell Drive and the west line of Routes 5&20
(Lakefront Drive);
street, in the rear of buildings, or public areas. Alleys, parking lots
and rear building entries are safe and attractive, and encourage a
commercial/residential environment.
(3) Traditional mid-nineteenth through early-twentieth century urban
facades: characterized by retail storefronts at street level with an
entrance that is often recessed, large display windows with
bulkheads or kickplates below, an upper facade with regularly
spaced windows, and a decorative cornice at the top.
(4) Building materials and colors: characterized by masonry faced with
brick. Wrought iron cladding work is encouraged. The color
scheme is subtle, traditional and complementary to adjoining
buildings.
71.Editor's Note: The map is on file in the City offices.
§ 351-2 GENEVA CODE § 351-3
346:784
THENCE northerly along the west line of Routes 5&20 to a point which
marks the intersection of the west line of Routes 5&20 and the north line
of Lake Street;
THENCE westerly encompassing all properties except the railroad that
front the north line of Lake Street to a point which marks the intersection
of the north line of Lake Street and the east line of Exchange Street;
THENCE northerly encompassing all properties along the east line of
Exchange Street that front the east line of Exchange Street to a point
which marks the intersection of the east line of Exchange Street and the
south line of the railroad tracks;
THENCE westerly along the south line of the railroad tracks to the point
and place of beginning.
§ 351-4. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all properties located within the TUDD. The
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 350, Geneva Municipal Code)
shall apply in the TUDD, except where the provisions of this article differ
from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, this article shall take
precedence.
§ 351-5. Nonconforming structures.
Any building, structure, parking area, or sign that lawfully exists at the time
this article is enacted, which would not otherwise be permitted under this
article, may be continued in the same manner as existed before the effective
date of this article.
§ 351-6. Parking.
§ 351-7. Signs.
A. Business. Businesses located in this district are not required to provide
on-site parking for their patrons or employees.
B. Residential.
(1) Residences located in this district are not required to provide onsite
parking for their residents.
(2) TUDD residents may use designated overnight or long-term
parking areas.
C. Private parking lots shall be located behind or within buildings.
A. Facades. Each building facade may have signage.
B. Number and size of signs.
(1) Each floor of a facade may have any number of signs flush with the
facade so long as the aggregate size does not exceed 20% of that
§ 351-3 WIRES AND POLES § 351-7
346:785
floor's facade area, provided that the floor is used for commercial
use and the signage relates to the commercial use, and the sign
doesn't block the window.
(2) Rear facades facing Routes 5&20 may exceed the 20% area square
footage limitation, but shall not exceed 120 square feet.
C. Signs shall be externally lit. Internally illuminated signs are not
permitted. Flashing lights are not permitted.
D. Sidewalk sandwich board signs are permitted, provided: [Amended
3-5-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014]
(1) All sandwich board signs shall require an annual permit, the
application for which shall be reviewed by the Building Official. The
permit application shall include contact information for the
applicant and a rendering of the sign, including location to be
placed, physical appearance, and dimensions.
(2) Except as provided for in Subsection D(6), the sign shall be located
in front of the business it represents.
(3) The sign shall be removed at the end of the business's hours of
operation.
(4) Size shall not exceed 12 square feet per side, nor be more than 42
inches in height.
(5) The location of the sign shall not interfere with pedestrian access
on the sidewalk nor obstruct the view of vehicular traffic.
(6) The Building Official may grant exceptions to Subsection D(2) in
cases where it is deemed that the business location has obscured
visibility. In such cases, one sign may be placed at the nearest
intersection, provided that a signed affidavit of approval is
provided by the property owner on whose property the sign will be
placed.
(7) Any sign placed in violation of this section shall be confiscated and
stored by the City for 30 days. Property owners may reclaim the
sign once in a twelve-month period at no cost. Property owners
whose signs are confiscated more than once in a twelve-month
period will be fined $50 for each time reclaimed. Any signs not
reclaimed within 30 days shall be destroyed.
(8) Property owners with existing sandwich board signs at the time of
adoption of this subsection shall have 90 days from adoption date
to comply.
E. Pylon, pole, monument, rooftop, and billboard signs are not permitted.
§ 351-7 GENEVA CODE § 351-8
346:786
§ 351-8. Building location.
Building location regulations are as follows:
§ 351-9. Demolition of buildings in TUDD.
§ 351-10. Guidelines.
Traditional Urban Design Guidelines have been developed in accordance
with the Master Plan to provide recommended standards to enable the City,
property owners, and prospective property owners to "preserve existing
historic buildings" when implementing general maintenance and repairs,
and to "ensure that new development conforms to the existing character."
These guidelines are not a part of this article. The Guidelines are intended
to convey desirable elements. They are recommendations, not
requirements.
A. Building fronts at the sidewalk.
B. The minimum lot coverage is 50%.
C. New construction and infill buildings must maintain the existing
alignment of facades along the street front. Exceptions may be granted
by the Planning Board as long as the setback is pedestrian-oriented and
contributes to the character of the streetscape.
A. An application for demolition of any building within the TUDD shall be
subject to a hearing prior to issuance of a demolition permit by the
Code Enforcement Office. A public hearing on the application shall be
held by City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting upon notice
published within seven days of filing the application for demolition.
B. The purpose of the hearing shall be to notify the public of the pending
application, and to receive public comment on the issue of whether it is
in the public interest that the building be preserved and to allow for
solutions to demolition to be explored.
C. No permit for demolition shall be issued by the Code Enforcement
Office until at least 45 days after the filing of the application for
demolition.
D. The provisions of this section of the article may be waived by the Code
Enforcement Office if a building is damaged or destroyed in whole or in
part by fire or other catastrophe to the extent that it cannot be repaired,
or the building must be demolished for immediate emergency health
and public safety reasons, as determined by the Fire Department or
others considered by the Code Enforcement Office to be qualified to
assess the damage. In such instances, the building may be rebuilt in its
original form.
§ 351-8 WIRES AND POLES § 351-10
346:787
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2001 7-11-2001 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No. 2-2001 8-1-2001 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1-2017
Ord. No. 3-2001 9-5-2001 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 4-2001 10-3-2001 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-2001
Ord. No. 5-2001 11-7-2001 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 350
Ord. No. 6-2001 11-7-2001 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 7-2001 11-7-2001 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
L.L. No. 2-2001 12-5-2001 Resident and
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. III;
Ch. 341, Art. IV
Ord. No. 8-2001 12-5-2001 Taxicabs
amendment
Ch. 321
Ord. No. 9-2001 12-5-2001 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
Ord. No.
10-2001
12-19-2001 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 1-2002 1-9-2002 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 2-2002 5-1-2002 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 3-2002 5-1-2002 Peddlers and
solicitors
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
L.L. No. 1-2002 6-19-2002 Skateboards, inline
skates, roller
blades and roller
skates
Ch. 291
§ 351-10 GENEVA CODE § DL-1
346:788
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 2-2002 7-10-2002 Retirement
incentive program
NCM
L.L. No. 3-2002 7-10-2002 Empire Zone
amendment
Ch. 138 (table
only)
Ord. No. 4-2002 8-7-2002 Water amendment Ch. 341, Art. I
Ord. No. 5-2002 9-18-2002 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
L.L. No. 4-2002 11-6-2002 Cross-connection
control
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. VI
L.L. No. 5-2002 11-20-2002 Zoning
amendment
(Agricultural
Technology
District)
Ch. 350
Ord. No. 6-2002 11-20-2002 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
Ord. No. 7-2002 6-19-2002 Subdivision of
land amendment
zoning
amendment
Ch. 310; Ch. 350
L.L. No. 6-2002 12-4-2002 Resident and
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. III;
Ch. 341, Art. IV
L.L. No. 7-2002 12-4-2002 Empire Zone
amendment
Ch. 138 (table
only)
Ord. No. 1-2003 4-2-2003 Zoning map
amendment
Ch. 350
Ord. No. 2-2003 5-7-2003 Taxicabs
amendment
Ch. 321
Ord. No. 3-2003 6-17-2003 Parks and
recreation
amendment
Ch. 247
Ord. No. 4-2003 11-5-2003 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 5-2003 12-3-2003 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
Ord. No. 6-2003 12-3-2003 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1-2017
§ DL-1 WIRES AND POLES § DL-1
346:789
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2003 12-3-2003 Resident and
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. III;
Ch. 341, Art. IV
L.L. No. 1-2004 3-3-2004 Fair housing Ch. 158
Ord. No. 1-2004 3-3-2004 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 2-2004 5-5-2004 Excavations,
maintenance and
use of streets
amendment
Ch. 306, Art. I
Ord. No. 3-2004 5-5-2004 Excavations,
maintenance and
use of streets
amendment
Ch. 306, Art. I
Ord. No. 4-2004 5-5-2004 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 5-2004 6-2-2004 Taxicabs
amendment
Ch. 321
Ord. No. 6-2004 6-2-2004 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 7-2004 6-2-2004 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 8-2004 6-2-2004 Skateboard, inline
skates, roller
blades and roller
skates amendment
Ch. 291
Ord. No. 9-2004 9-1-2004 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No.
10-2004
11-3-2004 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No.
11-2004
12-1-2004 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
L.L. No. 2-2004 12-15-2004 Resident and
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Arts. III
and IV
Ord. No.
12-2004
12-15-2004 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
Ord. No. 1-2005 3-2-2005 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
§ DL-1 GENEVA CODE § DL-1
346:790
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 2-2005 5-4-2005 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 3-2005 8-10-2005 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 4-2005 9-14-2005 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 350
Ord. No. 5-2005 9-14-2005 Skateboard, inline
skates, roller
blades and roller
skates amendment
Ch. 291
Ord. No. 6-2005 11-2-2005 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 7-2005 11-2-2005 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
L.L. No. 1-2005 12-7-2005 Resident and
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Arts. III
and IV
L.L. No. 2-2005 12-7-2005 Charter
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 8-2005 12-7-2005 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
Ord. No. 1-2006 1-4-2006 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 2-2006 3-1-2006 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
L.L. No. 1-2006 3-22-2006 Empire zones
amendment
Ch. 138
L.L. No. 2-2006 6-21-2006 Empire zones
amendment
Ch. 138
Ord. No. 3-2006 6-21-2006 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 4-2006 8-6-2006 Vehicles and
traffic repealer
only
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 5-2006 10-4-2006 Smoke abatement
amendment
Ch. 294
L.L. No. 3-2006 12-6-2006 Sewer charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Arts. III
and IV
Ord. No. 6-2006 12-6-2006 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
§ DL-1 WIRES AND POLES § DL-1
346:791
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1-2007 3-14-2007 Zoning Appendix:
Traditional Urban
Design District
Ch. 351, Art. I
Ord. No. 2-2007 5-2-2007 Tax exemption for
senior citizens
amendment
Ch. 318, Art. III
L.L. No. 1-2007 8-7-2007 Room occupancy
tax
Ch. 318, Art. VII
L.L. No. 2-2007 8-7-2007 Empire Zones
amendment
Ch. 138 (table
only)
Ord. No. 3-2007 9-5-2007 Building
construction
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2010
Ord. No. 4-2007 9-5-2007 Operating permits Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2010
Ord. No. 5-2007 9-5-2007 Firesafety and
property
maintenance
compliance
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2010
Ord. No. 6-2007 9-5-2007 Housing Code Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2010
Ord. No. 7-2007 9-5-2007 Property
Maintenance Code
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2010
Ord. No. 8-2007 9-5-2007 Enforcement
officers
Ch. 22
Ord. No. 9-2007 10-3-2007 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
L.L. No. 3-2007 12-5-2007 Resident sewer
charges
amendment;
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment;
sewer rents
amendment
Ch. 341, Arts. III,
IV and V
L.L. No. 4-2007 12-5-2007 Empire Zones
amendment
Ch. 138 (table
only)
Ord. No.
10-2007
12-5-2007 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
Ord. No.
11-2007
12-5-2007 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 350
§ DL-1 GENEVA CODE § DL-1
346:792
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1-2008 4-2-2008 Sex offenders:
residency
restrictions
Repealed by Ord.
No. 3-2012
Ord. No. 2-2008 6-4-2008 Taxicabs
amendment
Ch. 321
Ord. No. 3-2008 7-2-2008 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 4-2008 8-6-2008 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 5-2008 9-3-2008 Nuisances:
nuisance parties
Ch. 236, Art. II
Ord. No. 6-2008 9-3-2008 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 350
Ord. No. 7-2008 12-3-2008 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
L.L. No. 1-2008 12-18-2008 Resident sewer
charges
amendment;
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Arts. III
and IV
Ord. No. 8-2008 1-7-2009 Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 26
Ord. No. 1-2009 2-4-2009 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 350
Ord. No. 2-2009 6-3-2009 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 350
Ord. No. 3-2009 12-2-2009 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
L.L. No. 1-2009 12-2-2009 Resident sewer
charges
amendment;
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Arts. III
and IV
L.L. No. 1-2010 4-7-2010 New York Uniform
and Energy Codes
Chs. 105
(repealer); 170
(repealer); 171
(repealer); 202
(repealer); 230;
264 (repealer)
Ord. No. 1-2010 5-12-2010 Zoning
amendment
Ch. 350
§ DL-1 WIRES AND POLES § DL-1
346:793
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 2-2010 6-2-2010 Empire Zones
amendment
Ch. 138 (table
only)
Ord. No. 2-2010 7-7-2010 Water amendment Ch. 341, Art. I
L.L. No. 3-2010 12-1-2010 Collection of real
property taxes
repealer
Ch. 318, Art. IV
(footnote only)
L.L. No. 4-2010 12-1-2010 Animals
amendment
Ch. 77
Ord. No. 3-2010 12-1-2010 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
L.L. No. 1-2011 4-6-2011 Water and sewers:
resident sewer
charges
amendment;
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Arts. III,
IV
Ord. No. 1-2011 7-6-2011 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 2-2011 10-5-2011 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 1-2012 3-7-2012 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 2-2012 3-7-2012 Water amendment Ch. 341, Art. I
Ord. No. 3-2012 5-2-2012 Sex offender
residency
restrictions
repealer
Ch. 285, reference
only
Ord. No. 4-2012 Not adopted
Ord. No. 5-2012 6-6-2012 Abandoned
vehicles
amendment
Ch. 332
Ord. No. 6-2012 6-6-2012 Public nuisances
amendment
Ch. 236, Art. I
Ord. No. 7-2012 6-6-2012 Sanitary Code
amendment
Ch. 273
Ord. No. 8-2012 6-6-2012 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 300
Ord. No. 9-2012 6-6-2012 Sanitary sewers
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1-2017
Ord. No.
10-2012
8-1-2012 Outdoor burning Ch. 114
§ DL-1 GENEVA CODE § DL-1
346:794
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
11-2012
8-1-2012 Boat docking
amendment
Ch. 96
Ord. No.
12-2012
Not adopted
L.L. No. 1-2012 10-24-2012 2013 tax levy limit
override
NCM
Ord. No. 1-2013 1-9-2013 Water amendment Ch. 341, Art. I
Ord. No. 2-2013 3-6-2013 Skateboards, inline
skates, roller
blades and roller
skates amendment
Ch. 291
Ord. No. 3-2013 5-1-2013 Excavations,
maintenance and
use of streets
amendment
Ch. 306, Art. I
Ord. No. 4-2013 6-5-2013 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 5-2013 10-2-2013 Excavations,
maintenance and
use of streets
amendment
Ch. 306, Art. I
Ord. No. 6-2013 11-6-2013 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 1-2014 3-5-2014 Zoning
amendment;
Traditional Urban
Design District
amendment
Ch. 350; Ch. 351,
Art. I
Ord. No. 2-2014 7-2-2014 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
L.L. No. 1-2014 10-29-2014 2015 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2014 12-3-2014 Nonresident
sewer charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. IV
L.L. No. 3-2014 12-3-2014 Room occupancy
tax amendment
Ch. 318, Art. VII
Ord. No. 1-2015 1-7-2015 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
Ord. No. 2-2015 1-7-2015 Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 26
§ DL-1 WIRES AND POLES § DL-1
346:795
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2015 2-4-2015 Charter
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 3-2015 2-4-2015 Fortune telling
repealer
Ch. 184, reference
only
L.L. No. 2-2015 7-1-2015 Appearance
tickets
amendment
Ch. 8
Ord. No. 4-2015 7-1-2015 Sanitary Code
amendment
Ch. 273
Ord. No. 5-2015 7-1-2015 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 300
Ord. No. 6-2015 7-1-2015 Streets and
sidewalks:
excavations,
maintenance and
use of streets
amendment
Ch. 306, Art. I
Ord. No. 7-2015 8-5-2015 Parks and
recreation
amendment
Ch. 247
Ord. No. 8-2015 8-5-2015 Hunting and
trapping
amendment
Ch. 206
Ord. No. 9-2015 8-5-2015 Code of Ethics
amendment
Ch. 26
L.L. No. 3-2015 10-28-2015 2016 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No. 4-2015 12-2-2015 Water and sewers:
resident sewer
charges
amendment;
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. III;
Ch. 341, Art. IV
Ord. No.
10-2015
Number not used
Ord. No.
11-2015
12-2-2015 Water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
Ord. No. 1-2016 2-3-2016 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 2-2016 5-4-2016 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
§ DL-1 GENEVA CODE § DL-1
346:796
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 3-2016 10-5-2016 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
L.L. No. 1-2016 10-19-2016 2017 tax levy limit
override
NCM
L.L. No. 2-2016 12-7-2016 Water and sewers:
resident sewer
charges
amendment;
nonresident sewer
charges
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. III;
Ch. 341, Art. IV
Ord. No. 4-2016 12-7-2016 Water and sewers:
water rates
amendment
Ch. 341, Art. II
Ord. No. 1-2017 2-1-2017 Sanitary sewers Ch. 277
Ord. No. 2-2017 4-5-2017 Vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No. 3-2017 5-3-2017 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 300
L.L. No. 1-2017 6-7-2017 Energy: municipal
building energy
benchmarking
Ch. 140, Art. I
L.L. No. 2-2017 6-7-2017 Energy: Energize
NY Benefit
Financing
Program
Ch. 140, Art. II
L.L. No. 3-2017 10-18-2017 2018 tax levy limit
override
NCM
Ord. No. 4-2017 12-6-2017 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 300
Ord. No. 5-2017 9-6-2017 Sanitary Code
Amendment
Ch. 273
L.L. No. 1-2018 3-7-2018 Energy:
Community
Choice
Aggregation
Program
Ch. 140, Art. III
L.L. No. 2-2018 4-4-2018 Energy: Energize
NY Benefit
Financing
Program
Amendment
Ch. 140, Art. II
§ DL-1 WIRES AND POLES § DL-1
346:797
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1-2018 5-2-2018 Solid Waste
Amendment
Ch. 300
Ord. No. 2-2018 9-5-2018 Code of Ethics
Amendment
Ch. 26
Ord. No. 3-2018 11-7-2018 Sanitary Code
Amendment
Ch. 273
Ord. No. 4-2018 11-7-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 335
L.L. No. 3-2018 10-24-2018 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
Ord. No.
1-2019
2-6-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 335 21
Ord. No.
2-2019
2-6-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 335 21
Ord. No.
3-2019
5-1-2019 Trees: Shade Trees
Amendment
Ch. 327,
Art. I
21
Ord. No.
4-2019
7-10-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 335 21
L.L. No.
1-2019
9-4-2019 Energy: Energize
NY Open C-PACE
Financing Program
Ch. 140,
Art. II
21
Ord. No.
5-2019
9-4-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Excavations,
Maintenance and
Use of Streets
Amendment;
Sanitary Sewers
Amendment
Ch. 306,
Art. I; Ch.
277
21
Ord. No.
6-2019
10-2-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 335 21
L.L. No.
2-2019
10-9-2019 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM 21
§ DL-1 GENEVA CODE § DL-1
346:798
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
L.L. No.
3-2019
12-4-2019 Water and Sewers:
Resident Sewer
Charges
Amendment;
Nonresident Sewer
Charges
Amendment
Ch. 341,
Art. III; Ch.
341, Art. IV
21
Ord. No.
7-2019
12-4-2019 Water and Sewers:
Water Rates
Amendment
Ch. 341,
Art. II
21
Ord. No.
8-2019
12-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 335 21
Ord. No.
9-2019
12-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 335 21
§ DL-1 WIRES AND POLES § DL-1
346:799