Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted 1-9-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984]
§ 1-1. Penalties for violations. [Amended 1-13-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997; 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
§ 1-2. Vehicle and traffic and parking violations. [Added 3-10-1997
by L.L. No. 3-1997]
Any person committing a violation of any provision of Chapter 217 of this
Code shall be punishable upon conviction thereof as provided in Chapter
217.
§ 1-3. Correction of violations; assessment. [Added 4-7-1986 by L.L.
No. 5-1986]
A. Any person committing a violation of any provision of this Code, except
a provision of Chapter 217, for which a different penalty is not provided
in this Code shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than $2,500 or
by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each separate day on which a violation occurs shall be a
separate offense. [Amended 4-11-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
B. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, the Village of Great
Neck Estates may obtain injunctive relief against any continuing
violation of any provision of this Code, by action commenced in a court
of appropriate jurisdiction. In any such action, in addition to any other
relief which may be awarded by the court, the Village shall be entitled
to recover its reasonable expenses of such action, including attorneys'
fees.
A. Any interested person, or any appropriate officer or employee of the
Village, may file a complaint in writing with the Village Clerk alleging
that there exists on any property in the Village conditions which
constitute a violation of this Code or which constitute a public nuisance
or which endanger or tend to endanger the property, safety or health of
any inhabitant of the Village or the public health.
B. The Village Clerk shall cause any such complaint to be investigated and
shall submit the same, together with a written report of the findings
resulting from such investigation, to the Board of Trustees at its next
meeting.
C. The Board of Trustees may direct that the person or persons believed to
be responsible for the alleged conditions shall appear before the Board
of Trustees at a time and place designated, and show cause why such
conditions should not be abated or corrected. Such notice may be
served either personally or by certified mail, addressed to each such
person at his or her last known residence address, or may be served in
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
any other manner permitted for service of a summons in a civil action.
Such notice may include a warning of consequences as described in
Subsection E hereof.
D. At the time and place designated, the Board of Trustees shall meet and
hear all persons interested and may make such investigations and
inquiries as the Board may determine necessary or appropriate.
Thereupon, the Board of Trustees may, by resolution, make such orders
and directions as may seem necessary or proper under the
circumstances.
E. In the event that any person or persons to whom such notice has been
sent fails to appear in person at the designated time and place, such
failure to appear shall be deemed an admission by each such person of
the truth of the allegations and a consent to such action by the Board of
Trustees, provided that the notice given to such person so states.
F. The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of any order or
direction of the Board of Trustees, or any part thereof, issued pursuant
to this section shall constitute a violation.
G. In addition to any penalty provided herein, or elsewhere in this Code, in
the event that any person fails to comply with the provisions of an order
or direction of the Board of Trustees, or any part thereof, made
pursuant to this section, within the period of time specified therein by
the Board of Trustees, the Village of Great Neck Estates may perform or
cause to be performed such acts as may reasonably be necessary to
effectuate compliance with the said order or direction, and the
expenses of said action shall be charged to the property affected in the
same manner as a special assessment, and shall also be the personal
liability of any person who failed to so comply.
§ 1-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 1-3
1:4
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
§ 1-4. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Great
Neck Estates, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of Chapters 1 through 230, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the "Code of the Village of Great Neck Estates," hereafter
termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions contained in the Code of the Village of Great
Neck Estates to any other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in
said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title,
chapter number, article number or section number appearing in the Code
as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to
so read.
§ 1-5. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates,
and it is the intention of said Board that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this
Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-6
below.
§ 1-6. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Great Neck Estates, including the 1981 Code, in force on the
date of the adoption of this local law and not contained in such Code or
recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed
from and after the effective date of this local law.
§ 1-7. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-6 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Great Neck Estates prior to the
effective date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for
the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of Great
Neck Estates or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Great
Neck Estates.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Village of Great
Neck Estates.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Great Neck Estates
providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating,
straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, park or other public place within the Village of Great Neck
Estates or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Great Neck Estates
appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond of the Village of Great Neck Estates or other instruments or
evidence of the village's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for municipal employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the village.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to 12-10-2003.
§ 1-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 1-8
1:6
§ 1-8. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Great Neck Estates and shall remain there
for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this local
law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by
the Village Clerk of the Village of Great Neck Estates by impressing thereon
the Seal of the Village of Great Neck Estates, and such certified copy shall
remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code
is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law, coupled with
the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Village of Great Neck Estates" or any new local laws or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Board of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-11. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified
copy of the book containing the Code of the Village of Great Neck Estates
required to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public.
All changes in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
Board of Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such
form as to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code
shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such
changes, local laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Village Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of
a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-13. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Great Neck Estates or who alters or tampers with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village
of Great Neck Estates to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any
other provision of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Great Neck Estates, no
changes in the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions have been made, except as provided for in Subsections B
and C hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances
and resolutions had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. The following nomenclature changes are made:
(1) "Master Plan" is changed to "Comprehensive Plan."
(2) In Chapters 181 and 230, "Building Inspector" and "Building
Official" are changed to "Code Official."
C. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
§ 1-11 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 1-15
1:8
§ 1-15. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article II of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Great Neck Estates, such local law to be entitled
"General Provisions, Article II, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this
local law shall be numbered §§ 1-4 to 1-15, inclusive.
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 4-12-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Village offices.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 3
ACCOUNTING POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 29.
§ 1-15 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 1-15
1:10
ARTICLE I
General Guidelines
[Adopted 4-8-2013]
§ 3-1. Purpose.
To the extent practicable, the Village seeks to prevent and reduce fraud,
abuse, theft, and questionable accounting or auditing problems that can
adversely impact the finances of the Village.
§ 3-2. Guidelines adopted.
In order to reduce the possibility of any such adverse impacts, the Village
adopts the following guidelines with regard to the receipt of monies and
payment of all claims:
A. Daily receipts.
(1) Daily monies are recorded into the receipting software at the
reception desk. Receipts are numbered consecutively.
(2) At the end of each day, a daily transaction report is printed by the
Secretary to the Board or the Village Administrator and checked for
accuracy with the checks/cash received.
(3) The daily transaction report posts directly to the general ledger.
(4) Deposits are made twice weekly, more often if necessary, by the
Deputy Treasurer or the Village Administrator.
(5) The deposit spreadsheet is approved by the Village Administrator
and entered on the monthly cashflow spreadsheet.
B. Payment of claims.
(1) The Secretary to the Board opens all mail and separates the
invoices for the Village Administrator.
(2) The invoices are reviewed by the Village Administrator. The Deputy
Treasurer assigns a proper expenditure account number.
(3) The claims are submitted to the appropriate department head for
approval and then to the department commissioner for approval.
(4) The Deputy Treasurer prepares a pre-abstract of all approved
claims which is presented to the Village Administrator for review
and modification if necessary.
(5) The pre-abstract is presented to the Board of Trustees for review
and approval at the Board meeting.
(6) The Deputy Treasurer prints the approved abstract and payment
checks. The approved abstract posts directly to the general ledger.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:11
(7) A monthly financial report of the receipts and expenditures is
processed and printed by the Deputy Treasurer, reviewed by the
Village Administrator and presented to the Board of Trustees.
C. Payroll.
(1) The biweekly payroll is presented to the Deputy Treasurer by the
department heads, worksheets are prepared and the information is
called in to ADP.
(2) The Deputy Treasurer reviews the completed ADP payroll and
printed checks for accuracy.
(3) Payroll is reviewed by the Village Administrator and the Budget
Director and checks are signed.
D. Checks. Every check shall require two signatures. The only persons
authorized to sign Village checks shall be the members of the Board of
Trustees and the Village Administrator.
E. Bank reconciliations. Bank reconciliations are processed in the
accounts payable software by the Deputy Treasurer and reviewed and
approved by the Village Administrator.
§ 3-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 3-2
1:12
ARTICLE II
Fraud, Theft or Questionable Practices
[Adopted 4-8-2013]
§ 3-3. Required acts.
In the event that anyone communicates to any employee of the Village,
directly or indirectly, an alleged fraud, abuse, or questionable accounting
or auditing problems, theft of Village property, or improper solicitation or
receipt of gratuities by or on behalf of Village employees, in cash, goods, or
services, the person receiving that communication shall:
A. Request, but not require, the name of the communicant.
B. Request as much information as possible about the allegations and the
basis for the allegations.
C. Immediately, but in no event by the next business day, report the
allegations to the Village Administrator and the Mayor.
D. In the event that the Village Administrator and/or the Mayor are the
targets of the complaint, such report shall be given to the one who is
not the target of the complaint and to either the Deputy Mayor, the
Police Chief, or Counsel to the Village.
E. Any person receiving such a report shall immediately investigate or
cause such report to be investigated, including, if appropriate,
reporting such activity to the Chief of Police and the District Attorney's
office to assist in the investigation.
F. The Village shall publicize this policy to encourage valid reports to the
Village.
G. The Village shall educate its employees about the Village's Code of
Ethics Policy.2
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 29, Code of Ethics.
§ 3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:13
Chapter 5
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 5-1. Authority to administer and enforce laws; issuance of tickets.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates is hereby
empowered, by resolution, to promulgate rules and regulations for carrying
into effect or fully administering the provisions of any local law and to
authorize the issuance of appearance tickets, by a public servant who, by
virtue of office, title or position, is authorized or required to enforce any
statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to parks, parking,
licensing of occupations or businesses, fire prevention and safety, health
and sanitation, and building, zoning and planning; and further provided,
however, that a peace officer may be authorized to issue an appearance
ticket relating to enforcement of any statute, local law, ordinance, rule or
regulation affecting the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 5-2. Authorized persons. [Added 10-5-2009]
Chapter 8
APPLICATIONS, PREREQUISITES TO
§ 8-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to any application for a permit or approval
from any board or official of the Village of Great Neck Estates, including
any application for a building or alteration permit, subdivision or site plan
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by law, and in § 5-1 of this chapter,
the persons holding the following positions are authorized to issue
appearance tickets in addition to any other person or official authorized
by law to do so:
(1) Mayor.
(2) Trustee.
(3) Superintendent of Public Works.
(4) Code Official.
(5) Building Inspector.
(6) Code Enforcement Officer.
(7) Safety Inspector.
B. Any and all previous designations by the Board of Trustees of persons
authorized to issue appearance tickets pursuant to Village Code §5-1
are hereby terminated, effective as of the date of this section.
§ 3-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 8-1
8:14
approval or waiver of the same or variance from any applicable law,
ordinance or regulation of the Village pertaining to real property in the
Village or activities to be conducted thereon.
§ 8-2. Prerequisites.
No application to which this chapter is applicable shall be accepted,
processed or acted upon by any official or Board of the Village of Great Neck
Estates unless all property taxes and other assessments, liens or charges
previously levied by the Village of Great Neck Estates upon the property
which is affected by or the subject of the said application, together with
any interest and penalties thereon, have been paid to the Treasurer of the
Village of Great Neck Estates.
Chapter 12
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Voting requirements for Village Boards — See
Ch. 72.
Building construction and plumbing — See
Ch. 95.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 12-1. Creation; membership; terms; alternate members.
[Amended 9-6-2006 by L.L. No. 8-2006]
A. There is hereby created a Board of Architectural Review, which shall
consist of three residents of the Village appointed by the Mayor, with
the approval of the Board of Trustees of the Village. The Mayor shall
designate which member of the Architectural Review Board shall be the
Chairman of the Architectural Review Board, subject to the approval of
the Board of Trustees, and the person so designated shall serve as
Chairman at the pleasure of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The
terms of the members of the Architectural Review Board shall be three
official years, except that of the members first appointed to said Board,
one shall be appointed for a term expiring at the end of the official year
ending in 1983, one shall be appointed for a term expiring at the end of
the official year ending in 1984, and one shall be appointed for a term
expiring at the end of the official year ending in 1985. Vacancies
occurring for whatever reason shall be filled for the balance of the
unexpired term.
B. Alternate members. With the approval of the Board of Trustees, the
Mayor may appoint not more than three alternate members of the
Board of Architectural Review. Each such appointee shall serve from
the date of appointment until the conclusion of the official year of the
Village in which such appointment is made. In the event any regular
§ 8-1 APPLICATIONS, PREREQUISITES TO § 12-1
8:15
§ 12-2. Board procedures. [Amended 4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
§ 12-3. Referral of building permit applications to Board.
member of the Architectural Review Board is unable to participate with
respect to any matter before that Board, for any reason, the Chair of
the Architectural Review Board may designate an alternate to serve in
the place and stead of each such regular member. When so designated,
the alternate member shall have all the powers and responsibilities of
such regular member.
A. Meetings of the Board of Architectural Review shall be held at the call
of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board shall determine.
The Board may hold a public hearing when it deems the same to be in
the public interest. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall also maintain
records of its examinations and other official actions, such records to be
kept in the Village Office. The Board may from time to time adopt,
amend and repeal rules and regulations not inconsistent with law or the
provisions of this chapter governing its procedure and the transactions
of its business and for the purpose of carrying into effect the standards
outlined in § 12-4 of this chapter.
B. With respect to any application to be reviewed by the Board which
pertains to construction of a new structure, or a substantial addition or
alteration to an existing structure which would enlarge the floor area or
lot coverage of the existing structure by 40% or more, the application to
the Board shall include a radius map showing all properties located in
whole or in part within 200 feet of any part of the property which is the
subject of the application and a list of the names and addresses of the
owners of such properties as shown on the Village tax records. At least
10 and no more than 20 calendar days prior to a Board meeting at
which such application is to be considered, the applicant shall give
notice of the application and meeting to each such owner, by first-class
mail, and shall file a United States Postal Service certificate of mailing
with the Building Department no later than one business day prior to
the meeting.
A. Transmission of copies of application to Board. [Amended 1-7-1987
by L.L. No. 1-1987]
(1) As soon as practicable and in any event within three business days
after determining that an application for a building permit for the
construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or
structure complies with all provisions of this chapter other than
this section, the Building Inspector shall transmit to each member
of the Board of Architectural Review a copy of any such application
which comes within either of the following categories:
§ 12-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 12-3
8:16
§ 12-4. Standards for Board action.
(a) Construction of any new building or structure.
(b) An addition to or reconstruction or alteration of an existing
building or structure in such manner as to change substantially
the exterior character and appearance of the building or
structure.
(2) In the event that the Building Inspector shall determine that any
application for a building permit need not be transmitted to the
Board of Architectural Review pursuant to this section and the
building permit application otherwise conforms to the
requirements of the Village of Great Neck Estates, the Building
Inspector shall transmit the same to the Board of Trustees, with his
recommendation. The Board of Trustees may, in its discretion,
determine to transmit said application to the Board of Architectural
Review, in which case the Board of Architectural Review shall
thereafter conduct a review of said application as if it had been
referred by the Building Inspector. [Added 3-13-1989 by L.L. No.
3-1989]
B. Applications must be accompanied by plans showing all elevations of
new structures and all affected elevations in the case of additions or
alterations. When required by the Building Inspector or by the Board of
Architectural Review, a site plan shall be submitted showing both
existing and proposed contours at five-foot intervals, all existing trees
with a trunk diameter of four inches or more at a point three feet above
the ground level and whether such trees shall remain or be removed
and/or other topographical features.
A. Recommendation of any building permit shall be by a vote of at least a
majority of the members of the Board of Architectural Review.
B. In considering an application for a permit, the Board shall take into
account natural features of the site and surroundings, exterior design
and appearances of existing structures and the character of the district
and its peculiar suitability for particular purposes, with a view to
conserving the values of property and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land.
C. The Board may recommend approval of any application referred to it
upon finding that the building or structure for which the permit was
requested, if erected or altered in accordance with the submitted plan,
would be in harmony with the purpose of this chapter, would not be
visually offensive or inappropriate by reason of poor quality of exterior
design, monotonous similarity or striking visual discord in relation to
the sites or surroundings; would not mar the appearance of the area;
would not impair the use, enjoyment and desirability and reduce the
values of properties in the area; would not be detrimental to the
character of the neighborhood; would not prevent the most appropriate
§ 12-3 APPLICATIONS, PREREQUISITES TO § 12-4
8:17
development and utilization of the site or of adjacent lands; and would
not adversely affect the functioning economic stability, prosperity,
health, safety and general welfare of the entire community.
D. In recommending approval of any application, the Board may impose
appropriate conditions and safeguards designed to prevent harmful
effects.
E. The Board may recommend disapproval of any application for a permit,
provided that the Board has afforded the applicant an opportunity to
confer upon suggestions for change of the plan, and provided that the
Board finds and states that the structure for which the permit was
requested would, if erected or altered as indicated, provoke one or
more of the harmful effects described in this chapter by reason of:
(1) Monotonous similarity to any other structure or structures located
or proposed to be located on the same street or a corner thereof
and within 250 feet of the site of the structure for which a building
permit is requested in respect to one or more of the following
features of exterior design and appearance:
(a) Substantially identical facade, disregarding color.
(b) Substantially identical size and arrangement of either doors,
windows, porticos, porches or garages or other openings or
breaks or extensions in the facade, including reverse
arrangements.
(c) Other substantially identical features, such as but not limited
to setbacks from street lines; heights, widths and lengths of
elements of the building design; and exterior materials and
treatments.
(2) Striking dissimilarity, visual discord or inappropriateness with
respect to other structures located or proposed to be located on the
same street or a corner thereof and within 250 feet of the site of the
structure for which a building permit is requested in respect to one
or more of the following features of exterior design and
appearance:
(a) Facade, disregarding color.
(b) Size and arrangement of doors, windows, porticos, porches or
garages or other openings, breaks or extensions in the facade.
(c) Other significant design features, such as but not limited to
heights, widths and lengths of elements of design; exterior
materials and treatments; roof structures; exposed mechanical
equipment; service and storage areas; retaining walls;
landscaping; signs; light posts; parking areas and fences; and
service and loading areas.
§ 12-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 12-4
8:18
§ 12-5. Additional regulations applicable to building facades in
Business D Districts. [Added 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
(3) Visual offensiveness or other poor qualities of exterior design,
including, with respect to signs, considerations of the harmony or
discord of colors, or incompatibility of the proposed structure with
the terrain on which it is to be located, including but not limited to
excessive divergencies of the height or levels of any part of the
structure from the grade of the terrain.
A. Except for ordinary maintenance and repairs, no person may construct,
reconstruct or otherwise alter the facade of any building in a Business
D District without obtaining a facade permit from the Village's Building
Inspector. An application for a facade permit shall be made on such
application forms as are established by the Building Inspector. An
application for a facade permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set
forth in Chapter 109, Fees. An application for a facade permit shall be
processed in the same manner as an application for a building permit,
except that the standards of this section shall be applicable to
architectural review of the facade, in the place and stead of the
standards set forth in § 12-4. Where an application involves a
construction, reconstruction or alteration to which § 12-4 is applicable
and to which this section is also applicable, the application must
conform to the requirements of both sections before any permit shall be
granted.3
B. It is the purpose of this section to prevent excessive uniformity,
dissimilarity or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of
building facades, since such conditions adversely affect the desirability
of the immediate and neighboring areas, impair the benefits of
occupancy of existing developed property, undermine the stability and
value of both improved and unimproved real property in such areas and
prevent the most appropriate development of such areas.
C. The Board of Architectural Review may determine that a building
facade does not meet the requirements of this law in the event that it
finds that the building facade would, if erected, be so detrimental to the
desirability, property values or development of the surrounding area as
to produce one or more of the harmful effects set forth in this section by
reason of:
(1) Excessive similarity to any other building facade existing or for
which a permit has been issued or to any other building facade
included in the same facade permit application, facing upon the
same street and within 1,000 feet of the proposed site, in respect to
one or more of the following features of exterior design and
appearance:
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 12-4 APPLICATIONS, PREREQUISITES TO § 12-5
8:19
§ 12-6. Failure of Board to act.
If the Board of Architectural Review shall fail to act on any application
referred to it under § 12-4 of this chapter within 60 days of the date of
referral of such application to it, the Building Inspector shall refer the
application to the Board of Trustees, who must act thereon within 45 days
of receipt of such referral.
§ 12-7. Review by Board of Trustees.
All actions of the Architectural Review Board in recommending approval
or disapproval of building permits shall be reported promptly to the Board
of Trustees of the Village, who shall affirm, revise or modify such
recommendations within 45 days of the receipt of such referral.
(a) Apparently identical facade.
(b) Substantially identical size and arrangement of either doors,
windows, porticos or other openings or breaks in the facade
facing the street, including reverse arrangements.
(c) Other significant identical features provided that a finding of
excessive similarity shall set forth facts showing not only that
such similarity exists, but shall further set forth facts showing
that it is of such a nature as to be expected to produce one or
more of the harmful effects set forth in this section.
(2) Poor quality of design or excessive dissimilarity in relation to any
other building facade existing or for which a permit has been
issued, or to any other building facade included in the same facade
permit application, facing upon the same street and within 1,000
feet of the proposed site in respect to one or more of the following
features:
(a) Materials of which the facade is constructed.
(b) Height of the facade.
(c) Lines of the facade.
(d) Color of the facade.
(e) Plane of the facade.
(f) Texture of the facade.
(g) Other significant design features, such as materials used in
construction or nature of architectural design, provided that a
finding of poor quality of design or excessive dissimilarity shall
set forth facts showing that such poor quality of design or
excessive dissimilarity exists but, shall further set forth facts
showing that it is of such nature as to be expected to produce
one or more of the harmful effects set forth in this section.
§ 12-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 12-8
8:20
§ 12-8. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Board of Architectural Review or
of the Board of Trustees with respect to a building permit application and/
or of the Building Inspector in denying such permit because of disapproval
by the Board of Architectural Review or by the Board of Trustees may bring
a proceeding to review in the manner provided by Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules. Such proceeding must be commenced within 30
days after the filing in the office of the Village Clerk of the decision to be
reviewed.
Chapter 16
ASSESSORS, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Voting requirements for Village Boards — See
Ch. 72.
Taxation — See Ch. 198.
§ 16-1. Establishment; terms of office; powers and duties.
§ 16-2. Income and expense statements. [Added 10-31-1990 by L.L.
No. 5-1990]
A. Section 3-301, Subsection 2b, of the Village Law of the State of New
York is hereby repealed in its application to the Village of Great Neck
Estates.
B. The Village shall have a Board of Assessors, which shall consist of seven
members, to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Board
of Trustees. The Assessors shall each serve for a term of one official
year, and any vacancy on the Board of Assessors shall be filled by
appointment in the same manner as the original appointment for the
balance of the unexpired term. The Board of Assessors shall have the
powers and duties prescribed for assessors by law. [Amended
5-14-2012 by L.L. No. 8-2012]
A. Where real property is income-producing property, the owner shall be
required to submit annually to the Assessor, not later than the first day
of June, a statement of all income derived from and all expenses
attributable to the operation of such property as follows:
(1) Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of
the property are maintained on a calendar year basis, the
statement shall be for the calendar year preceding the date the
statement is required to be filed.
(2) Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of
the property are maintained on a fiscal year basis for federal
§ 12-8 APPLICATIONS, PREREQUISITES TO § 16-2
8:21
income tax purposes, the statement shall be for the last fiscal year
concluded as of the first day of January preceding the date the
statement is required to be filed.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A(1) and (2), where
the owner of the property has not operated the property and is
without knowledge of the income and expenses of the operation of
the property for a consecutive twelve-month period concluded as of
the first day of January preceding the date the statement shall be
filed, then the statement shall be for the period of ownership.
(4) The Assessor may, for good cause shown, extend the time for filing
an income and expense statement by a period not to exceed 30
days.
B. Such statements shall contain the following declaration: "I certify that
all information contained in this statement is true and correct to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that the willful making of
any false statement of material fact herein will subject me to the
provisions of law relevant to the making and filing of false instruments
and will render this statement null and void."
C. The form on which such statement shall be submitted may be prepared
by the Assessor and copies of such form may be made available at the
Village office.
D. Failure to file statement within required time.
(1) In the event that an owner of income-producing property fails to file
an income and expense statement within the time prescribed in
Subsection A of this section, such owner shall be subject to penalty
in an amount not to exceed 3% of the assessed value of such
income-producing property determined for the current fiscal year;
provided, however, that if such statement is not filed by the last day
of June, the penalty shall be in an amount not to exceed 4% of such
assessed value. If, in the year immediately following the year in
which an owner fails to file by the last day of June, the owner again
fails to file an income and expense statement within the time
prescribed in Subsection A of this section (determined with regard
to any extension of time for filing), such owner shall be subject to a
penalty in an amount not to exceed 5% of the assessed value of
such property determined for the current fiscal year. Such owner
shall also be subject to a penalty of up to 5% of such assessed value
in any year immediately succeeding a year in which a penalty of up
to 5% could have been imposed, if in such succeeding year the
owner fails to file an income and expense statement within the time
prescribed in Subsection A of this section (determined with regard
to any extension of time for filing). The penalties prescribed in this
subsection shall be determined by the Assessor after notice and an
opportunity to be heard.
§ 16-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 16-2
8:22
Chapter 21
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE
§ 21-1. Policy.
The Village of Great Neck Estates is committed to the development and
maintenance of a drug-free work environment and, in accordance with the
Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988, will not tolerate the unlawful or improper
possession or use of controlled substances on its premises. In furtherance
of such commitment, and in accordance with applicable requirements of
(2) The Assessor and any body which reviews assessments shall deny a
hearing on any objection to the assessment of property for which
an income and expense statement is required and has not been
timely filed.
(3) Where an income and expense statement required under the
provisions of this section has not been timely filed, the Assessor
may compel by subpoena the production of the books and records
of the owner relevant to the income and expenses of the property
and may also make application to any court of competent
jurisdiction for an order compelling the owner to furnish the
required income and expense statement.
E. As used in this section, the term "income-producing property" means
property owned for the purpose of securing an income from the
property itself, residential property owned by cooperative corporations
and property owned in condominium form of ownership.
F. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Assessor, any officer or
employee of the Village or any person engaged or retained by the
Village on an independent contract basis or any person who, pursuant
to this section, is permitted to inspect any income and expense
statement or to whom a copy, an abstract or a portion of any such
statement is furnished, to divulge or make known in any manner the
amount of income and/or expense or any particulars set forth or
disclosed in any such statement required under this section. The
Assessor or officer or employee of the Village charged with the custody
of such statements shall not be required to produce any income and
expense statement or evidence of any information contained in them in
any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Village.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to an owner
or his or her duly authorized representative of a copy of any statement
filed by such owner pursuant to this section, or to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular statements and the items thereof, or the inspection by the
legal representatives of the Village of the statement of any owner who
shall bring an action to correct the assessment.
§ 16-2 DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE § 21-1
21:23
federal law, the Village Board of Trustees hereby finds and concludes that
the adoption of a formal policy for a work environment free of substance
abuse is appropriate. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the Village
will seek to encourage such an environment by making available to its
employees, on a continuing basis, information on substance abuse, as well
as other health and safety standards, and will encourage its employees
who have substance abuse problems to seek confidential assistance and
counseling through any available agencies.
§ 21-2. Improper use of controlled substance; notification
requirements.
In order to maintain and encourage a work environment which is free of
substance abuse, the following regulations shall apply in the Village of
Great Neck Estates:
§ 21-3. Disciplinary action.
A violation of any of the foregoing regulations or policies shall lead to
appropriate disciplinary action, including discharge, through normal
disciplinary procedures.
Chapter 25
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 79.
Development of filled-in land — See Ch. 113.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 129.
A. No Village employee shall work, or report to work, while impaired by
the illicit or improper use of a controlled substance.
B. Any Village employee who is convicted of any violation of a statute
involving the use or abuse of a controlled substance which occurred at
such employee's workplace in the Village, or during the course of the
employee's work on behalf of the Village, shall notify the Village Clerk
within five days after such conviction.
C. Within 10 days after receiving any such notification of such conviction,
and if the work of the employee reporting the conviction is funded in
whole or in part by federal funds, the Village Clerk shall promptly notify
the federal agency providing such funds, such notification to be given
by the Village through the appropriate agency of the State of New York
or any political subdivision thereof responsible for managing said
federal funding.
§ 21-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 25-1
25:24
§ 25-1. Establishment.
A commission is hereby created which shall be known as the "Great Neck
Estates Commission for Conservation of the Environment."
§ 25-2. Membership; vacancies; terms.
§ 25-3. Officers, meetings, procedures.
The Chairman of the Commission shall be designated by the Village Board.
At the organizational meeting of the Commission, its members shall elect
from among themselves a Recording Secretary, who shall serve until a
successor has been elected at the next annual organizational meeting.
In addition to its regular meetings, the Commission shall hold an annual
organizational meeting, at which time it shall elect a secretary, adopt rules
and procedures for its meetings and conduct such other business as it may
deem proper and necessary. It shall keep accurate records of its meetings
and activities and shall file an annual report as hereinafter provided in this
chapter.
§ 25-4. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Commission shall be as follows:
A. The Commission shall consist of not less than five nor more than nine
members who shall be appointed by the Village Board of Trustees. Said
members of the Commission shall serve at the pleasure of said Board of
Trustees.
B. All members of the Village Board of Trustees shall have the right of
attendance at all meetings.
C. Only persons residing within the Village of Great Neck Estates shall be
eligible for appointment as members of the Commission.
D. Vacancies on the Commission created by reason of death, resignation or
moving outside of the geographical limits of the Village shall be filled by
the Board of Trustees for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Vacancies occurring by reason of the expiration of a term shall be filled
by the Board of Trustees for a full term.
E. The terms of the members of the Commission may be staggered in such
manner as may be designated by the Board of Trustees.
A. Advise the Village Board of Trustees on matters affecting the
preservation, development and use of natural and man-made features
and conditions of the Village with respect to beauty, quality and
environmental factors.
B. Conduct a program of public information in the community designed to
increase understanding of the nature of environmental problems and
suggested solutions.
§ 25-1 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 25-4
25:25
§ 25-5. Reports to Board of Trustees.
The Commission shall submit an annual written report to the Village Board
of Trustees, not later than the first day of March of each year, concerning
the activities and work of the Commission; and from time to time it shall
submit such reports and recommendations as may be necessary to fulfill the
intention and purposes of this chapter.
§ 25-6. Compensation and expenses.
The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services as members thereof. However, reasonable and necessary expenses
may be incurred by the Commission only after they have been submitted
to the Village Board of Trustees for authorization and approval. Thereafter,
payment shall be made upon the presentation to the Board of proper
vouchers.
§ 25-7. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the authority of
the Incorporated Village of Great Neck Estates to preserve and improve the
quality of the natural and man-made environment on behalf of the present
and future inhabitants thereof. This chapter is not intended and shall not be
deemed to in anywise limit or impair the powers of the Board of Trustees or
any other public corporation.
C. Conduct such studies, surveys and inventories of natural and man-made
features within the Village as may be necessary to carry out the general
purposes of this chapter.
D. Maintain an up-to-date inventory or index of all open spaces in public or
private ownership within the Village, including but not limited to
natural landmarks, physiographic features, streams, swamps,
marshlands, wetlands, biotic communities and scenic or other open
areas of ecological value so as to provide a base of information for
recommendations by the Commission for their preservation and/or use.
E. Seek out and encourage persons to make gifts, grants, conveyances,
devises, bequests or otherwise, of real or personal property, to the
Village of Great Neck Estates for the purpose of conservation and
utilization of open spaces, land and water resources within the Village.
F. Carry out such other duties as may be designated from time to time by
the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 25-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 25-7
25:26
Chapter 29
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
§ 29-1. Legislative intent and purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates recognizes that there are
rules of ethical conduct for public officers and employees which must be
observed if a high degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public
confidence is to be maintained in our unit of local government. It is the
purpose of this chapter to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the
officers and employees of the Village of Great Neck Estates. These rules
shall serve as a guide for official conduct of the officers and employees
of the Village of Great Neck Estates. The rules of ethical conduct set
forth in this chapter shall not conflict with, but shall be in addition to,
any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or any other
general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest in contracts
of municipal officers and employees.
§ 29-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of
this chapter, a municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an
"interest" in the contract of:4
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves.
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee.
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee.
C.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 25-7 ETHICS, CODE OF § 29-2
29:27
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village of Great Neck Estates whether paid or unpaid, including members
of any administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person
shall be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of
being a volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a fire chief or
assistant fire chief.5
§ 29-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village of Great Neck Estates shall be
subject to and abide by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit any gift having a value of
$75 or more, whether in the form of money, services, loan travel,
entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise, or any other form, under
circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was
intended to influence him in the performance of his official duties or
was intended as a reward for any official action on his part.6
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive or enter
into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency
over which he had jurisdiction or to which he has the power to appoint
any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his municipality, whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Board of Trustees and any officer or employee of the
Village of Great Neck Estates, whether paid or unpaid, who participates
in the discussion or gives official opinion to the Board of Trustees on
any legislation before the Board of Trustees shall publicly disclose on
the official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect
financial or other private interest he has in such legislation.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 29-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 29-3
29:28
§ 29-4. Filing of claims against Village.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Village of Great Neck Estates or any agency
thereof on behalf of himself or any member of his family arising out of any
personal injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized
or permitted by law. Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of any
officer or employee to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty of
compliance with such code, nor the enforcement provisions thereof.
§ 29-5. Distribution of code.7
The Mayor of the Village of Great Neck Estates shall cause a copy of
this Code of Ethics to be distributed to every officer and employee of the
Village of Great Neck Estates within 10 days after the effective date of this
chapter. Each officer and employee elected or appointed thereafter shall
be furnished with a copy before entering upon the duties of his office or
employment. Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of any officer
or employee to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty of
compliance with such code, nor the enforcement provisions thereof.
§ 29-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions
of this Code of Ethics may be fined, suspended or removed from office or
employment, as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
H. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the Village of Great Neck Estates in relation to any case, proceeding
or application in which he personally participated during the period of
his service or employment or which was under his active consideration.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 29-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 29-6
29:29
Chapter 33
EXECUTIVE SESSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Architectural Review Board — See Ch. 12.
Board of Assessors — See Ch. 16.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 25.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
§ 33-1. Executive sessions.
Unless otherwise required by law, or by a court of competent jurisdiction,
no Village officer or employee, and no other person present at an executive
session of any board or agency of the Village of Great Neck Estates, shall
disclose by any means any matter or information discussed or deliberated
upon, or any action or determination taken or made, during a properly
convened executive session of such board or agency. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any such officer, employee or other person may disclose the
nature and content of any such discussion, deliberation, action or
determination only to the extent necessary to effectuate, implement or
enforce any such action or determination.
§ 33-2. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of the prohibitions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $1,000, and imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, any such violation shall
constitute official misconduct and shall constitute a basis for appropriate
proceedings or action for the removal or discharge of any officer or
employee committing such violation.
§ 33-3. Enforcement.
In addition to any other penalty provided by law, the Village may institute
such legal or equitable proceedings as may be available to prevent a
violation of this chapter.
Chapter 34
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY
§ 34-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a policy and guidelines for the
use of family or medical leave for Village of Great Neck Estates employees,
consistent with the rules and regulations adopted by the United States
Department of Labor.
§ 29-6 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 34-2
33:30
§ 34-2. Types of leave.
§ 34-3. Employee eligibility.
An employee shall be entitled to family leave when he/she meets the
following criteria:
A. Family and medical reasons. As provided by the 1993 Family and
Medical Leave Act (FMLA), all eligible employees shall be entitled to 12
weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave during a twelve-month period for
one or more of the following reasons:
(1) The birth and care of a newborn child or placement with the
employee of a child for adoption or foster care;
(2) To care for a spouse, child, or parent with a serious health
condition; or
(3) If a serious health condition makes the employee unable to perform
the functions of his/her position.
B. Military family leave. As provided by the 2008 National Defense
Authorization Act, all eligible employees shall also be entitled to unpaid
leave during a twelve-month period as follows:
(1) Military caregiver leave. Eligible employees who are family
members of covered service members of the Armed Forces
(including members of the National Guard or Reserves) may take
up to 26 workweeks of leave to care for a service member who has
a serious illness or injury that was incurred in the line of duty while
on active duty and, as a result, is undergoing medical treatment,
recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in outpatient services, or is
otherwise on the temporary disability retired list. The definition of
"family" is broader than "son, daughter, spouse or parent," and
includes "next of kin" (which is defined as the nearest blood
relative).
(2) Qualifying exigency leave. Eligible employees with a spouse, son,
daughter, or parent who is a covered military member serving in
the National Guard or Reserves may be eligible for up to 12 weeks
of unpaid leave to use for any qualifying exigency arising out of the
fact that a covered military member is on active duty or called to
active duty status in support of a contingency operation.
"Qualifying exigency" refers to eight categories for which
employees can use this FMLA leave, including short-notice
deployment; military events and related activities; child care and
school activities; financial and legal arrangements; counseling; rest
and recuperation; post-deployment activities; and additional
activities not encompassed in the other categories but agreed to by
the employer and employee.
§ 34-2 EXECUTIVE SESSIONS § 34-3
33:31
§ 34-4. Calculation of leave.
Eligible employees can use up to 12 weeks of leave during any twelvemonth
period. The Village will use a rolling twelve-month period measured
backward from the date an employee first uses FMLA leave. (It will not
be measured backward before August 5, 1993.) Each time an employee
uses leave, the Village computes the amount of leave the employee has
taken under this policy and subtracts it from the 12 weeks, and the balance
remaining is the amount the employee is entitled to take at that time. For
example, if an employee has taken five weeks of leave in the past 12 months,
he/she could take an additional seven weeks under this policy. Eligibility for
unpaid leave for the birth and care of a newborn child or for the placement
with the employee of a child for adoption or foster care expires at the end
of the twelve-month period beginning on the date of the birth, adoption
or placement. Any such leave must be concluded within this twelve-month
period.
§ 34-5. Maintenance of benefits.
A. The employee has worked for at least 12 months for the Village. The 12
months need not have been consecutive. (If the employee was on the
payroll for part of a week, the Village will count the entire week. The
Village considers 52 weeks to be equal to 12 months).
B. The employee has to have worked for the Village for at least 1,250
hours over the 12 months before the leave begins.
C. When both spouses are employed by the Village, they are jointly
entitled to a combined total of 12 workweeks of family leave during any
rolling twelve-month period for the birth and care of a newborn child or
placement of a child for adoption or foster care, and to care for a parent
who has a serious health condition, and for military qualifying exigency
leave. For military caregiver leave, spouses both employed by the
Village are jointly entitled to a combined total of 26 workweeks of leave.
A. An employee shall be entitled to maintain group health and dental
insurance coverages on the same basis as if he/she had continued to
work at the Village. To maintain uninterrupted coverage, during a
period of family or medical leave, an employee who contributes to
group health and/or dental insurance may choose to remain covered
under the Village's group health and dental insurance plans on the
same conditions, including the payment by the employee of the
employee's share of the premiums for coverage, as would have been
provided if the employee had been continuously employed during the
leave period. While substituting paid leave during the period of family
or medical leave, the Village will continue to make payroll deductions to
collect the employee's share, if any, of the premiums for such
coverages. While on unpaid leave, the employee who contributes must
continue to make his/her contributions. Payment must be made monthly
and must be received by the Village by the fifth day of the month.
§ 34-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 34-5
33:32
§ 34-6. Job restoration.
§ 34-7. Use of paid and unpaid leave.
If an employee has accrued paid leave of less than 12 weeks, the employee
will use paid leave first and take the remainder of the 12 weeks as unpaid
leave.
Payment must be made by check or money order payable to
"Incorporated Village of Great Neck Estates." An employee's failure to
pay required premiums within 30 days of the due date will result in
the cessation of the employee's group health and/or dental insurance
coverages during the entire remaining leave period.
B. Generally, if an employee fails to return to work after a period of family
or medical leave, for reasons other than the continuation of a serious
health condition, the employee will be required to pay to the Village an
amount equal to any group health and dental insurance paid by the
Village on behalf of the employee during the leave period.
C. Other benefits such as the accrual of seniority will not continue during
leave. However, the use of family or medical leave will not be
considered a break in service when vesting or eligibility to participate
in benefit programs is being determined.
A. An employee who utilizes family or medical leave under this policy will
be restored to the same job or a job with equivalent status, pay, benefits
and other employment terms.
B. The Village may choose to exempt certain highly compensated "key"
employees from this job restoration requirement and not return them to
the same or a similar position at the completion of FMLA leave.
Employees who may be exempted will be informed of this status when
they request leave. If the Village deems it necessary to deny job
restoration for a key employee on FMLA leave, the Village will inform
the employee of its intention and will offer the employee the
opportunity to return to work immediately.
C. An employee who has been on leave due to the employee's own serious
health condition who wants to return to work must provide the Village
with a certification from a health-care provider that the employee is
able to resume work. Return to employment will be denied if this
certification is not provided.
A. If an employee uses leave because of the serious health condition of an
immediate family member, the employee will first use all paid leave and
then will be eligible for unpaid leave.
B. An employee using leave for the birth of a child will use paid sick leave
for physical recovery after childbirth. The employee then may use all
paid vacation or personal leave for the care of the newborn child and
then will be eligible for unpaid leave for the remainder of the 12 weeks.
§ 34-5 EXECUTIVE SESSIONS § 34-7
33:33
§ 34-8. Intermittent leave and reduced work schedules.
In certain cases, intermittent use of the 12 weeks of family or medical leave
or as part of a reduced workweek may be allowed by the Village.
§ 34-9. Procedure for requesting leave.
C. An employee using leave for the adoption or foster care of a child will
use all paid vacation or personal leave first and then will be eligible for
unpaid leave for the remainder of the 12 weeks.
A. Employees wishing to use leave intermittently or to utilize a reduced
workweek for birth or adoption purposes will need to discuss and gain
approval for such use from the employee's department head and the
Village Administrator.
B. Employees may also use family or medical leave intermittently or as
part of a reduced workweek whenever it is medically necessary. If the
need to use leave is foreseeable and based on preplanned and
prescheduled medical treatment, then the employee is responsible to
schedule the treatment in a manner that does not unduly disrupt the
Village's operations. This provision is subject to the approval of the
health-care provider.
C. In some cases, the Village may temporarily transfer an employee using
intermittent or a reduced workweek to a different job with equivalent
pay and benefits if another position would better accommodate the
intermittent or reduced schedule.
A. All employees requesting leave under this policy must complete the
appropriate leave certification form available from the Village.
B. An eligible employee must provide the Village with at least 30 days'
advance written notice before the requested family or medical leave is
to begin if the leave is foreseeable. If, under the circumstances, 30 days'
notice is not practicable due to an emergency or lack of knowledge as to
when leave will be needed, notice must be given to the Village as soon
as practicable.
C. An eligible employee requesting leave to care for the employee's
spouse, child or parent with a serious health condition or because of the
employee's own serious health condition is required to provide a
certification (in the form acceptable to the Village) of the serious health
condition from a health-care provider. This certification must be
provided within 15 calendar days after it is requested by the Village.
Recertification of the serious health condition will also be required to
be provided to the Village no more often than every 30 days during the
leave period. Failure to provide the required certification or
recertification could result in the leave being refused or the leave being
discontinued, as the case may be.
§ 34-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 34-9
33:34
Chapter 35
FUND BALANCE POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Investment policy — See Ch. 38.
Fees — See Ch. 109.
Taxation — See Ch. 198.
§ 35-1. Fund balance classifications (pursuant to GASB Statement
54).
D. Qualified health-care providers include doctors of medicine or
osteopathy, podiatrists, dentists, clinical psychologists, optometrists
and chiropractors, nurse practitioners and nurse-midwives authorized
to practice under state law and performing within the scope of their
practice under state law, and Christian Science practitioners.
E. Employees with questions about coverage under this FMLA policy are
encouraged to meet with the Village representative responsible for
human resources for guidance and to obtain the necessary certification
forms.
A. Nonspendable: consists of assets that are inherently nonspendable in
the current period either because of their form or because they must be
maintained intact, including prepaid items, inventories, long-term
portions of loans receivable, financial assets held for resale, and
principal of endowments.
B. Restricted: consists of amounts that are subject to externally
enforceable legal purpose restrictions imposed by creditors, grantors,
contributors, or laws and regulations of other governments; or through
constitutional provisions or enabling legislation. Because the state
regulates the establishment, funding and use of reserves, generally,
reserves will be classified as restricted fund balance.
C. Committed: consists of amounts that are subject to a purpose constraint
imposed by a formal action of the government's highest level of
decisionmaking authority before the end of the fiscal year and that
require the same level of formal action to remove the constraint.
D. Assigned: consists of amounts that are subject to a purpose constraint
that represents an intended use established by the Board or by their
designated official. The purpose of the assignment must be narrower
than the purpose of the general fund, and in funds other than the
general fund, assigned fund balance represents the residual amount of
fund balance. Assigned fund balance generally includes encumbrances
and appropriated fund balance.
§ 34-9 EXECUTIVE SESSIONS § 35-1
33:35
§ 35-2. General policy.
Chapter 36
INTERNET POLICY
§ 36-1. Rules for use of Internet.
E. Unassigned: represents the residual classification for the government's
general fund and could report a surplus or deficit. In funds other than
the general fund, the unassigned classification should be used only to
report a deficit balance resulting from overspending for specific
purposes for which amounts had been restricted, committed, or
assigned.
A. Fund balance measures the net financial resources available to finance
expenditures within current or future periods. The Village's unassigned
general fund balance will be maintained to provide the Village with
financial stability and a margin of safety to fund unanticipated
contingent expenditures that may occur unexpectedly during the fiscal
year. The unassigned general fund balance used for these purposes may
only be appropriated by resolution of the Board of Trustees unless voter
approval is required.
B. Any portion of fund balance may be applied or transferred for a specific
purpose either by voter approval, if required by law, or by formal action
of the Board of Trustees if voter approval is not required. Amendments
or modification to the applied or transferred fund balance must also be
approved by formal action of the Board of Trustees.
C. The Board of Trustees shall delegate the authority to assign fund
balance, for encumbrance purposes, to the person(s) to whom it has
delegated the authority to sign purchase orders.
D. In circumstances where an expenditure is incurred for a purpose for
which amounts are available in multiple fund balance classifications
(e.g., expenditures related to reserves), the expenditure is to be spent
first from the restricted fund balance, to the extent that an approved
permissive referendum is in place or has been appropriated by the
Board of Trustees, and then from the unrestricted fund balance.
Expenditures incurred in the unrestricted fund balances shall be
applied first to the assigned fund balance to the extent that there is an
assignment, and then to the unassigned fund balance.
A. General principles.
(1) Use of the Internet on Village computers is a privilege; exercise
good judgment as you use it. Failure to adhere to these rules may
result in suspending or revoking the offender's privilege of Internet
access and subject the offender to disciplinary actions.
§ 35-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 36-1
36:36
(2) It is the responsibility of each Internet user to ensure compliance
with all Village computer policies.
(3) Treat the Internet as a formal communications tool just as you
would the telephone, e-mail and written communications. You are
responsible and accountable for your communication.
(4) Employees are encouraged to use all forms of electronic
communication as necessary to perform their jobs and/or enhance
effectiveness.
(5) The Internet is intended to facilitate Village-related business
communications and research and shall be used in a responsible,
efficient, ethical, and legal manner in accordance with the mission
of the Village.
(6) Internet access on Village computers will be logged. If any
supervisor suspects excessive or inappropriate use, logs can be
reviewed at any time.
(7) Use of the Internet should not impact work performance in any
way.
(8) When in doubt, use common sense or ask a supervisor before
proceeding.
B. Security issues.
(1) Downloading of software products from Internet sites is not
permitted without the prior approval of the Village Administrator.
Any software that is downloaded must comply with all licensing and
copyright laws. The Village Administrator will maintain and publish
a list of approved software for installation/downloading.
Furthermore, Village employees should not access, download, scan
or install software unrelated to the employee' s Village tasks.
(2) Do not share your network passwords or otherwise breach the
security of the Internet/network accounts. Only the Village
Administrator or other person designated by the Village
Administrator should have the passwords.
(3) Computers or terminals shall not be left unattended in an insecure
state. This allows for inappropriate access to records of the Village,
allows unauthorized users access to the Internet, intranet and
Village network, and severely compromises security.
(4) Village employees shall not tamper with anti-virus software
installed on any Village computer.
C. Inappropriate use.
§ 36-1 INTERNET POLICY § 36-1
36:37
§ 36-2. Rules for use of e-mail and instant messaging.
E-mail or electronic mail is an important communication tool for our
organization. The use of e-mail needs to be encouraged and controlled.
Instant messaging is a form of computer communications growing in
popularity. All the policies for e-mail apply to instant messaging.
(1) Messages transferred via the Internet are public information. If you
desire to transmit confidential communications or sensitive
information, do not use the Internet.
(2) The use of racially or sexually derogatory or offensive language in
your communications is prohibited. This concept extents to e-mail
messages, jokes, screen savers, Web sites visited, and any
information accessed by the computer.
(3) Using the network for personal use, personal business, personal
financial gain, or for any commercial or illegal activity is
prohibited.
A. E-mail on Village machines, or on Village time, should be limited to
Village business.
B. Personal use will be acceptable only under the following circumstances:
If you receive a personal e-mail you can briefly read the message just as
you might receive a personal phone call while on the job. A very brief
reply will also be acceptable. However, drafting lengthy replies,
receiving numerous personal messages, or drafting numerous personal
messages must be done on your own time. This means during your
break time, lunchtime, or before or after normal working hours as is
acceptable with your supervisor. Excessive forwarding of jokes, trivial
messages, and chain messages is also prohibited.
C. You may access and use the Village e-mail from home or outside the
office to the extent authorized by the Village Administrator. However,
use of the Village e-mail from home or outside the office is to be done
only in accordance with these policies.
D. The following personal e-mail uses are strictly forbidden on the Village
e-mail system at all times:
(1) Private business.
(2) Profit-making activities, including the sale of personal items.
(3) Mass mailings.
(4) Any other organizational or agency mailings not directly related to
Village business.
E. E-mail is not a private and confidential form of communication; the
Internet is not a secure medium of communication. Messages can be
intercepted by internal or external sources. If you desire to transmit
§ 36-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 36-2
36:38
§ 36-3. Prohibited uses.
The following are prohibited uses:
confidential communications or sensitive information, do not use the
Internet or e-mail.
F. Any information residing on a Village computer is subject to the
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).
G. If you do not recognize the name of an e-mail sender use caution; be
suspicious of unsolicited messages. Call or e-mail the Village
Administrator or your supervisor if you have questions. If you do not
know the source of the e-mail:
(1) Don't open unsolicited attachments or those received from
strangers.
(2) Don't launch (click on) URL's provided from unsolicited e-mails.
(3) Don't download executable files from unknown sources (for
example, *.exe).
(4) Don't forward chain letters.
A. Intentionally downloading, accessing, viewing, posting or transmitting
information that is abusive, offensive, harassing, threatens violence, or
that discriminates on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, age or disability.
B. Intentionally accessing, viewing, posting or transmitting sexually
explicit material from the Internet. Sexually explicit material includes
any description of or any picture, photograph, drawing, motion-picture
film, digital image or similar visual representation depicting nudity,
sexual excitement, or sexual conduct of any kind.
C. Operating a business, soliciting money, product advertising, or
conducting transactions for personal gain or profit, or gambling.
D. Arranging for the sale or purchase of illegal drugs, alcohol or firearms.
E. Communication with elected representatives or public or political
organizations to express opinions on political issues outside of workrelated
communications. This can be misinterpreted as an official
Village opinion on such issues.
F. Solicitation for non-Village-sponsored organizations or functions.
G. Violation of copyright laws.
H. Confidential information such as criminal records, juvenile records,
personnel records, etc.
I. Intentionally creating a computer virus.
§ 36-2 INTERNET POLICY § 36-3
36:39
§ 36-4. Disciplinary actions.
Chapter 38
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 38-1. Scope.
This investment policy applies to all moneys and other financial resources
available for investment on its own behalf or on behalf of any other entity or
individual.
§ 38-2. Objectives.
The primary objectives of the local government's investment activities are,
in priority order:
J. Unauthorized hacking or fraudulent activities.
A. In the event of violations of Village policy, the possible disciplinary
actions are:
(1) Warning.
(2) Monitoring of activities.
(3) Suspension of access to e-mail and/or Internet services.
(4) Suspension from employment, without pay.
(5) Restitution for hours used for unauthorized use of a Village
computer or e-mail.
(6) Termination of employment.
B. In most cases, the appropriate disciplinary action will be determined by
the Village, as provided by law, based upon the circumstances of the
particular matter. However, in some matters, such as sexually explicit
material violations, or crime related to or committed with Village
computer equipment, the initial disciplinary action may be termination
of employment.
A. To conform with all applicable federal, state and other legal
requirements (legal);
B. To adequately safeguard principal (safety);
C. To provide sufficient liquidity to meet all operating requirements
(liquidity); and
D. To obtain a reasonable rate of return (yield).
§ 36-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 38-3
38:40
§ 38-3. Delegation of authority.
The governing Board's responsibility for administration of the investment
program is delegated to the Village Treasurer who shall establish written
procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with
these investment guidelines. Such procedures shall include an adequate
internal control structure to provide a satisfactory level of accountability
based on a database or records incorporating description and amounts of
investments, transaction dates, and other relevant information and regulate
the activities of subordinate employees.
§ 38-4. Exercising prudence in investments.
§ 38-5. Diversification.
It is the policy of the Village of Great Neck Estates to diversify its deposits
and investments by financial institution, by investment instrument, and by
maturity scheduling.
§ 38-6. Internal controls.
A. All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly
as custodians of the public trust and shall avoid any transaction that
might impair public confidence in the Village of Great Neck Estates to
govern effectively.
B. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence discretion
and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not
for speculation, but for investment, considering the safety of the
principal as well as the probable income to be derived.
C. All participants involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of
the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make
impartial decisions.
A. It is the policy of the Village of Great Neck Estates for all moneys
collected by any officer or employee of the government to transfer those
funds to the Chief Fiscal Officer within two days of deposit, or within
the time period specified in law, whichever is shorter.
B. The Village Clerk is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure to provide reasonable, but not absolute,
assurance that deposits and investments are safeguarded against loss
from unauthorized use or disposition, that transactions are executed in
accordance with management's authorization and recorded properly,
and are managed in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
§ 38-3 INVESTMENT POLICY § 38-7
38:41
§ 38-7. Designation of depositaries.8
The list of banks and trust companies authorized for the deposit of moneys
up to the maximum amounts is available in the Village Clerk's office.
§ 38-8. Collateralizing of deposits.
In accordance with the provisions of the General Municipal Law § 10, all
deposits of the Village of Great Neck Estates, including certificates of
deposit and special time deposits, in excess of amount insured under the
provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall be secured:
§ 38-9. Safekeeping and collateralization.
A. By a pledge of eligible securities with an aggregate market value as
provided by General Municipal Law § 10, equal to the aggregate
amount of deposits from the categories designated in Appendix A to the
policy.
B. By an eligible irrevocable letter of credit issued by a qualified bank
other than the bank with the deposits in favor of the government for a
term not to exceed 90 days with an aggregate value equal to 140% of
the aggregate amount of deposits and the agreed upon interest, if any. A
qualified bank is one whose commercial paper and other unsecured
short-term debt obligations are rated in one of the three highest rating
categories by at least one nationally recognized statistical rating
organization or by a bank that is in compliance with applicable federal
minimum risk-based capital requirements.
C. By an eligible surety bond payable to the government for an amount at
least equal to 100% of the aggregate amount of deposits and the agreed
upon interest, if any, executed by an insurance company authorized to
do business in New York State, whose claims-paying ability is rated in
the highest rating category by at least two nationally recognized
statistical rating organizations.
A. Eligible securities used for collateralizing deposits shall be held by
Chase Manhattan Bank and Bank of New York Trust Company, subject
to security and custodial agreements.
B. The security agreement shall provide that eligible securities are being
pledged to secure local government deposits together with agreed-upon
interest, if any, and any costs or expenses arising out of the collection of
such deposits upon default. It shall also provide the conditions under
which the securities may be sold, presented for payment, substituted or
released and the events which will enable the local government to
exercise its rights against the pledged securities. In the event that the
securities are not registered or inscribed in the name of the local
government, such securities shall be delivered in a form suitable for
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 38-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 38-9
38:42
§ 38-10. Permitted investments.
transfer or with an assignment in blank to the Village of Great Neck
Estates or its custodial bank.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company, or agent of and custodian for, the local government,
will be kept separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial
bank or trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be
commingled with or become part of the backing for any other deposit or
other liabilities. The agreement should also describe that the custodian
shall confirm the receipt, substitution or release of the securities. The
agreement shall provide for the frequency or revaluation of eligible
securities and for the substitution of securities when a change in the
rating of the security may cause ineligibility. Such agreement shall
include all provisions necessary to provide the local government a
perfected interest in the securities.
A. As authorized by General Municipal Law § 11, the Village of Great Neck
Estates authorizes the Village Treasurer to invest moneys not required
for immediate expenditure for terms not to exceed its projected cash
flow needs in the following types of investments:
(1) Special time deposit accounts.
(2) Certificates of deposit.
(3) Obligations of the United States of America.
(4) Obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America where the payment of principal and interest are
guaranteed by the United States of America.
(5) Obligations of the State of New York.
(6) Obligations issued pursuant to the Local Finance Law § 24.00 or
25.00 (with approval of the State Comptroller) by any municipality,
school district or district corporation other than the Village of
Great Neck Estates.
(7) Obligations of public authorities, public housing authorities, urban
renewal agencies and industrial development agencies where the
general State statutes governing such entities or whose specific
enabling legislation authorizes such investments.
(8) Certificates of Participation (COPs) issued pursuant to General
Municipal Law § 109-b.
(9) Obligations of this local government, but only with any moneys in
the reserve fund established pursuant to General Municipal Law
§ 6-c, 6-d, 6-e, 6-g, 6-h, 6-j, 6-k, 6-l, 6-m or 6-n.
§ 38-9 INVESTMENT POLICY § 38-10
38:43
§ 38-11. Authorizing financial institutions and dealers.
The Village of Great Neck Estates shall maintain a list of financial
institutions and dealers approved for investment purposes and establish
appropriate limits to the amount of investments which can be made with
each financial institution or dealer. All financial institutions with which
the local government conducts business must be creditworthy. Banks shall
provide their most recent Consolidated Report of Condition (Call Report)
at the request of the Village of Great Neck Estates. Security dealers not
affiliated with a bank shall be required to be classified as reporting dealers
affiliated with the New York Federal Reserve Bank, as primary dealers.
The Village Treasurer is responsible for evaluating the financial position
and maintaining a listing of proposed depositaries, trading partners and
custodians. Such listing shall be evaluated at least annually.
§ 38-12. Purchase of investments.
B. All investment obligations shall be payable or redeemable at the option
of the Village of Great Neck Estates within such times as the proceeds
will be needed to meet expenditures for purposes for which the moneys
were provided and, in the case of obligations purchased with the
proceeds of bonds or notes, shall be payable or redeemable at the
option of the Village of Great Neck Estates within two years of the date
of purchase.
A. The Village Treasurer is authorized to contract for the purchase of
investments:
(1) Directly, including through a repurchase agreement, from an
authorized trading partner.
(2) By participation in a cooperative investment program with another
authorized governmental entity pursuant to Article 5G of the
General Municipal Law where such program meets all the
requirements set forth in the Office of the State Comptroller
Opinion No. 88-46, and the specific program has been authorized
by the governing board.
(3) By utilizing an ongoing investment program with an authorized
trading partner pursuant to a contract authorized by the governing
board.
B. All purchased obligations, unless registered or inscribed in the name of
the local government, shall be purchased through, delivered to and held
in the custody of a bank or trust company. Such obligations shall be
purchased, sold or presented for redemption or payment by such bank
or trust company only in accordance with prior written authorization
from the officer authorized to make the investment. All such
transactions shall be confirmed in writing to the Village of Great Neck
Estates by the bank or trust company. Any obligation held in the custody
§ 38-10 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 38-12
38:44
§ 38-13. Repurchase agreements.
Repurchase agreements are authorized subject to the following restrictions:
Chapter 42
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
§ 42-1. Public hearing required; notice.
No local law shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees except after a
public hearing has been held thereon on public notice of at least three days.
Such public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper
of the Village or, where directed by resolution of the Board of Trustees, by
publication in a daily newspaper having general circulation in the Village.
§ 42-2. Zoning laws and amendments. [Added 11-2-1981 by L.L. No.
8-1981]
of a bank or trust company shall be held pursuant to a written custodial
agreement as described in General Municipal Law § 10.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company, as agent of and custodian for, the local government,
will be kept separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial
bank or trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be
commingled with or become part of the backing for any other deposit or
other liabilities. The agreement shall describe how the custodian shall
confirm the receipt and release of the securities. Such agreement shall
include all provisions necessary to provide the local government a
perfected interest in the securities.
A. All repurchase agreements must be entered into subject to a Master
Repurchase Agreement.
B. Trading partners are limited to banks or trust companies authorized to
do business in New York State and primary reporting dealers.
C. Obligations shall be limited to obligations of the United States of
America and obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America.
D. No substitution of securities will be allowed.
E. The custodian shall be a party other than the trading partner.
A. Section 7-706, Subdivisions 2 and 5, of the Village Law are hereby
superseded in their application to the Village of Great Neck Estates,
and the said provisions of the Village Law are amended to delete their
content.9
§ 38-12 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 42-2
42:45
Chapter 46
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of local laws — See Ch. 42.
§ 46-1. Designation of official newspaper.
The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, designate one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the Village as the official newspaper
for the Village of Great Neck Estates. Such designation or designations may
from time to time be amended or repealed, and each such designation shall
remain in effect until amended or repealed.
Chapter 49
NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY
§ 49-1. Policy statement.
It is the policy of the Village of Great Neck Estates not to discriminate in
employment, or in any other activity of the Village, on the basis of race,
creed, national origin, age, gender or religion. Where such characteristics
relate to a bona fide occupational qualification, and where such
discrimination is not otherwise prohibited by law, the Village may engage in
appropriate distinctions based upon such characteristics where it is deemed
appropriate or necessary to do so. All employees of the Village are expected
to conduct their activities in compliance with this policy statement.
Chapter 53
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 29.
B. Every zoning law and every amendment thereto (including any map
incorporated therein) adopted pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be entered in the minutes of the Village Board, and a
summary or abstract of any such law or amendment shall be posted at
the office of the Village Clerk. Such local law or amendment shall
provide for its effective date.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 42-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 49-1
46:46
ARTICLE I
Indemnification for Civil Actions
[Adopted 12-3-1979 by L.L. No. 10-1979 (Ch. 17, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 53-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment or
employment in the service of the Village, whether or not a sponsored
volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a Village-sponsored
volunteer program, but shall not include a former employee, his estate or
judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 53-2. Employees to be defended; conditions; costs.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 53-5 of this
article, the Village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
have occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his
public employment or duties or which is brought to enforce a provision
of 42 U.S.C. § 1981 or § 1983. This duty to provide for a defense shall
not arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on
behalf of the Village.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section, the
employee shall be entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney;
provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial
proceeding whenever:
(1) The Village Attorney determines, based upon his investigation and
review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that
representation by the Village Attorney would be inappropriate.
(2) A court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or by a
special proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists and
that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel
of his choice.
C. The Village Attorney shall notify the employee, in writing, of such
determination that the employee is entitled to be represented by
private counsel. The Village Attorney may require, as a condition to
payment of the fees and expenses of such representation, that
appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same
counsel. If the employee or group of employees is entitled to
representation by private counsel under the provisions of this section,
the Village shall so certify to the Board of Trustees.
§ 53-1 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY § 53-2
49:47
§ 53-3. Requests for defense; avoidance of default judgment.
Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Village Attorney as required by § 53-5 of this article, the Village Attorney
shall take the necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel
under the terms and conditions provided in § 53-2B, C and D of this article,
on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending
resolution of any question pertaining to the obligation to provide for a
defense.
§ 53-4. Indemnification conditions; approval by Board of Trustees.
D. Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the
Village to such private counsel from time to time during the pendency
of the civil action or proceeding, subject to certification by the Board of
Trustees that the employee is entitled to representation under the
terms and conditions of this section. Any dispute with respect to
representation of multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount
of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be
resolved by the court upon or by way of a special proceeding.
A. The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state
or federal court, or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided
that the act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose
occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public
employment or duties. The duty to indemnify and save harmless
prescribed by this subsection shall not arise where the injury or
damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the
part of the employee.
B. An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the Board of Trustees any proposed settlement which may
be subject to indemnification by the Village, and the Board of Trustees
shall submit such settlement to the Village Attorney for review. The
Village Attorney shall review such proposed settlement as to form and
amount and shall give his approval to the form and amount if, in his
opinion, the settlement is in the best interests of the Village. The
proposed settlement, with the approval of the Village Attorney, shall
then be submitted to the Board of Trustees for its approval and shall not
be subject to indemnification unless and until approved by the Board of
Trustees. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit or
impair the power of the Board of Trustees to indemnify or save an
employee harmless with respect to a settlement which has not been
approved by the Village Attorney as to form or amount. [Amended
2-6-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
C. Nothing in this section shall authorize the Village to indemnify or save
harmless an employee with respect to punitive or exemplary damages,
fines or penalties; provided, however, that the Village shall indemnify
§ 53-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 53-4
49:48
§ 53-5. Conditions for defense by Village.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this
article shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Village Attorney by the
employee of the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process,
notice, demand or pleading within five days after he is served with such
document and the full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such
action or proceeding and in defense of an action or proceeding against the
Village based upon the same act or omission and in the prosecution of any
appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee that the
Village provide for his defense pursuant to this article.
§ 53-6. Punitive damage claims against members of Police
Department. [Added 4-14-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Village shall
provide for the defense of any civil action or proceeding brought against any
duly appointed member of the Police Department of the Village, and shall
indemnify and save harmless such member from any judgment of a court
of competent jurisdiction, whenever such action, proceeding or judgment
is for damages, including punitive or exemplary damages, arising out of a
negligent act or other tort of such member committed while in the proper
discharge of such member's duties and within the scope of such member's
employment. The indemnification and other protection provided by this
subsection shall be in addition to any other indemnifications or protections
provided by this chapter or any other law.
and save harmless its employees in the amount of any costs, attorneys'
fees, damages, fines or penalties which may be imposed by reason
of an adjudication that an employee, acting within the scope of his
public employment or duties, has, without willfulness or intent on his
part, violated a prior order, judgment, consent decree or stipulation
of settlement entered in any court of the State of New York or of the
United States. [Amended 1-9-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
D. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of
such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail, within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the Board
of Trustees, and, if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section,
such judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment by such
Board of Trustees. If the Village Attorney concurs in such certification,
the judgment or settlement shall be paid.
A. Whether or not the act or other tort alleged to have been committed by
such member was in the proper discharge of duties and scope of
employment shall be determined by majority vote of a panel to consist
of the Mayor or a person designated by the Mayor to serve on such
panel, a person designated by the Board of Trustees and the Village
Police Chief or, if the Police Chief is the member against whom such
§ 53-4 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY § 53-6
49:49
§ 53-7. Construction and applicability of provisions.
claim has been asserted, the highest ranking other officer in the Village
Police Department.
B. The Village shall not be obligated to provide the indemnification and
other protection provided in this section unless there is reasonably
available to the Village one or more insurance policies which will insure
the Village against such claims, and the Board of Trustees determines,
in its sole discretion, to obtain such insurance.
A. The benefits of this article shall inure only to employees as defined
herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the right of any other party, nor
shall any provision of this article be construed to affect, alter or repeal
any provision of the Workers' Compensation Law.
B. This article shall not in any way affect the obligation of any claimant to
give notice to the Village under any provision of law.
C. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
D. The provisions of this article shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
E. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the provisions
of this article shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit,
modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred
upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the Village or any right to
defense and/or indemnification provided for any governmental officer
or employee by, in accordance with or by reason of any other provision
of state or federal statutory or common law.
F. Pursuant to the provisions of § 18 of the Public Officers Law, the Village
of Great Neck Estates hereby confers upon its employees and officers
the benefits of said § 18, which benefits shall supplement and be
available in addition to defense or indemnification protection conferred
by this article. [Added 11-2-1981 by L.L. No. 7-1981]
§ 53-6 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 53-7
49:50
ARTICLE II
Mayor, Trustees, Village Justices
[Adopted 11-12-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
§ 53-8. Terms of office.
A. Commencing with the 2019 general Village election, elections shall be
held for the offices of Mayor, Trustees and Village Justices for terms of
four years each, and elections for such offices thereafter shall be held
biennially in odd-numbered years.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section and
pursuant to the provisions of Village Law § 3-302(7)(a) and (c), the
terms of office for the Mayor, Trustees and Village Justice to be elected
at the 2019 general Village election shall be four years each, and the
terms of office of the Mayor and Trustees to be elected at the 2020
general Village election shall be five years each. The term of office of
the Village Justice to be elected at the 2021 general Village election
shall continue to be four years. Thereafter, the successors to each such
office shall be elected for terms of four years each.
§ 53-8 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY § 53-8
49:51

ARTICLE III
Village Justices
[Adopted 11-12-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
§ 53-9. Number of Justices.
The Village of Great Neck Estates shall continue to have two elected Village
Justices pursuant to Village Law § 3-301, Subdivision 2a.
§ 53-9 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY § 53-9
49:53

ARTICLE IV
Village Administrator; Deputy Village Clerk; Deputy Village
Treasurer
[Adopted 3-12-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001 (Ch. 17, Art. IIIA, of the
1981 Code)]
§ 53-10. Village Administrator; powers and duties; appointment;
residence.
§ 53-11. Office of Deputy Village Clerk; appointment; residence.
[Amended 8-11-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
The Village of Great Neck Estates hereby establishes the public office of
Deputy Village Clerk. The Deputy Village Clerk shall be appointed in the
same manner as the Village Administrator, to serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor. The Deputy Village Clerk shall not be required to be a resident of
A. Section 3-301, Subdivision 1c, of the Village Law of the State of New
York is hereby amended in its application to the Village of Great Neck
Estates, to read as follows: "c. a Village Administrator."
B. Section 3-301, Subdivision 1d, of the Village Law of the State of New
York is hereby repealed in its application to the Village of Great Neck
Estates.
C. Pursuant to the authority granted by § 3-301, Subdivision 2c, of the
Village Law of the State of New York, the office of Village Administrator
is hereby established in the Village of Great Neck Estates.
D. The Village Administrator shall have the powers and duties of the
Village Clerk and the Village Treasurer, as may be provided in the
Village Law or any other statute, law, rule or regulation of the State of
New York or as may be provided by this Code. Any reference in any
statute, law, rule or regulation or code to the Village Clerk, Treasurer or
Clerk-Treasurer shall be deemed to be a reference to the Village
Administrator. The Village Administrator also shall have such other
powers and duties as may be designated or assigned from time to time
by the Mayor or Board of Trustees in the manner authorized by law.
E. The Village Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
the approval of the Board of Trustees, to serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, with
the consent of the Board of Trustees, the Village Administrator shall not
be required to be a resident of the Village of Great Neck Estates, but
shall be a resident of the County of Nassau or a county which adjoins
the County of Nassau. [Amended 2-12-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
F. Section 3-302, Subdivisions 3 and 4, of the Village Law of the State of
New York are hereby expressly superseded by this section, to the extent
that any provisions of the Village Law may be inconsistent with the
provisions of this section.
§ 53-10 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY § 53-11
49:55
the Village of Great Neck Estates but shall be a resident of the County of
Nassau or a county which adjoins the County of Nassau.
§ 53-12. Office of Deputy Village Treasurer; appointment; residence.
[Amended 8-11-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
The Village of Great Neck Estates hereby establishes the public office of
Deputy Village Treasurer. The Deputy Village Treasurer shall be appointed
in the same manner as the Village Administrator, to serve at the pleasure
of the Mayor. The Deputy Village Treasurer shall not be required to be a
resident of the Village of Great Neck Estates but shall be a resident of the
County of Nassau or a county which adjoins the County of Nassau.10
10.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Retirement Incentives, adopted 8-14-1991 by L.L. No.
5-1991, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-12-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004.
§ 53-11 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 53-12
49:56
ARTICLE V
Benefits
[Adopted 9-8-1997 by L.L. No. 9-1997]
§ 53-13. Compensation for unused sick leave, vacation leave and
separation pay.
A. The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may from time to time establish
and amend policies of the Village with respect to provisions for granting
and use of sick leave and vacation leave; for accumulation of unused
sick leave and vacation leave; and for compensation of employees for
unused sick leave and vacation leave and for separation pay. Such
policies shall be applicable to all employees other than those employees
who are members of a collective bargaining unit established or
recognized pursuant to the New York State Civil Service Law.
B. Any policy established pursuant to this section shall be subject to
change in the discretion of the Board of Trustees. The adoption or
amendment of any particular policy shall not be deemed to establish
any vested right in any employee to compensation for any unused sick
leave or vacation leave, except that the rights of an employee who has
met all requirements for receipt of such compensation and who has
applied therefor, in accordance with the policy in effect at the time of
such application, shall not be diminished by any subsequent
amendment to the said policy.
C. In establishing or amending any policy pursuant to this section, the
Board of Trustees may establish reasonable classifications or categories
of employees, and make and amend different provisions for use or
accumulation of sick leave or vacation leave or for compensation for
unused sick leave or vacation leave or separation pay for employees in
different classes or categories.
D. Any policy established pursuant to this section may provide for granting
sick leave and vacation leave and accumulation and/or compensation
for unused sick leave or vacation leave or separation pay at such time or
times and in such amount or amounts as the Board of Trustees shall
determine in its sole discretion.
§ 53-13 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY § 53-13
49:57
Chapter 58
PROCUREMENT POLICY
§ 58-1. Review of purchase type; documentation.
§ 58-2. Requests for proposals; exceptions.
All goods and services will be secured by use of written requests for
proposals, written quotations, verbal quotations, or any other method that
assures that goods will be purchased at the lowest price and that favoritism
will be avoided, except in the following circumstances: purchase contracts
under $10,000 and Public Works contracts $35,000; goods purchased from
agencies for the blind or severely handicapped, pursuant to § 175-b of
the State Finance Law 11; goods purchased from correctional institutions,
pursuant to § 186 of the Correction Law; purchases under state contracts,
pursuant to § 104 of the General Municipal Law; where permitted by law,
purchases under county contracts, pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 3, of the
General Municipal Law; or purchases pursuant to § 58-6 of this policy.
§ 58-3. Method of purchase.
A. Every purchase to be made must be initially reviewed to determine
whether it is a purchase contract or a public works contract. Once that
determination is made, a good-faith effort will be made to determine
whether it is known or can reasonably be expected that the aggregate
amount to be spent on the item of supply or service is not subject to
competitive bidding, taking into account past purchases and the
aggregate amount to be spent in a single fiscal year. The following items
are not subject to competitive bidding pursuant to § 103 of the General
Municipal Law: purchase contracts under $10,000 and Public Works
contracts under $35,000; emergency purchases; goods purchased from
agencies for the blind or severely handicapped; goods purchased from
correctional institutions; purchases under state and county contracts;
contracts for personal services; and surplus and secondhand purchases
from another governmental entity.
B. The decision that a purchase is not subject to competitive bidding will
be documented in writing by the individual making the purchase or
proposing that the Board of Trustees approve a purchase. This
documentation may include written or verbal quotes from vendors, a
memo from the purchaser indicating how the decision was arrived at, a
copy of the contract indicating the source which makes the item or
service exempt, a memo from the purchaser detailing the
circumstances which led to an emergency purchase, or any other
written documentation that is appropriate.
11.Editor's Note: Section 175-b of the State Finance Law was repealed by L.1995, c. 83,
effective April 1, 1995.
§ 53-13 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 58-3
49:58
§ 58-4. Documentation required.
Documentation is required of each action taken in connection with each
procurement.
§ 58-5. Awarding of contracts.
Documentation and an explanation is required whenever a contract is
awarded to other than the lowest responsible offeror. This documentation
will include an explanation of how the award will achieve savings or how
the offeror was not responsible, or any other reason why the contract was
awarded to other than the lowest responsible offeror. A determination that
the offeror is not responsible shall be made by the purchaser and may not
be challenged under any circumstances.
§ 58-6. Exemptions from solicitations.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 104-b, Subdivision 2f, the Village's
Procurement Policy may contain circumstances when, or types of
procurements for which, in the sole discretion of the governing body, the
solicitation of alternative proposals or quotations will not be in the best
interest of the municipality. In the following circumstances it may not be in
the best interest of the Village of Great Neck Estates to solicit quotations or
document the basis for not accepting the lowest bid:
A. The following method of purchase will be used when required by this
policy in order to achieve the highest savings:
Estimated Amount of
Purchase Contract Minimum Required Method
$500 to $2,999 2 verbal quotations
$3,000 to $9,999 3 written/fax quotations or written
request for proposals
Estimated Amount of
Public Works Contract Minimum Required Method
$1,000 to $4,999 2 verbal quotations
$5,000 to $9,999 2 written/fax quotations
$10,000 to $34,999 3 written/fax quotations or written
request for proposals
B. A good-faith effort shall be made to obtain the required number of
proposals or quotations. If the purchaser is unable to obtain the
required number of proposals or quotations, the purchaser will
document the attempt made at obtaining the proposals. In no event
shall the failure to obtain the proposals be a bar to the procurement.
§ 58-3 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY § 58-6
49:59
A. Professional services or services requiring special or technical skill,
training or expertise.
(1) The individual or company must be chosen based on the
accountability, reliability, responsibility, skill, education and
training, judgment, integrity, and moral worth. These qualifications
are not necessarily found in the individual or company that offers
the lowest price and the nature of these services are such that they
do not readily lend themselves to competitive procurement
procedures.
(2) In determining whether a service fits into this category, the Board
of Trustees shall take into consideration the following guidelines:
(a) Whether the services are subject to state licensing or testing
requirements;
(b) Whether substantial formal education or training is a
necessary prerequisite to the performance of the services; and
(c) Whether the services require a personal relationship between
the individual and municipal officials.
(3) Professional or technical services shall include but not be limited to
the following: services of an attorney; services of a physician;
technical services of an engineer engaged to prepare plans, maps
and estimates; securing insurance coverage to prepare plans, maps
and estimates; securing insurance coverage and/or services of an
insurance broker; services of a certified public accountant;
investment management services; management of municipally
owned property; and computer software or programming services
for customized programs, or services involved in substantial
modification and customizing of prepackaged software.
B. Emergency purchases pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 4, of the General
Municipal Law. Due to the nature of this exception, these goods or
services must be purchased immediately and a delay in order to seek
alternative proposals may threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of
the residents. This section does not preclude seeking alternate
proposals if time permits.
C. Purchases of surplus and secondhand goods. Such purchases may be
made without alternative proposals, because if alternate proposals are
required, the Village is precluded from purchasing surplus and
secondhand goods at auctions or through specific advertised sources
where the best prices are usually obtained. It is also difficult to try to
compare prices of used goods, and a lower price may indicate an older
product.
D. Goods or services under $500. The time and documentation required to
purchase through this policy may be more costly than the item itself
and would therefore not be in the best interests of the taxpayer. In
§ 58-6 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 58-6
49:60
§ 58-7. Purchase contracts. [Added 5-14-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter with respect to
purchase contracts (including contracts for purchase of service work), and
pursuant to the provisions of General Municipal Law § 103, Subdivision 1,
the Village of Great Neck Estates may award such purchase contracts to a
responsive and responsible bidder or offeror on the basis of "best value."
Chapter 62
RECORDS
addition, it is not likely that such de minimis contracts would be
awarded based on favoritism.
§ 58-6 RECORDS § 58-7
62:61

ARTICLE I
Records Management
[Adopted 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989 (Ch. 103 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 62-1. Intent.
Records are essential to the administration of local government. They
contain the information that keeps government programs functioning. It is
the intent of this article that a records management program be established
which will assist officials in making decisions, administering programs and
providing administrative continuity with past operations. The program
would be intended to document delivery of services, show the legal
responsibilities of government and protect the legal rights of citizens. It will
contain information on taxation and on the management and expenditure
of funds. These records will also document the historical document of
government itself, the community and the people of the Village.
§ 62-2. Program established; designation of records management
officer.
There shall be a records management program established under the aegis
of the Village Clerk and headed by a records management officer. The
Village Clerk is designated as the records management officer and will be
responsible for administering the current and archived public records in
storage areas for the Village in accordance with local, state and federal laws
and guidelines.
§ 62-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by the
officer and Advisory Committee to have sufficient historical or other value
to warrant the continued preservation by the Village.
RECORDS — Official files, minutes and documents, books, papers,
photographs, sound recordings, microforms, electronic transmissions or
any other materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or
received pursuant to law or in conjunction with the transaction of official
Village business.12
RECORDS CENTER — An establishment maintained by the records
management officer for the storage, servicing, security and processing of
records which must be preserved for varying periods of time.
RECORDS DISPOSITION — The removal by the Village, in accordance
with approved records control schedules, of records no longer necessary
for the conduct of business by such agency through removal methods,
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 62-1 RECORDS § 62-3
62:63
which may include the disposition of temporary records by destruction
or donation, or the transfer of records to a central storage facility for
temporary or permanent storage of records determined to have historical
or other sufficient value warranting continued preservation, or the transfer
of records from one Village agency to another Village agency.
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial activities involved in
records creation, records maintenance and use and records disposition,
including records preservation, records disposal and the records center or
other storage facilities.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any agency for
official use or to the public.
§ 62-4. Powers and duties of records management officer.
The records management officer shall have all the necessary powers to
carry out the efficient administration, determination of value, use,
preservation, storage and disposition of the public records kept, filed or
received by the officers and departments of the Village.
A. The records management officer shall continually survey and examine
public records to recommend their classification so as to determine the
most suitable method to be used for the maintaining, storing and
servicing of the following:
(1) Obsolete and unnecessary records according to the New York State
Retention and Disposition Schedules, thereby subject to
disposition;
(2) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research,
historical or educational value which warrants their permanent
retention; or
(3) Records not subject to disposition according to state law.
B. The records management officer shall establish guidelines for proper
records management in any department of the Village government in
accordance with local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
C. The records management officer shall report annually to the Board of
Trustees on the powers and duties herein mentioned, including but not
limited to the development and progress of programs to date and
planned activities for subsequent years.
D. The records management officer shall operate a central records
management storage facility for storage, processing and servicing of all
Village records for all Village departments and agencies.
E. Additional requirements of the records management officer include but
are not limited to:
§ 62-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 62-4
62:64
§ 62-5. Records Advisory Board.
There shall be a Records Advisory Board designated to work closely with
and provide advice to the records management officer. The Board shall
consist of the Village Historian, a member of the Village Board of Trustees
selected by the Mayor, the Village Treasurer and a department head. The
Board shall meet periodically and have the following duties:
§ 62-6. Custody and control of records.
The records management officer shall maintain physical custody and the
official responsibility for all records. Department heads shall retain
constructive control and authority over all department records.
(1) The development of a comprehensive records management
program.
(2) The conduct of an initial survey and analysis of all records, to be
followed up annually with a report of records stored.
(3) The encouragement and coordination of the continuous legal
destruction of obsolete records through the adoption and use of the
state archive record retention and distribution schedules.
(4) The development and a suitable retention period for records not
covered by the State Records Retention and Disposition Schedules.
(5) The assistance to each department for the establishment of a
records management system to support the overall Village records
management program.
(6) The setting up and overseeing of a center for the storage of inactive
records.
(7) The coordinating and carrying out or participating in the planning
for development of advanced records management systems and
equipment.
(8) The preparation of special and annual reports for the Board of
Trustees on records management program progress, cost savings
and cost avoidance problems and additional issues.
A. To provide advice to the records management officer on the
development of the records management program.
B. To review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and
propose changes and improvements.
C. To review retention periods proposed by the records management
officer for records not covered by the state archive schedules.
D. To provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and to
be the final sign-off entity as to what is or is not archival.
§ 62-4 RECORDS § 62-7
62:65
§ 62-7. Disposition of records.
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department
of the Village unless approval has been obtained from the records
management officer. No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
by the records management officer without the express written consent of
the department head having authority.
§ 62-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 62-7
62:66
ARTICLE II
Public Access
[Adopted 12-7-1998 by L.L. No. 10-1998 (Ch. 25 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 62-8. Designation of records access officer.
The Village Clerk shall be the records access officer for the Village of Great
Neck Estates.
§ 62-9. Location of records.
Records of the Village shall be made available for public inspection and
copying, to the extent permitted or required by law, at the Village Hall.
§ 62-10. Hours for inspection of records.
Public records of the Village which are available for inspection and copying
shall be made available, and requests for access to such records shall be
received, during regular business hours of the Village office.
§ 62-11. Appeals.
Appeals from denials of access to records shall be heard and determined by
the Mayor.
§ 62-12. Fees.13
The following fees shall be charged:
A. Inspection of records: no fee.
B. Search for records: no fee.
C. Certification of a copy of a document: $3.
D. Photocopies, not exceeding nine inches by 14 inches in size: $0.25 per
page.
E. Copies of other records: actual copying costs, excluding fixed agency
costs such as salaries.
13.Editor's Note: As to fees generally, see Ch. 109, Fees.
§ 62-8 RECORDS § 62-12
62:67
Chapter 67
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
§ 67-1. Introduction.
§ 67-2. Applicability; policy.
The Village of Great Neck Estates policy applies to all employees, applicants
for employment, interns, whether paid or unpaid, contractors and persons
conducting business, regardless of immigration status, with the Village
of Great Neck Estates. In the remainder of this document, the term
"employees" refers to this collective group and also includes appointed
officers of the Village.
A. The Village of Great Neck Estates is committed to maintaining a
workplace free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is a form of
workplace discrimination. All employees are required to work in a
manner that prevents sexual harassment in the workplace. This Policy
is one component of the Village of Great Neck Estates' commitment to a
discrimination-free work environment.
B. Sexual harassment is against the law.14 All employees have a legal right
to a workplace free from sexual harassment, and employees are urged
to report sexual harassment by filing a complaint internally with the
Village of Great Neck Estates. Employees also may file a complaint with
a government agency or in court under federal, state or local
antidiscrimination laws.
A. Sexual harassment will not be tolerated. Any employee or individual
covered by this policy who engages in sexual harassment or retaliation
will be subject to remedial and/or disciplinary action (e.g., counseling,
suspension, termination).
B. Retaliation prohibition: No person covered by this Policy shall be
subject to adverse employment action because the employee reports
incidents of sexual harassment, provides information, or otherwise
assists in any investigation of a sexual harassment complaint. The
Village of Great Neck Estates will not tolerate such retaliation against
anyone who, in good faith, reports or provides information about
suspected sexual harassment. Any employee of the Village of Great
Neck Estates who retaliates against anyone involved in a sexual
harassment investigation will be subjected to disciplinary action, up to
and including termination. All employees, paid or unpaid interns, or
nonemployees15 working in the workplace who believe they have been
subject to such retaliation should inform a supervisor, manager, the
14.While this policy specifically addresses sexual harassment, harassment because of and
discrimination against persons of all protected classes is prohibited. In New York State,
such classes include age, race, creed, color, national origin, sexual orientation, military
status, sex, disability, marital status, domestic violence victim status, gender identity and
criminal history.
§ 62-12 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 67-2
62:68
§ 67-3. Definitions; prohibited acts.
Village Administrator or the Mayor. Any employee, paid or unpaid
intern or nonemployee who believes they have been a target of such
retaliation may also seek relief in other available forums, as explained
below in the section on legal protections.
C. Sexual harassment is offensive, a violation of Village policies, unlawful,
and may subject the Village of Great Neck Estates to liability for harm
to targets of sexual harassment. Harassers may also be individually
subject to liability. Employees of every level who engage in sexual
harassment, including managers and supervisors who engage in sexual
harassment or who allow such behavior to continue, will be penalized
for such misconduct.
D. The Village of Great Neck Estates will conduct a prompt and thorough
investigation that ensures due process for all parties whenever
management receives a complaint about sexual harassment or
otherwise knows of possible sexual harassment occurring. The Village
will keep the investigation confidential to the extent possible. Effective
corrective action will be taken whenever sexual harassment is found to
have occurred. All employees, including managers and supervisors, are
required to cooperate with any internal investigation of sexual
harassment.
E. All employees are encouraged to report any harassment or behaviors
that violate this policy. The Village of Great Neck Estates will provide all
employees a complaint form for employees to report harassment and
file complaints.
F. Managers and supervisors are required to report to the Village
Administrator or the Mayor any complaint that they receive, or any
harassment that they observe or become aware of.
G. This policy applies to all employees, paid or unpaid interns, and
nonemployees, and all must follow and uphold this policy. This policy
must be provided to all employees and should be posted prominently in
all work locations to the extent practicable (for example, in a main
office and not an off-site work location) and be provided to employees
upon hiring.
A. Sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination and is unlawful under
federal, state and (where applicable) local law. Sexual harassment
includes harassment on the basis of sex, sexual orientation, selfidentified
or perceived sex, gender expression, gender identity and the
status of being transgender.
15.A nonemployee is someone who is (or is employed by) a contractor, subcontractor, vendor,
consultant, or anyone providing services in the workplace. Protected nonemployees
include persons commonly referred to as "independent contractors," "gig workers" and
"temporary workers." Also included are persons providing equipment repair, cleaning
services or any other services provided pursuant to a contract with the employer.
§ 67-2 RECORDS § 67-3
62:69
B. Sexual harassment includes unwelcome conduct which is either of a
sexual nature, or which is directed at an individual because of that
individual's sex when:
(1) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive work environment, even if the reporting
individual is not the intended target of the sexual harassment;
(2) Such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of employment; or
(3) Submission to or rejection of such conduct is used as the basis for
employment decisions affecting an individual's employment.
C. A sexually harassing hostile work environment includes, but is not
limited to, words, signs, jokes, pranks, intimidation or physical violence
which are of a sexual nature, or which are directed at an individual
because of that individual's sex. Sexual harassment also includes any
unwanted verbal or physical advances, sexually explicit derogatory
statements or sexually discriminatory remarks made by someone which
are offensive or objectionable to the recipient, which cause the
recipient discomfort or humiliation, or which interfere with the
recipient's job performance.
D. Sexual harassment also occurs when a person in authority tries to trade
job benefits for sexual favors. This can include hiring, promotion,
continued employment or any other terms, conditions or privileges of
employment. This is also called "quid pro quo" harassment.
E. Any employee who feels harassed should report so that any violation of
this policy can be corrected promptly. Any harassing conduct, even a
single incident, can be addressed under this policy.
F. Examples of sexual harassment. The following describes some of the
types of acts that may be unlawful sexual harassment and that are
strictly prohibited:
(1) Physical assaults of a sexual nature, such as:
(a) Touching, pinching, patting, kissing, hugging, grabbing,
brushing against another employee's body or poking another
employee's body;
(b) Rape, sexual battery, molestation or attempts to commit these
assaults.
(2) Unwanted sexual advances or propositions, such as:
(a) Requests for sexual favors accompanied by implied or overt
threats concerning the target's job performance evaluation, a
promotion or other job benefits or detriments;
§ 67-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 67-3
62:70
§ 67-4. Unlawful retaliation; protected activity.
(b) Subtle or obvious pressure for unwelcome sexual activities.
(3) Sexually oriented gestures, noises, remarks, jokes or comments
about a person's sexuality or sexual experience, which create a
hostile work environment.
(4) Sex stereotyping occurs when conduct or personality traits are
considered appropriate simply because they may not conform to
other people's ideas or perceptions about how individuals of a
particular sex should act or look.
(5) Sexual or discriminatory displays or publications anywhere in the
workplace, such as:
(a) Displaying pictures, posters, calendars, graffiti, objects,
promotional material, reading materials or other materials that
are sexually demeaning or pornographic. This includes such
sexual displays on workplace computers or cell phones and
sharing such displays while in the workplace.
(6) Hostile actions taken against an individual because of that
individual's sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or the status of
being transgender, such as:
(a) Interfering with, destroying or damaging a person's
workstation, tools or equipment, or otherwise interfering with
the individual's ability to perform the job;
(b) Sabotaging an individual's work;
(c) Bullying, yelling, name calling.
G. Who can be a target of sexual harassment? Sexual harassment can
occur between any individuals, regardless of their sex or gender. New
York law protects employees, paid or unpaid interns, and
nonemployees, including independent contractors, and those employed
by companies contracting to provide services in the workplace.
Harassers can be a superior, a subordinate, a coworker, or anyone in
the workplace including an independent contractor, contract worker,
vendor, client, customer or visitor.
H. Where can sexual harassment occur? Unlawful sexual harassment is
not limited to the physical workplace itself. It can occur while
employees are traveling for business or at employer sponsored events
or parties. Calls, texts, e-mails, and social media usage by employees
can constitute unlawful workplace harassment, even if such conduct
occurs away from the workplace premises or outside work hours.
A. Unlawful retaliation can be any action that would discourage a worker
from coming forward to make or support a sexual harassment claim.
Adverse action need not be job-related or occur in the workplace to
§ 67-3 RECORDS § 67-4
62:71
§ 67-5. Reporting procedure.
§ 67-6. Supervisory responsibilities.
constitute unlawful retaliation (e.g., threats of physical violence outside
of work hours). Such retaliation is unlawful under federal, state and
(where applicable) local law.
B. The New York State Human Rights Law16 protects any individual who
has engaged in "protected activity." Protected activity occurs when a
person has:
(1) Made a complaint of sexual harassment, either internally or with
any antidiscrimination agency;
(2) Testified or assisted in a proceeding involving sexual harassment
under the Human Rights Law or other antidiscrimination law;
(3) Opposed sexual harassment by making a verbal or informal
complaint to management, or by simply informing a supervisor or
manager of harassment;
(4) Reported that another employee has been sexually harassed; or
(5) Encouraged a fellow employee to report harassment.
A. Preventing sexual harassment is everyone's responsibility. The Village
of Great Neck Estates cannot prevent or remedy sexual harassment
unless it knows about it. Any employee, paid or unpaid intern or
nonemployee who has been subjected to behavior that may constitute
sexual harassment is encouraged to report such behavior to a
supervisor, manager, the Village Administrator or the Mayor. Anyone
who witnesses or becomes aware of potential instances of sexual
harassment should report such behavior to a supervisor, manager, the
Village Administrator or the Mayor.
B. Reports of sexual harassment may be made verbally or in writing. A
form for submission of a written complaint is attached to this policy, and
all employees are encouraged to use this complaint form. Employees
who are reporting sexual harassment on behalf of other employees
should use the complaint form and note that it is on another employee's
behalf.
C. Employees, paid or unpaid interns or nonemployees who believe they
have been a target of sexual harassment may also seek assistance in
other available forums, as explained below in the section on legal
protections.
A. All supervisors and managers who receive a complaint or information
about suspected sexual harassment, observe what may be sexually
16.Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 290 et seq.
§ 67-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 67-6
62:72
§ 67-7. Complaints; investigations.
harassing behavior or for any reason suspect that sexual harassment is
occurring are required to report such suspected sexual harassment to
the Village Administrator or Mayor.
B. In addition to being subject to discipline if they engaged in sexually
harassing conduct themselves, supervisors and managers will be
subject to discipline for failing to report suspected sexual harassment
or otherwise knowingly allowing sexual harassment to continue.
C. Supervisors and managers will also be subject to discipline for
engaging in any retaliation.
A. All complaints or information about suspected sexual harassment will
be investigated, whether that information was reported in verbal or
written form. Investigations will be conducted in a timely manner and
will be confidential to the extent possible.
B. An investigation of any complaint, information or knowledge of
suspected sexual harassment will be prompt and thorough, commenced
immediately and completed as soon as possible. The investigation will
be kept confidential to the extent possible. All persons involved,
including complainants, witnesses and alleged harassers will be
accorded due process, as outlined below, to protect their rights to a fair
and impartial investigation.
C. Any employee may be required to cooperate as needed in an
investigation of suspected sexual harassment. The Village of Great
Neck Estates will not tolerate retaliation against employees who file
complaints, support another's complaint or participate in an
investigation regarding a violation of this policy.
D. While the process may vary from case to case, investigations should be
done in accordance with the following steps:
(1) Upon receipt of a complaint, the Village Administrator or the Mayor
will conduct an immediate review of the allegations and take any
interim actions (e.g., instructing the respondent to refrain from
communications with the complainant), as appropriate. If the
complaint is verbal, the investigating authority will encourage the
individual to complete the complaint form in writing. If he or she
refuses, the investigating authority will prepare a complaint form
based on the oral reporting.
(2) If documents, e-mails or phone records are relevant to the
allegations, the person responsible for investigation shall take
steps to obtain and preserve them.
(3) Request and review all relevant documents, including all electronic
communications.
§ 67-6 RECORDS § 67-7
62:73
§ 67-8. Legal protection; external remedies.
(4) Interview all parties involved, including any relevant witnesses.
(5) Create a written documentation of the investigation (such as a
letter, memo or e-mail) which contains the following:
(a) A list of all documents reviewed, along with a detailed
summary of relevant documents;
(b) A list of names of those interviewed, along with a detailed
summary of their statements;
(c) A time line of events;
(d) A summary of prior relevant incidents, reported or unreported;
and
(e) The basis for the decision and final resolution of the complaint,
together with any corrective action(s).
(6) Keep the written documentation and associated documents in a
secure and confidential location.
(7) Promptly notify the individual who reported and the individual(s)
about whom the complaint was made of the final determination and
implement any corrective actions identified in the written
document.
(8) Inform the individual who reported of the right to file a complaint
or charge externally as outlined below.
A. Sexual harassment is not only prohibited by the Village of Great Neck
Estates, but is also prohibited by state and federal law and may be
prohibited by applicable local law. In addition to, or separate from, the
internal process at the Village of Great Neck Estates, employees may
also choose to pursue legal remedies with the following governmental
entities at any time. While a private attorney is not required in order to
file a complaint with a governmental agency, you may seek the legal
advice of a private attorney if you wish to do so.
(1) New York State Division of Human Rights (DHR).
(a) The Human Rights Law (HRL), codified as New York Executive
Law, Article 15, § 290 et seq., applies to employers in New York
State with regard to sexual harassment and protects
employees, paid or unpaid interns and nonemployees,
regardless of immigration status. A complaint alleging
violation of the Human Rights Law may be filed either with
DHR or in New York State Supreme Court.
(b) Complaints with DHR may be filed any time within one year of
the harassment. If an individual did not file at DHR, they can
§ 67-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 67-8
62:74
sue directly in state court under the HRL within three years of
the alleged sexual harassment. An individual may not file with
DHR if they have already filed a HRL complaint in state court.
(c) Complaining internally to the Village of Great Neck Estates
does not extend your time to file with DHR or in court. The one
year or three years is counted from date of the most recent
incident of harassment.
(d) You do not need an attorney to file a complaint with DHR, and
there is no cost to file with DHR.
(e) DHR will investigate your complaint and determine whether
there is probable cause to believe that discrimination has
occurred. Probable cause cases are forwarded to a public
hearing before an administrative law judge. If discrimination is
found after a hearing, DHR has the power to award relief,
which varies but may include requiring your employer to take
action to stop the harassment, or redress the damage caused,
including paying monetary damages, attorney's fees and civil
fines.
(f) DHR's main office contact information is: New York State
Division of Human Rights, One Fordham Plaza, Fourth Floor,
Bronx, New York 10458, (718) 741-8400 www.dhr.ny.gov.
Contact DHR at (888) 392-3644 or visit dhr.ny.gov/complaint
for more information about filing a complaint. The website has
a complaint form that can be downloaded, filled out, notarized
and mailed to DHR. The website also contains contact
information for DHR's regional offices across New York State.
(2) United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
— Civil Rights Act of 1964.
(a) The EEOC enforces federal antidiscrimination laws, including
Title VII of the 1964 federal Civil Rights Act (codified as 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.). An individual can file a complaint with
the EEOC anytime within 300 days from the harassment. There
is no cost to file a complaint with the EEOC. The EEOC will
investigate the complaint and determine whether there is
reasonable cause to believe that discrimination has occurred,
at which point the EEOC will issue a right to sue letter
permitting the individual to file a complaint in federal court.
(b) The EEOC does not hold hearings or award relief, but may take
other action, including pursuing cases in federal court on
behalf of complaining parties. Federal courts may award
remedies if discrimination is found to have occurred.
(c) If an employee believes that he/she has been discriminated
against at work, he/she can file a charge of discrimination. The
EEOC has district, area, and field offices where complaints can
§ 67-8 RECORDS § 67-8
62:75
Chapter 72
VOTING REQUIREMENTS FOR VILLAGE BOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Architectural Review Board — See Ch. 12.
Board of Assessors — See Ch. 16.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 230, Art.
VIII.
Rules of Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch.
A235.
§ 72-1. Purpose and applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are intended to override any contrary law
or judicial determination which allows or permits a decision to be made
by any municipal board or body without the affirmative action of at least a
majority of the whole membership of such board or body. Without limitation,
the intention of this chapter is to override the effects of the decision of
the New York Court of Appeals in Tall Trees Construction Corp. v. Zoning
Board of Appeals of the Town of Huntington. Also without limitation, it is the
intention of this chapter to ensure that no approval or authorization shall
be issued or made by any board or body of the Village by default, or by
inaction or failure to act within any particular period of time. This chapter
shall apply to all boards of the Village of Great Neck Estates, and any official
Village body which has power or authority to make final determinations with
be filed. Contact the EEOC by calling 1-800-669-4000 (TTY:
1-800-669-6820), visiting their website at www.eeoc.gov or via
email at info@eeoc.gov.
(d) If an individual filed an administrative complaint with DHR,
DHR will file the complaint with the EEOC to preserve the right
to proceed in federal court.
B. Local protections. Many localities enforce laws protecting individuals
from sexual harassment and discrimination. Contact the county, city or
town in which you live or work to find out if such a law exists.
C. Contact the local police department. If the harassment involves
physical touching, coerced physical confinement or coerced sex acts,
the conduct may constitute a crime. Contact the local police
department.
D. Questions regarding the Village policy. Any Village officer, employee, or
paid or unpaid intern, or other person subject to this policy, may submit
questions regarding this Policy and its implementation by submitting
the questions, in writing, to the Village Administrator or the Mayor.
Written responses will be provided with respect to any such question
within a reasonable period of time after submission.
§ 67-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 72-1
72:76
respect to matters pending before such body, whether the members of such
board or body are appointed or elected.
§ 72-2. Supersession, repeal or amendment of existing laws; scope.
§ 72-3. Vote required.
A. In addition to any other provisions of the Village Law of the State of
New York which may heretofore or hereafter have been superseded,
amended or repealed by any other provision of the Code of the Village
of Great Neck Estates, or any local law adopted by the Village of Great
Neck Estates, pursuant to Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, Subdivision
1(ii), Village Law § 7-712-a, Subdivision 4, is hereby repealed in its
application to the Village of Great Neck Estates, and a new § 7-712-a,
Subdivision 4, is enacted in its place and stead, to read as follows:
"4.Hearing appeals. Unless otherwise provided by local law, the
jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals shall be appellate only and shall
be limited to hearing and deciding appeals from and reviewing any
order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or determination made
by the administrative official charged with the enforcement of any
local law adopted pursuant to this article. The concurring vote of a
majority of such Board shall be required, as provided in the Village
Code of the Village of Great Neck Estates, and shall be necessary
for a determination of any matter considered by such Board. Such
appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by an officer,
department, board or bureau of the Village."
B. This chapter shall apply to any determination or issuance of an
application, decision, motion, action, approval or other matter
(hereinafter referred to as an "action") pending before any board or
body authorized to make a final determination with respect to such
action.
A. No board or body of the Village having the power or authority to make a
final determination with respect to any matter within the jurisdiction of
such board or body shall take any action to grant, grant with conditions,
deny, deny with conditions, modify, or otherwise determine any action
pending before such board or body, except with the concurring
affirmative vote of at least a majority of the whole number of members
of such board or body (as if no positions on such board or body were
vacant). By way of example, if a board or body consists of five
authorized members, regardless of the number of members actually
appointed to such board or body, or the number of members of such
board or body present at the time of the vote, no action shall be taken
by such board or body except upon the affirmative vote of at least three
members of such board or body.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where any provision of law requires an
affirmative vote of a greater number or proportion of the members of
§ 72-1 VOTING REQUIREMENTS FOR VILLAGE § 72-3
72:77
Chapter 75
WORK VIOLENCE POLICY
§ 75-1. Purpose.
The safety and security of Village employees is important. Threats,
threatening behavior, or acts of violence against employees, visitors, guests,
or other individuals by anyone on Village property will not be tolerated.
§ 75-2. Response to incidents of violence.
Any person who makes threats, exhibits threatening behavior, or engages
in violent acts on Village property will be removed from the premises as
quickly as safety permits and shall remain off Village premises pending the
outcome of an investigation. The Village's response to incidents of violence
may include suspension and/or termination of any business relationship,
reassignment of job duties, suspension or termination of employment, and
criminal prosecution of those involved.
such board or body, the affirmative vote of such greater number shall
be required to take any action as described in this chapter.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, consistent with the
rules or procedures of any board or body of the Village, the chair of
such board or body, or a member of such board or body lawfully
exercising the authority of the chair of such board or body, may:
(1) Adjourn, postpone or continue further consideration of any matter
until such time as a concurring vote to act upon such matter may be
obtained consistent with the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Adjourn a meeting upon the conclusion of the business to be
conducted at such meeting.
D. In determining whether an affirmative vote has been cast by any
particular member of a board or body, an abstention or absence shall
not be counted either as an affirmative vote or a negative vote.
E. For the purposes of determining whether a board or body has approved
any action by a concurring affirmative vote as required by law, the
failure to obtain a necessary majority to approve such action shall not
be considered an action to approve the converse of the action proposed
in the motion. Where the vote of a body or board is less than the
required affirmative vote to adopt or approve an action, the action shall
be considered to have been defeated, and the body or board shall not be
deemed or considered to have taken any action on the substance of the
matter pending before the board or body by virtue of such defeat of any
action.
§ 72-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 75-3
72:78
§ 75-3. Response to threats of violence.
All Village personnel are responsible for notifying the contact person
designated below of any threats they have witnessed, received, or have
been told that another person has witnessed or received. Personnel should
also report behavior they regard as threatening or violent if that behavior is
job-related or might be carried out on a company-controlled site.
§ 75-4. Protective or restraining orders.
An employee who applies for or obtains a protective or restraining order
that lists company locations as protected areas must provide a copy of
the petition and declarations used to seek the order and a copy of any
temporary or permanent protective or restraining order that was granted.
The Village has confidentiality procedures that recognize and respect the
privacy of the reporting employee(s).
§ 75-5. Designated contact.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 79
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 25.
§ 79-1. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Great Neck Estates to
maintain a reasonable degree of purity of its air resources, consistent with
the public health, welfare and comfort of the residents of the Village and
the protection of property and other resources, and to that end to require
A. Designated contact:
Name: Kathleen L. Santelli
Title: Village Administrator
Phone: 516-482-8283
Location: Village Hall, Atwater Plaza, 4 Gateway Drive, Great Neck
Estates, New York.
B. Alternate contact person: contact any member of the Village Police
Department, at Police Headquarters, by contacting 911 or
516-487-7700.
§ 75-3 AIR POLLUTION § 79-1
79:79
the use of all available practical and reasonable methods for preventing and
controlling air pollution in the Village atmosphere.
§ 79-2. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to safeguard the air resources of
the Village of Great Neck Estates from pollution by controlling or abating
air pollution existing when this chapter is enacted and preventing new
air pollution under a program which is consistent with the above-stated
declaration of policy.
§ 79-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the atmosphere of one or more air
contaminants in quantities, of characteristics and of a duration which are
injurious to human, plant or animal life or to business or property or which
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property, health, repose,
safety or welfare of persons.
ATMOSPHERE — Open air existing in all space outside of buildings, stacks
or exterior ducts.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, political
subdivision, agency, board, department or bureau of the state or any
political subdivision of the state, municipal corporation, partnership,
association, firm, trust, organization, estate or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties,
or any officer, agent or employee of any of the foregoing.
REFUSE BURNING EQUIPMENT or INCINERATOR — Equipment designed
to burn garbage, rubbish and other wastes.
§ 79-4. Use or installation of refuse burning equipment or
incinerators.
A. Commencing immediately, no person shall use, or permit the use or
operation of, refuse burning equipment or incinerators for the
destruction of refuse without first obtaining an operating certificate
issued by the Commissioner of Health of the Nassau County
Department of Health.
B. Commencing immediately, no person shall cause or permit the
installation or construction of any refuse burning equipment or
incinerator for the destruction of refuse in any building or structure
being erected or constructed within the Village.
C. Commencing October 1, 1973, no person shall use or permit the use or
operation of refuse burning equipment or incinerators for the
destruction of refuse.17
§ 79-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 79-4
79:80
Chapter 82
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 82-1. Title and purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the "Alarm System Law" and is intended to
foster and render more effective the installation of alarm systems having
the capability of calling or signaling law enforcement authorities.
§ 82-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 82-3. Permit required.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, no owner, tenant, resident or
occupant (hereinafter collectively referred to as "resident") of any building
or structure within the Village shall install or cause to be installed in any
premises in the Village any alarm system, calling device, signaling device
or other mechanical device or apparatus connected or capable of being
connected directly or indirectly to the Village police headquarters office or
telephone line without first receiving a permit for the installation.
§ 82-4. Application for permits; issuance.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — A burglar alarm system, a fire alarm system or a
system combining the elements of a burglar and fire alarm system or a
system for transmission of other emergency signals.
B. All references in this chapter to "Village" shall refer to the Village of
Great Neck Estates.
A. Applications for permits shall be on a form prescribed by the Police
Commissioner of the Village.
B. Permits shall be issued by the Mayor or such other person as authorized
by law.
C. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates that the
alarm system to be installed meets the standards set forth in this
chapter.
D. An application for a permit shall constitute an authorization that the
Village may, on reasonable notice to the resident, inspect the alarm
system for the purpose of determining whether the system continues to
comply with the standards set forth in this chapter.
17.Editor's Note: Former § 32-5, Penalties for offenses, added 6-1-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See
now § 1-1.
§ 79-4 AIR POLLUTION § 82-5
79:81
§ 82-5. Standards for alarm systems. [Amended 6-11-2001 by L.L.
No. 5-2001]
All alarm systems referred to in this chapter shall, at the time of their
installation and at all times that such alarm systems shall be connected,
directly or indirectly, to the Village police office by telephone line, meet the
following standards:
§ 82-6. Existing alarm systems.
Alarm systems installed or in use at the effective date of this chapter shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter within 120 days after the
effective date hereof. Residents shall apply for permits for such systems
within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. In the event of a failure
of any system to comply with the provisions of this section or of § 82-5 of this
chapter, the Village may, without further notice to the resident, disconnect
such alarm system from the Village police office or telephone line.
§ 82-7. Audible alarms. [Amended 10-5-1978 by L.L. No. 4-1978;18
6-11-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001]
A. All alarm systems must meet reasonable safety standards such as those
acceptable to Underwriters Laboratories or equivalent.
B. Every alarm system capable of signaling as a burglar alarm and a fire
alarm shall be equipped with separate distinguishing signals, as
reasonably required by the Police Commissioner, to the end that the
appropriate authorities, upon receipt of a signal, may immediately
ascertain the nature and cause of the signal.
C. Alarm systems equipped with automatic calling devices shall be
designed, installed or maintained to call only the number or numbers
designated for that purpose by the Police Commissioner and shall be
equipped so that no message will be repeated more than three times.
D. All alarm systems capable of emitting audible signals shall be equipped
with an operating device which will automatically, by mechanical,
electrical or other means, shut off such audible signal after no more
than 15 minutes of continuous sound audible beyond the boundaries of
the premises in which the alarm system is located.
A. No owner or occupant of property shall suffer or permit any alarm
system installed upon such property to emit a sound audible beyond the
boundaries of said premises for a continuous period in excess of 15
minutes in any one-hour period.
18.Editor's Note: Section 1 of L.L. No. 4-1978 read as follows: "The Board of Trustees hereby
finds and declares that the maintenance of audible alarm systems without adequate
provision for automatic shut off devices has resulted in incidents where such alarms have
emitted audible sounds for extended periods of time far beyond that necessary to alert the
appropriate authorities. Such continuous or extended emission of sound has a disturbing
and deleterious effect upon the health, safety and general welfare of the neighbors of the
premises where such alarms are located, which effects are so severe as to require
remedial measures as set forth herein."
§ 82-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 82-7
79:82
§ 82-8. False alarms. [Amended 6-11-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001;
5-14-2012 by L.L. No. 7-2012]
B. In any case where the alarm system emits sound in violation of the
foregoing subsection, the operation or maintenance of the alarm system
shall be deemed to constitute the grant of permission by the owners and
occupants of the premises for law enforcement or fire officials to
disconnect the alarm system from the outside of the premises or to
enter the interior of said premises and investigate and to disconnect
and/or disarm the alarm system, either from the interior or exterior of
the premises.
C. In the event that any alarm system is operated or maintained in
violation of this section, the owners and adult occupants of the premises
shall be guilty of a violation of this section and subject to a penalty of
$250 for each such violation.
A. The term "false alarm" as used herein shall mean any emergency
message or signal which is transmitted, directly or indirectly, to the
Village police office to which the Village police office or other
emergency personnel respond and which signal is not the result of a
robbery, burglary, other crime, fire or emergency. An activated alarm
signal which is promptly followed by a call to the police office properly
notifying the police that the signal is to be disregarded shall not
constitute a false alarm.
B. Within 10 business days after written notification from the Village
Clerk, any property owner having an alarm system subject to any of the
provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Village of Great Neck Estates,
for each and every false alarm in any calendar year, a civil penalty as
follows:
(1) First or second false alarm in the first month after issuance of a
permit required pursuant to this chapter: no charge.
(2) First through fourth false alarm of each calendar year thereafter:
no charge.
(3) Fifth through sixth false alarm in each such calendar year: $75
each.
(4) Each additional false alarm in each such calendar year: $100 each.
C. The Board of Trustees, acting by resolution, may from time to time
amend the foregoing schedule of civil penalties.19
D. In addition to any other penalty or remedy as provided in this section,
any person who shall fail or omit to pay any penalty assessed or due as
provided in this section shall be guilty of a violation, and upon
19.Editor's Note: Former § 34-9, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 82-7 AIR POLLUTION § 82-8
79:83
Chapter 86
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals in parks — See Ch. 150.
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not less than $150
nor more than $350 for each such violation. Each week that a penalty
assessed or due as provided in this section is not paid shall constitute a
separate violation. [Added 4-13-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
§ 82-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 82-8
79:84
ARTICLE I
Dogs Running at Large
[Adopted 8-4-1975 by L.L. No. 6-1975 (Ch. 52, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 86-1. Dogs at large; leash. [Amended 6-2-1980 by L.L. No. 2-1980]
No person who owns, possesses or harbors a dog (male or female) shall
permit or allow such dog to run loose or at large in any street, sidewalk,
lane or public place in the Village of Great Neck Estates or upon any
private property without the consent of the owner or person in possession
of said property. No dog shall be permitted at any time to be on such street,
sidewalk, lane or public or private place unless effectively restrained in the
immediate custody and control of the owner or custodian of the dog by a
chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length.
§ 86-2. Nuisances on public or private premises.
A person who owns, possesses or controls a dog, cat or other animal
shall not permit the animal to commit a nuisance on a sidewalk of any
public place, or a floor, wall, stairway or roof of any public or private
premises used in common by the public, or on a fence, wall or stairway of a
building abutting on a public place. The term "sidewalk" shall mean the area
between the curbline and the property line of the abutting property owner.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions hereof shall not be deemed
to supersede, replace or repeal the provisions of Local Law No. 4-1975.20
§ 86-3. Seizure and impoundment. [Amended 6-2-1980 by L.L. No.
2-1980; 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
Any dog found at large in any street, sidewalk, lane or public place and
not under effective restraint by a chain or leash, as aforesaid, may be
seized by any duly appointed Animal Control Officer, peace officer or duly
authorized officer or representative of the Town of North Hempstead and
confined and impounded in the public pound maintained by the Town of
North Hempstead in the County of Nassau. A dog seized by either a Village
Animal Control Officer or independent contractor hired by the Village shall
be impounded as a responsibility of the Village. Any dog so found at large
not under effective restraint, as aforesaid, that cannot be safely seized
may be destroyed by such Animal Control Officer, peace officer or duly
authorized officer.
§ 86-4. Impounded dogs; appearance tickets. [Amended 6-2-1980 by
L.L. No. 2-1980]
20.Editor's Note: L.L. No. 4-1975, adopted 7-7-1975, was repealed by L.L. No. 3-1979, adopted
8-6-1979. See Article II of this chapter.
§ 86-1 AIR POLLUTION § 86-4
79:85
§ 86-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-3-1975 by L.L. No.
12-1975; 8-2-1976 by L.L. No. 2-1976; 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or any part thereof,
shall be subject to a fine or penalty not to exceed $50 for the first such
violation, $100 for the second such violation, and $250 for the third and
each subsequent violation. Each day that a violation is permitted shall
constitute a separate offense. Such fine or penalty shall be in addition to
any redemption fee required by law.
A. Any dog so impounded may be dealt with as provided in § 14-9 of the
Town of North Hempstead Code and the Agriculture and Markets Law
of the State of New York.
B. The Animal Control Officer of the Town of North Hempstead, and any
other person duly authorized by law, may issue and serve appearance
tickets21 for violation of this article. [Amended 4-12-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004]
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Appearance Tickets.
§ 86-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 86-5
79:86
ARTICLE II
Nuisances
[Adopted 8-6-1979 by L.L. No. 3-1979 (Ch. 52, Art. II, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 86-6. Unlawful acts by dogs; curbing conditions.
No person who owns, possesses, harbors, keeps or is in any charge or
control of a dog shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any such animal to soil,
defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any public highway, street,
thoroughfare or walk used in common by the public, or any place where
people congregate, or on any private property without the permission of the
owner of said private property. The restriction in this section shall not apply
to that portion of the street lying between the curblines, which may be used
to curb such animal under the following conditions:
§ 86-7. Feeding of stray animals and wildlife prohibited. [Added
12-13-1999 by L.L. No. 7-1999]
No person shall feed, cause to be fed or provide food for any wild animal,
and/or stray domestic animal, or bird or other fowl within the Village of
Great Neck Estates. It shall constitute a violation of this section to provide
food or water for any domestic animal in a location which is reasonably
accessible to any wild animal and/or stray domestic animal.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, providing food or water for birds in a feeder
or watering facility shall not be prohibited by this section so long as the
container in which such food or water is maintained is at least three feet
above ground level.
§ 86-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $25 for the first such violation, $50 for the second such
violation and $75 for the third such violation and each succeeding violation.
A. The person who so curbs such animals shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such animal by any sanitary method approved by the
Nassau County Department of Health.
B. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be
disposed of in a sanitary manner approved by the Nassau County
Department of Health by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any animal curbed in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 86-6 AIR POLLUTION § 86-8
79:87

ARTICLE III
Wild or Exotic Animals
[Adopted 3-11-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996 (Ch. 52, Art. III, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 86-9. Purpose.
This article is adopted to protect the health, safety and well-being of
persons and property in the Village of Great Neck Estates by imposing
restrictions on the keeping or harboring of wild or exotic animals within the
Village. The Board of Trustees finds that the harboring or keeping of wild
or exotic animals may be offensive to other residents of the Village so as to
constitute a public nuisance and may pose a threat to persons and property
within and without the Village.
§ 86-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male
and female, singular and plural.
HARBOR — To keep or contain upon public or private property or to permit
another to keep or contain upon public or private property.
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any species of animal whose natural or usual
habitat is either in the wild or in a zoo, as opposed to a domesticated
environment, regardless of whether such animal poses an actual or
apparent threat to persons, other animals or property, and any species of
animal which, as a matter of common knowledge, is naturally ferocious,
unpredictable, dangerous and mischievous. The following animals, the
ownership of which is normally legal, and which are normally found within
a domesticated environment, are specifically declared not to be "wild or
exotic animals" subject to regulations under this article: dogs; cats; tropical
birds such as canaries, parakeets, parrots and myna birds; guinea pigs;
gerbils; hamsters; white mice; turtles other than snapping turtles; tropical
fish; and nonpoisonous snakes.[Amended 11-12-2012 by L.L. No.
12-2012]
§ 86-11. Prohibition.
No person shall harbor a wild or exotic animal within the Village of Great
Neck Estates, except as permitted by this article.
§ 86-12. Permit applications; public hearing.
A. Applications for permits to harbor a wild or exotic animal shall be
submitted, in writing, to the Village Clerk, who shall maintain a
permanent record of such applications and the disposition of each such
application.
§ 86-9 AIR POLLUTION § 86-12
79:89
§ 86-13. Approval of permit application.
B. Each such application shall include identification of the applicant and
the person who proposes to harbor such wild or exotic animal, the
nature and species of such animal, a description of the characteristics
of such animal and its propensity or ability to cause harm to persons or
property and the location where the wild or exotic animal is to be
harbored, a list of any other wild or exotic animals harbored or
proposed to be harbored at the same location, and the consent of all
owners of such location. Such application shall be accompanied by such
fee as may be prescribed by the Board of Trustees, by resolution.
C. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Village Clerk shall notify the
Board of Trustees, which shall schedule a public hearing for the
purpose of hearing all interested persons as to whether a permit should
be issued to permit the harboring of the wild or exotic animal.
D. The applicant shall give notice of such public hearing to all owners of
property located within 500 feet of the boundaries of the property
where it is proposed to harbor the wild or exotic animal.
E. Notice of such public hearing shall be published by the Village, at the
applicant's expense, in the Village's official newspaper designated for
such purpose, at least 10 days before the commencement of such
hearing.
A. The Board of Trustees shall not grant any permit pursuant to this
article, without first having determined that:
(1) The wild or exotic animal does not constitute a present or future
threat to the safety and well-being of the residents of the Village,
their animals or property.
(2) Such animal does not constitute a nuisance to those who may be
exposed to it including but not limited to, the immediate neighbors
of the harborer of such animal. A wild or exotic animal shall be
deemed a nuisance if it or methods to care for it are unsightly or
are likely to create offensive sounds or odors. A wild or exotic
animal shall also be deemed a nuisance if exposure to it creates a
reasonable apprehension of danger.
(3) The harborer of such animal has the ability to provide a safe,
healthy and humane environment for the animal and to prevent its
escape from confinement.
(4) The ownership or harboring of such animal is otherwise permitted
by law.
B. In granting any such permit, the Board of Trustees may impose
reasonable restrictions, including, without limitation, restrictions as to
the duration of such permit and as to the portions of the premises
where the animal is to be harbored.
§ 86-12 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 86-13
79:90
§ 86-14. Waiver of hearing.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, prior to the
commencement of any public hearing pursuant to this article, the Board
of Trustees may waive the requirement for a public hearing after review
of any application for a permit pursuant to this article where the Board
makes a determination that each of the criteria in § 86-13A have been
met. In such instance, the Village Clerk shall issue the requested permit
without conditions, except that such permit shall be subject to revocation
by subsequent action of the Board of Trustees, after public hearing held
in accordance with the procedural provisions of § 86-12 of this article and
after a determination by the Board of Trustees that the criteria set forth in
§ 86-13A have not been met.
§ 86-15. Revocation of permits.
In addition to any other procedure for revocation of permits as provided
in this article, the Board of Trustees may at any time, and shall upon
written petition of at least 10 residents of the Village, hold a public hearing,
on notice to a permit holder and under the same procedure as provided
in § 86-12 hereof, to determine whether a permit shall be revoked. After
conclusion of such hearing, the Board of Trustees may revoke such permit
where the Board finds that the standards for permit approval are not or
have not been, or that the conditions of an approval have not been complied
with, or impose new or additional conditions where the Board finds the
same to be reasonable and appropriate.
§ 86-16. Seizure of animals.
C. Upon the approval of the Board of Trustees, the Village Clerk shall issue
a permit to the applicant, which permit shall clearly state the
conditions, if any, imposed by the Board of Trustees upon such permit.
The permit shall also state that it is subject to revocation as provided in
this article.
A. In any case where no valid permit has been issued or is outstanding to
harbor a wild or exotic animal, such animal may immediately be seized
by a person or persons authorized by the Mayor or Board of Trustees, or
by any police officer. In such case, the person seizing such animal shall
transport or deliver such animal or animals to an appropriate agency or
facility equipped and authorized by law to possess such animal or
animals, including a public or private zoo or society for the prevention
of cruelty to animals.
B. Whenever any animal shall be seized pursuant to this section, such
seizure shall be promptly reported to the owner or harborer of such
animal by reasonable means, if such owner or harborer can reasonably
be ascertained and located.
C. Within a reasonable time after seizure of such animal and written
request from the owner or harborer of such animal, the Mayor shall
§ 86-13 AIR POLLUTION § 86-16
79:91
§ 86-17. Review of official actions.
All actions of the Mayor or the Board of Trustees pursuant to this article
shall be reviewable pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules, which shall be the exclusive remedy of persons aggrieved by such
action.
§ 86-18. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of this article shall be punishable as provided by law for
violations of the Code of the Village of Great Neck Estates.22
hold a public hearing to determine if the seizure was proper. Notice of
such hearing shall be given by the Village by publication. If the Mayor
shall determine after public hearing that the seizure was proper, title
to the animal shall be forfeit to and shall vest in the Village, which may
then dispose of the animal in such manner as may be determined by
the Board of Trustees. If the Mayor shall determine after public hearing
that the seizure was improper, the Mayor shall direct the return of such
animal to the owner or harborer thereof.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, General Penalty.
§ 86-16 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 86-18
79:92
ARTICLE IV
Keeping of Certain Species
[Adopted 11-12-2012 by L.L. No. 12-2012]
§ 86-19. Restrictions on domesticated and nondomesticated
species.
No person shall keep or harbor any animal in the Village of Great Neck
Estates except as specifically authorized in this chapter or unless such
animal is of a domesticated species customarily kept in connection with a
residential household.
A. For the purposes of this article, the following species of animals are
considered to be customarily kept in connection with a residential
household: dogs; cats; tropical birds such as canaries, parakeets,
parrots and myna birds; guinea pigs; gerbils; hamsters; white mice;
turtles other than snapping turtles; tropical fish; and nonpoisonous
snakes, or other species determined by the Code Official to be similar in
nature and habitat to the foregoing species.
B. Animals which are typically kept or maintained outdoors or outside a
dwelling, including but not limited to horses, poultry or livestock, are
not considered domesticated species pursuant to this article, and no
person shall keep or harbor such animals in the Village.
§ 86-19 AIR POLLUTION § 86-19
79:93
Chapter 91
BOATS
§ 91-1. Applicability of regulations. [Amended 8-1-1960 by Ord. No.
98]
The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply with respect
to the speed and operation of boats while being operated or driven upon any
waters or waterways within the Village of Great Neck Estates, and upon any
waters or waterways adjacent, to a distance of 1,500 feet from the shore,
except when prohibited by the laws of the United States.
§ 91-2. Compliance with state and federal navigation regulations.
[Amended 8-1-1960 by Ord. No. 98]
All provisions of the Navigation Law of the State of New York, or the
inland rules enacted by Congress and governing the navigation of the inland
waters of the United States, and all the pilot rules for the United States
inland waters, and the provisions of the Motor Boat Act of 1940 and the
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, shall be complied with
by all vessels navigating the waters and waterways described in § 91-1 of
this chapter.
§ 91-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOAT or VESSEL — Includes every description of watercraft or other
contrivance used on or capable of being used as a means of transportation
in water and in air.
§ 91-4. Discharging of toilets.
Discharging of toilets from boats and vessels is prohibited.
§ 91-5. Dumping of oil or waste.
Dumping of oil, refuse, garbage or waste is prohibited.
§ 91-6. Mooring permit required.
Boats shall not moor unless previously granted a mooring permit by the
Captain of the Port of New York.
§ 91-7. Anchoring restrictions.
Boats shall not anchor within channel limits, and in no case shall vessels tie
to or anchor within 50 feet of any channel marker or so as to interfere with
the full use of the channel.
§ 86-19 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 91-8
91:94
§ 91-8. Removal of disabled or unseaworthy vessels.
Any vessel which becomes a menace to navigation or unseaworthy or sinks,
grounds or becomes otherwise disabled shall be removed by the owner or
person in charge thereof on order of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Great Neck Estates or any duly authorized officer or agent thereof. If said
boat is not removed after orders to so remove it, it may be removed by or
at the direction of the Board of Trustees or any duly authorized officer or
agent thereof at the expense of the owner or person in charge of said vessel.
§ 91-9. Removal of boats improperly moored.
Boats shall not moor or anchor so as to endanger the safety of or cause
damage to any boat previously anchored or moored or so as to interfere
with the mooring of any boat previously laid down. Any boat so moored
or anchored shall be removed by the owner or person in charge thereof
on order of the Board of Trustees or any duly authorized officer or agent
thereof. If said boat is not removed after orders to so remove it, it may
be removed by or at the direction of the Board of Trustees or any duly
authorized officer or agent thereof, at the expense of the owner or person
in charge of said vessel.
§ 91-10. Boat operation. [Amended 8-1-1960 by Ord. No. 98]
Every person operating a boat shall at all times operate the same in a
careful and prudent manner and at such a rate of speed as not to disturb
the reasonable comfort or endanger the property of another or the life and
limb of any person or so as to interfere with the free and proper use of the
waters and waterways described in § 91-1 of this chapter. Throwing up a
dangerous wake when approaching or passing another boat is prohibited by
this chapter.
§ 91-11. Speed limit. [Amended 8-1-1960 by Ord. No. 98]
No boat shall be operated at a speed greater than four miles per hour within
the waters and waterways described in § 91-1 of this chapter.
§ 91-12. Mufflers required.
No person shall operate a boat propelled wholly or in part by an engine
operated by the explosion of gas, gasoline, oil, naphtha, or other substance
without having the exhaust from the engine run through a muffler so
constructed and used as to muffle the noise of exhaust in a reasonable
manner.23
23.Editor's Note: Former § 41-13, Penalties for offenses, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No.
3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 91-8 BOATS § 91-12
91:95
Chapter 95
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical installations — See Ch. 102.
Fees — See Ch. 109.
Development of filled-in land — See Ch. 113.
Flood damage control — See Ch. 126.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 167.
Sewers — See Ch. 184.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 91-12 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 91-12
91:96
Part 1
Building Construction
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 95-1. Applicability of standards. [Amended 6-24-1996 by L.L. No.
5-1996]
The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be
applicable in the Village of Great Neck Estates. No building or structure
shall be constructed, altered, installed, repaired or removed, except in
conformity with the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, and the applicable provisions of the Code of
the Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 95-2. Definitions; interpretation of terms.24
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this code, have the meanings herein indicated:
ALTERATION — As applied to any building or structure, is any change
or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities or any
enlargement, whether by extending on any side or by increasing in
height, or the moving from one location or position to another.
APPROVED — As applied to any material, device or mode of
construction, means approved by the Board of Trustees, which approval
will be given only after satisfactory evidence of impartial tests is
submitted to the Board.
CURB — When used in defining the height of a building, means the curb
level as established by the Board of Trustees at that point of the curb
which is opposite the center of the wall nearest to and facing the street
line. The term "curb," when used in fixing the depth of an excavation,
means the curb level as established by the Board of Trustees at that
point of the curb which is nearest to the point of the excavation in
question.
GARAGE — A building, shed or enclosure, or any portion thereof, in
which a motor vehicle containing volatile flammable oil in its fuel
storage tank is stored, housed or kept.
HEIGHT — As applied to a building or structure, the vertical distance,
measured in a straight line from the curb level to the highest point of
the roof beams in the case of flat roofs and to the average height of the
gable in the case of roofs having a pitch.
OCCUPIED — As applied to any building, shall be construed as though
followed by the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied."
24.Editor's Note: Former § 44-2, Matters covered, was repealed 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996.
§ 95-1 BOATS § 95-2
91:97
§ 95-3. Construal of provisions.
This code is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed liberally
to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof.
§ 95-4. Enforcement; Building Inspector. [Amended 6-24-1996 by
L.L. No. 5-1996]
OWNER — Includes his duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser,
devisee and any person entitled to an interest in the property in
question.
STORY — That part of any building comprised between any floor and
the floor or roof next above.
B. Any term not defined herein but defined in other ordinances of the
Village shall be construed for the purpose of this code as so defined.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, and for the purpose of the Building
Code and the Plumbing Code of the Village, the words "building" and
"structure" shall include any trailer, house coach, car or vehicle used or
intended to be used within the Village for dwelling purposes or for the
sale or display of goods, wares and merchandise or for any purpose
whatsoever other than the transportation of persons or property, except
machinery temporarily used in connection with building operations or
the alteration of the premises on which they are located or operated.
[Added 10-3-1938 by Ord. No. 25]
A. The administration of the laws and regulations applicable with respect
to building and construction in the Village of Great Neck Estates shall
be conducted by the Building Inspector, except where otherwise
provided in this Code.
B. The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Board of Trustees, and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor. The Building Inspector shall conduct and supervise the
operation of the Building Department, if any, and administer and
enforce the provisions of the Code of the Village of Great Neck Estates.
The Building Inspector shall have authority to issue violation notices,
summonses and appearance tickets for the purposes of such
enforcement to the maximum extent permitted by law.
(1) Any person appointed to the position of Building Inspector shall be
familiar with the provisions of this Code and the provisions of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, and
shall be generally informed on the quality and strength of building
materials, on the prevailing methods of building construction, on
good practice in fire prevention, on the accepted requirements for
safe exit facilities and on the proper installation of plumbing,
electrical wiring and other installation for the safety, comfort and
convenience of occupants of buildings. Such person shall be in
good health sufficient to permit such person to perform the
§ 95-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-4
91:98
physical duties of the position, including the necessary
examinations and inspections of buildings in the course of
construction. In addition to any other limitations provided by law,
the Building Inspector shall not have any interest whatever,
directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material,
process or device entering into or used in or in connection with
building construction.
(2) With the consent of the Board of Trustees, the Mayor may appoint
such assistants to the Building Inspector as may be deemed
necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of the Code of the
Village of Great Neck Estates.
C. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, and such other persons as
may be designated to act on behalf of the Building Inspector, to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. In the discharge of such duties, the
Building Inspector shall have authority to enter any building or
premises at any reasonable time, as may be authorized by law.
D. An application for a permit or certificate of occupancy shall constitute
the consent of the owner of the subject property that the Building
Inspector or such other persons as may be designated to act on behalf
of the Building Inspector may enter upon such property, and inspect the
same, during the course of the construction work on such property and
until the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
completion for the completed work.
§ 95-4 BOATS § 95-4
91:99

ARTICLE II
Building Permits
§ 95-5. Permits; applications; procedures. [Amended 11-13-1989 by
L.L. No. 9-1989; 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
A. Permits required.
(1) No person or entity shall excavate, or construct, erect, alter, repair
or commence or continue the construction, erection or alteration of
a building, structure, driveway or parking area, including
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning or electrical work,
within the Village of Great Neck Estates without first having
obtained a permit therefor from the Building Inspector after having
duly applied therefor.
(2) No person or entity shall commence, continue or perform any
construction, development, improvement or other similar work on
any property within the Village of Great Neck Estates for which a
permit is required by any agency of any government unless all such
permits first have been obtained.
(3) No person or entity shall commence, continue or perform any
sandblasting of any building or structure without first obtaining a
permit from the Building Department under conditions of safety
specified by the Building Department in each case.
(4) Additions or alterations. When the cost of any addition or
alteration, as estimated by the Building Inspector, exceeds $3,000,
or the volume of such addition or alteration exceeds 2,000 cubic
feet, such work shall be deemed an addition or alteration subject to
all of the provisions of this chapter, regardless of whether the same
shall affect the structure of the building.
B. Form. An application for a permit to be obtained from the Village of
Great Neck Estates pursuant to this chapter shall be submitted in such
form and number of copies as may be prescribed by this Code or by the
Building Inspector. Except for an application for a permit related to one
single-family residence, each such application also shall include, at a
minimum, one electronic copy of all documents submitted in support of
the application in a format approved by the Building Official.
[Amended 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 5-2019]
C. Applications. Application for permits shall be made by the owner or
lessee of property, or by the agent of the owner or lessee, or the
architect, engineer or builder employed by the owner or lessee in
connection with the proposed work. Such application shall contain such
information as reasonably may be required by the Village, including,
without limitation, the following:
(1) A statement of the full name and residence of each of the persons
having an interest in the premises as owner, tenant or otherwise.
§ 95-5 BOATS § 95-5
91:101
(2) The use to which the building or premises is to be put.
(3) If the application is made by any person other than the fee owner of
the property, an affidavit of the fee owner that the proposed work is
authorized by the fee owner and that the person making the
application is authorized by the fee owner to make such
application.
(4) Information satisfactory to the Building Inspector to demonstrate
that the applicant proposes to control and prevent soil erosion
resulting from construction methods and procedures during the
course of construction. No building permit shall issue unless the
plans for which the permit is sought affirmatively demonstrate the
existence and intended use of methods satisfactory to the Building
Inspector for such soil erosion control purposes.
D. Plans and specifications. Applications for permits shall be accompanied
by three sets of drawings of the proposed work, drawn to scale,
including floor plans, elevations, structural details, an accurate plot
plan or diagram of the lot showing the exact location of all existing and
proposed buildings and structures and all other characteristics of the
site which will permit the Village to determine whether the proposed
alteration or use conforms to all applicable legal requirements. Except
for an application for a permit related to one single-family residence,
each such application also shall include, at a minimum, one electronic
copy of all documents submitted in support of the application in a
format approved by the Building Official. [Amended 8-12-2019 by
L.L. No. 5-2019]
(1) Where a lot or premises has an area equal to or in excess of two
times the minimum area required for a lot in the district where the
property is located, the application shall indicate whether it is
intended that the property be a site for more than one dwelling,
and if so, the application shall indicate the proposed subdivision of
the property for each such dwelling. In such cases, the application
for a building permit shall not constitute an application for a
subdivision of the property, and a separate application for such
subdivision shall be required if such subdivision of the property has
not been approved previously.
E. Certifications. When the proposed work involves structural alterations,
heating or plumbing, or where the cost of the work to be done under a
permit, as estimated by the Building Inspector, exceeds $2,500 or the
volume thereof exceeds 2,000 cubic feet or the work involves earth
moving of more than 50 cubic yards, the plans and specifications shall
be certified and filed by a registered architect or registered
professional engineer, duly licensed in and by the State of New York.
F. Amendments to plans. Amendments to an application may be filed at
any time before the completion of the work for which the permit is
sought, and such amendments shall constitute part of the application
§ 95-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-5
91:102
and shall be filed as such. Such amendments shall be made in the same
form and manner as the original application, and shall be accompanied
by similar plans and drawings relevant to the changes proposed. After
approval of such amendment, the amended application shall be filed
with and be deemed a part of the original application.
G. Fees for applications.25
(1) Applications for the issuance of building permits or certificates of
occupancy shall be accompanied by the payment to the Village,
through the Building Inspector, of the building permit fees and the
certificate of occupancy fees as established from time to time by
the Board of Trustees, by resolution.26
(2) The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may establish minimum cost
standards for the computation of value in establishing permit fees
based upon current building cost standards.
H. Review of applications. The Building Inspector shall examine each
application within a reasonable time after filing. If, after such
examination, it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance
with the provisions of this Code, and the Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, and other applicable laws, rules and regulations, the
application shall be approved and the permit issued. If the examination
reveals otherwise, the Building Inspector shall supply the applicant
with a written report of findings as to the manner in which the said
application does not so comply and shall deny the application. If an
application is withdrawn before issuance of a permit, or before
commencement of work pursuant to such permit, upon authorization of
the Board of Trustees, after written application, not more than 75% of
the fee paid for such application may be returned to the applicant.
I. Disposition of fees. All fees paid for any permit application, or for any
other purpose, shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
J. Removal or moving of buildings or structures. A bond may be required
by the Building Inspector to indemnify the Village for damages caused
by the removal or moving of a building or structure. If such a bond is
required, no permit for the removal of such building or structure shall
be issued until such bond is filed with, and accepted by, the Village
Clerk.
K. Signature and conditions of permit. All work performed under a permit
issued by the Building Inspector, signed by the Building Inspector or an
authorized assistant, shall conform to the approved application and the
plans and specifications and approved amendments thereto. No person
or entity shall perform any work other than in conformity with the
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 109, Fees.
26.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(2), establishing permit and certificate of occupancy
fees, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 4-12-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004.
§ 95-5 BOATS § 95-5
91:103
approved application and the plans and specifications and approved
amendments thereto.
(1) Foundation survey. It shall be a condition of each building permit
for a project which involves the construction, alteration or
relocation of the framing of a building or structure, that a
foundation survey shall be submitted to, and approved by, the
Building Inspector after completion of the foundation and before
commencement of any work on the framing of the structure. Such
condition shall be endorsed upon the building permit; provided,
however, that this condition shall be applicable even where such
endorsement is omitted or incomplete. No person, firm or entity
shall commence or permit framing of a building or structure
without first submitting such foundation survey and obtaining the
approval of the Building Inspector. [Added 11-5-2001 by L.L. No.
6-2001]
(2) Landscaping and/or grading plans. Where an application for a
building permit includes plans for landscaping and/or grading, the
approval of a building permit shall be deemed to include a
condition requiring the proper completion of such landscaping and/
or grading before a certificate of completion or compliance may be
issued. [Added 7-14-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
L. Limitations of time. [Amended 7-10-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000;
1-10-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; 7-11-2016 by L.L. No. 7-2016]
(1) A building permit under which no work is commenced within six
months after issuance shall expire by limitation. All other building
permits shall expire by limitation if the work authorized thereby
has not been completed within the following periods of time after
permit issuance:
(a) New construction and alterations/additions and/or repair/
renovations having an estimated cumulative cost in excess of
$750,000: 15 months.
(b) New construction and alterations/additions and/or repair/
renovations having an estimated cumulative cost of at least
$100,000, but not more than $750,000: nine months.
(c) New construction and alterations/additions and/or repair/
renovations having an estimated cumulative cost not more
than $100,000; six months.
(2) The Building Official may extend the foregoing periods of time,
upon written application and payment of any fee required by law,
for one period of no more than three additional months. Thereafter,
no building permit shall be renewed or extended except upon
approval of the Board of Trustees, after written application and
payment of any required fees and deposits. If any excavation shall
have been made or construction, alteration, renovation or removal
§ 95-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-5
91:104
of a building or structure commenced pursuant to a lawfully issued
permit, but the same is not diligently prosecuted and completed
within the required time, the person to whom the permit is issued
(or the owner of the property for which the permit was issued, if the
permit was issued to another person) shall, upon due notice from
the Building Inspector, take such action as directed in such notice
to restore the premises to its condition within the time directed in
such notice.
(a) No extension shall be granted by the Building Official or the
Board of Trustees pursuant to Subsection L of this section
unless:
[1] The permit is in good standing at the time the application
for renewal is made;
[2] The relevant information in the application is current and
accurate; and
[3] All required fees, including permit renewal fees, have been
paid.
(b) No extension shall be granted by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to Subsection L of this section unless the Board of
Trustees, in its sole discretion, shall determine the duration of
the extension, after having considered the following criteria in
determining whether to grant such extension and whether to
impose conditions upon any such grant of an extension:
[1] The reason for delay in construction;
[2] The adverse impact which the delay has had upon adjacent
property owners and the community, and which may occur
during the extension period;
[3] Methods and/or conditions to mitigate the adverse impacts
of the delay in construction, including, without limitation,
requiring regrading or other stormwater drainage controls
and/or requiring landscaping or other screening;
[4] The status of the construction, and the time anticipated to
be required to complete construction;
[5] Whether requiring a completion bond, cash deposit or
other financial security is appropriate to assure that the
construction is pursued with diligence and completed by
the approved extension date;
[6] Any other factor which the Board, in its sole discretion,
determines to be relevant.
(c) Any extension granted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to
the provisions of this Subsection L shall expire on the earliest
§ 95-5 BOATS § 95-5
91:105
of the extension date approved by the Board of Trustees,
expiration of the permit as provided in Subsection L(2)(d)
below, or revocation by the Building Inspector.
(d) As a condition of an extension of a building permit granted by
the Board of Trustees pursuant to the provisions of Subsection
L of this section, the Board of Trustees may establish a date
during the extension period after which the owner and
permittee shall jointly be responsible for a civil penalty in an
amount to be determined by the Board of Trustees for each
day, excluding weekdays and holidays, from such date until
completion of the work, payment of which daily penalty shall
be made from a bond, cash deposit or other financial security
to be provided by the applicant before the extension shall
become effective. If the bond, cash deposit or other security is
depleted to an amount equal to 25% of its original amount
prior to the expiration of the extension period authorized by
the Board of Trustees, the bond, cash deposit or other security
shall be replenished to 100% of such original amount upon
written notification from the Village Clerk, in default of which
the permit shall forthwith expire without further notice to the
permittee, and shall not be further extended. Work is not
deemed complete until certified by the Building Inspector as
complete.
M. Revocation of permits. The Board of Trustees or the Building Inspector
may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this
chapter in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans and
specifications upon which the permit or approval was based, or where
the holder of the permit has violated or has suffered or permitted a
violation of any stop-work order issued with respect to work to be
performed pursuant to said permit.
N. Posting of permit; plans. A copy of the permit shall be kept on the
premises, open to public inspection, during the prosecution of the work
and until the completion of the building or structure. A certified copy of
the approved plans and specifications shall be kept on the premises at
all times until the completion of the work.
O. Stop-work orders.
(1) Whenever the Building Inspector is satisfied that the execution of
any work for which a permit is issued is contrary to the provisions
of this Code and/or the permit for such work and/or the plans,
specifications and application submitted for such permit, the
Building Inspector shall serve notice or order upon the persons
responsible, directing the discontinuance of such illegal action and
the remedying of the condition that is in violation of the provisions
of this Code.
§ 95-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-5
91:106
§ 95-6. Requirements for site plan approval. [Added 4-12-1999 by
L.L. No. 2-1999; amended 3-12-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007; 5-12-2014
by L.L. No. 7-2014]
(2) Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the continuance
of construction is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare by
reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or
requirement of this Code or any permit, or by reason of conditions
on the property which adversely affect the public health or safety,
the Building Inspector may issue a written or oral order directing
remediation of such condition, or directing that all further work be
stopped or suspended until the condition which is the cause of the
order is remediated. [Amended 1-10-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
(3) No person shall perform, or permit the performance of, any work in
violation of, or contrary to the provisions of, a stop order issued by
the Building Inspector pursuant to this chapter.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no building permit
shall be issued for a new building or structure, or for any alteration or
addition to an existing building or structure, used or to be used for
nonresidential purposes, unless the Board of Trustees first has
approved a site plan for the premises upon which such building or
structure is located or proposed to be located.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no building permit
shall be issued for a new building or structure, or any alteration or
addition to an existing building or structure, used or to be used for
residential purposes other than a one-family dwelling, or used or to be
used for both residential and nonresidential uses, unless the Board of
Trustees first has approved a site plan for the premises upon which
such building or structure is located or proposed to be located.
C. No property used or to be used for nonresidential purposes, or for
residential purposes other than a single-family dwelling, or for both
residential and nonresidential purposes shall be modified or changed
with respect to the manner, scope or dimension of use, or contrary to
the conditions of a special use permit for such use, unless a building
permit is issued for such change, if required pursuant to this chapter,
and unless a site plan for such use or special permit amendment has
been approved by the Board of Trustees. The changes for which such
permit or approval shall be required include, but are not limited to,
changes in impervious surfaces on such property, changes in direction
of traffic flow on such property, changes in parking or other vehicular
areas on such property, and changes in the topography or drainage on
such property. This subsection shall not be interpreted or applied to
require such permit or approval for landscaping or ordinary
maintenance activities, or replacement of existing features in kind.
D. In approving a site plan pursuant to this section, or otherwise as
authorized by law, the Board of Trustees shall have power to grant
§ 95-5 BOATS § 95-6
91:107
waivers as provided in Village Law § 7-725-a(5), and to impose such
reasonable conditions as the Board of Trustees may determine are
appropriate in the interest of the public health, safety and general
welfare, or as may be appropriate to the particular site.
E. No site plan approval shall be granted pursuant to this section without
a public hearing.
F. Pursuant to the authority granted in Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
the provisions of Village Law § 7-725-a(8) are hereby superseded and
amended in their application to the Village of Great Neck Estates, and
with respect to such Village, said section is amended to read as follows:
8. Public hearing and decision on site plans. Where a public hearing
is required prior to approval of a site plan, the Board of Trustees
shall commence a public hearing with respect to any such site plan
within 62 days from the day a complete application is received by
the Board with respect to any matter referred to it or within its
jurisdiction. Where review of such application is required pursuant
to the State Environmental Quality Review Act,27 and the Board of
Trustees is the lead agency, no such application shall be complete
until the latest issuance of a negative declaration or acceptance of a
final environmental impact statement by the lead agency. Where the
Board of Trustees is not the lead agency, no such application shall
be complete until a determination by the Mayor that the application
is complete, or the issuance of a negative declaration or a findings
statement by the lead agency, whichever last occurs. At least 14 days
prior to the commencement of such hearing, the applicant shall mail
notice of said hearing to all persons and in the same manner as
required for notice of a public hearing with respect to a zoning
variance. The Village shall publish and post notice of such hearing
in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing date,
and shall give such other notice as may be required by law and such
additional notice as the Board of Trustees shall determine. The Board
of Trustees shall make a decision with respect to such application
within 62 days after the conclusion of such public hearing. No decision
with respect to such application shall be made by operation of law, and
all decisions shall require the affirmative vote of at least a majority of
the members of the Board of Trustees. The time periods to commence
a hearing or to render a decision may be extended by mutual consent
of the applicant and the Board of Trustees. The decision of the Board
shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk within five business
days after such decision is rendered, and a copy thereof shall be
mailed to the applicant and to any other person requesting the same
and providing a postage-paid mailing envelope. Nothing herein shall
preclude the holding of a public hearing on any matter on which a
public hearing is not so required.
27.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 95-6 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-7
91:108
§ 95-7. Tree protection. [Added 5-8-1989 by L.L. No. 6-1989]
A. Legislative intent, policy and findings.
(1) The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates hereby
finds that there is a direct relationship between the preservation
and the planting of trees in sufficient number in the Village and the
health, safety and welfare of Village residents and that trees are
related to the natural scenic and aesthetic values and the physical
and visual qualities of the environment which the Village is
obligated to protect. It is hereby found and determined that:
(a) Trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for
the survival of mankind.
(b) Trees appreciably reduce the ever-increasing and
environmentally dangerous carbon dioxide content of the air
and play a vital role in purifying the air.
(c) Trees play an important role in the hydrologic cycle,
transpiring considerable amounts of water each day, thereby
precipitating dust and other particulate airborne pollutants
from the air.
(d) Trees play an important role in neutralizing wastewater which
passes through the ground from the surface to groundwater
tables and the lower aquifers.
(e) Trees, through their root systems, stabilize the soil and play an
important and effective part in soil conservation, erosion
control and flood control, thereby preserving stormwater and
ultimately recharging the aquifers.
(f) Trees are an invaluable physical and psychological addition to
the Village, making life more comfortable by providing shade
and cooling both air and land, tempering the force of winds,
reducing noise levels and glare and breaking the visual
monotony of development on the land.
(g) Trees provide natural wildlife habitat and play other important
ecological roles.
(2) The indiscriminate removal and destruction of trees causes
increased Village costs for proper drainage control, impairs the
benefits of occupancy of existing residential properties and impairs
the stability and value of both improved and unimproved real
property in the area of the destruction and adversely affects the
health, safety and general welfare of residents of the Village.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms,
phrases and words shall have the following meanings:
§ 95-7 BOATS § 95-7
91:109
APPLICANT — The owner, contract vendee or lessee of real property or
its duly authorized agent.
HABIT — The natural growing characteristics of any tree, which
includes branch spread and distribution, branch height above ground
and root spread and distribution.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, public agency, public utility or organization of any kind, or
agent thereof.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes all unimproved or improved real property
within the Village of Great Neck Estates.
ROOT AREA — The entire root system and its environment, measured
from the trunk of a tree out to the dripline, which is an imaginary
vertical line running from the limits of the outermost branch tips to the
ground.
SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATION — Any cutting or drastic pruning or
elevating of the branches, or other alteration of the habit of a tree
which impairs or endangers the life of such tree or destroys its natural
symmetry, and shall include but not be limited to, heavy or unnecessary
cutting of top branches (topping) and cutting of major lower limbs
(severe elevating).
TREE — Any living woody plant (with a diameter of six inches or
more at the height of four feet, six inches) and its root system and
the environment within the area defined by the outermost limits of its
branches.
VILLAGE OFFICIAL — Refers to the Building Inspector or other Village
official designated by the Board of Trustees as the Code Official.
C. Prohibition.
(1) No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any new
building or structure or any alteration or improvement to any
existing building or structure, which construction or alteration
could reasonably be foreseen to cause or require the removal,
destruction or substantial alteration of the habit of any tree of six
inches or more in diameter (measured at four feet, six inches in
height) on any real property within the Village of Great Neck
Estates, except in conformity with the provisions of this section.
(2) In order to effectuate the provisions of Subsection C(1) of this
section, all applications for building permits shall include a tree
plan, showing the location of all trees and root systems, in whole or
in part, within 50 feet of any point on real property where
construction, alteration or improvement of a building or structure
is proposed to be done. Such tree plan shall also include a specific
listing of each tree or root system which may reasonably be
expected to be adversely affected by any aspect of the construction,
alteration or improvement work and a specific statement as to the
§ 95-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-7
91:110
manner in which the applicant intends or proposes to protect each
such tree and root system.
(3) The provisions of Subsection C(1) and (2) of this section shall not
prohibit the removal, destruction or substantial alteration of any
tree whenever and to the extent it is necessary to prevent imminent
danger to human life or to property.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the alteration
of habit of any tree made in accordance with customarily accepted
ornamental procedures according to National Arborist Association
Standards for pruning trees.
(5) Any tree plan required by this section shall include a plan of the lot
indicating the following:
(a) All existing trees on the site.
(b) The location, type and size of tree(s) which it is reasonably
expected will be removed or substantially altered or of which
the root system would be damaged by compaction, change of
grade or otherwise disturbing the root area.
(c) The location of any existing and proposed improvements on the
real property.
(d) Any additional information that the Village official may deem
necessary for evaluation of the application.
(6) The Village official shall not approve any application for a building
permit to which this section is applicable, unless he is satisfied that
all reasonable efforts have or will be made to protect the trees and
root systems which would be adversely affected by the
construction, alteration or improvement or any construction work
or construction methods which will be followed in furtherance
thereof. In making such determination, the Village official shall
take into account the following factors, and any other factors which
he deems to be pertinent:
(a) The condition of the trees with respect to disease and danger
of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures and
interference with utility services.
(b) The necessity of the removal or alteration of the tree in
question.
(c) The effect of the removal or alteration thereof on ecological
systems.
(d) The character established at the proposed site of removal or
alteration with respect to existing vegetation management
practices.
§ 95-7 BOATS § 95-7
91:111
§ 95-8. Permit to demolish or remove building.
(e) The impact of any removal or alteration upon existing
screening of any road or highway bordering the property.
D. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any act or determination of the Village
official in the exercise of the authority granted in this section shall
have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees, the decision of
which shall be final and conclusive.
(2) An appeal shall be in writing, stating the decisions appealed from
and reasons for the appeal, and shall be taken within 30 days of the
determination being appealed.28
A. Before any existing building or structure is demolished or removed to a
new location, either on the same lot or to any other lot, a permit for
such demolition or removal shall be obtained from the Building
Inspector. The fee for such permit shall be as provided by the Board of
Trustees and shall be based on the actual cost of such demolition or
removal. Such costs shall include any work necessary to remove
foundations and regrade the lot thus vacated and the construction of
any new foundations or similar construction to receive any relocated
building or structure. [Amended 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
B. Every application for a permit to demolish or remove a building shall
include information satisfactory to the Building Inspector to
demonstrate that the applicant proposes to control and prevent soil
erosion resulting from construction methods and procedures during the
course of demolition or removal. [Added 11-13-1989 by L.L. No.
9-1989]
C. Once commenced, demolition or removal of a building or structure for
which a permit is issued pursuant to this section shall be conducted in a
continuous manner and shall be completed within a period of time to be
specified by the Building Inspector at the time of permit issuance. The
property shall not remain unattended at any time between the
commencement of such activity and the completion of the demolition or
removal and the securing of the premises, except as may be authorized
by the Building Inspector. [Added 9-8-1997 by L.L. No. 10-1997]
D. Every permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire 45 days after
issuance. [Added 9-8-1997 by L.L. No. 10-1997]
E. Application. An application for a demolition or removal permit shall be
on a form provided by the Village Building Department. Unless a waiver
is granted by the Board of Trustees, such application shall include the
28.Editor's Note: Former § 44-7, Preparation of plans and specifications (added 9-9-1947 by
Ord. No. 41, as amended); § 44-8, Authorization of owner; and § 44-9, Fees (as amended),
were repealed 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996. See Ch. 109, Fees, for current fee provisions.
§ 95-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-8
91:112
following information, and such other information as may be required
by the Building Inspector, including, without limitation: [Added
12-13-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003; amended 1-10-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
(1) Satisfactory documentation that the application is made by the
owner(s) of the property or by another person or entity with the
consent of the owner(s);
(2) Satisfactory documentation that the mortgagee(s), if any, of the
property have consented to the proposed demolition or removal;
(3) Satisfactory proof of insurance sufficient to protect the owners and
occupants of adjoining properties;
(4) Satisfactory documentation of a plan for the protection of adjoining
properties from the effects of any demolition or removal activities;
(5) The names and addresses of all contractors and subcontractors
proposed to be engaged in the demolition or removal activity or any
part thereof;
(6) A building permit application, and all required fees for review of
such application, for any buildings or structures contemplated to
replace the buildings or structures proposed to be demolished or, if
no such buildings or structures are presently proposed, a plan for
clearing and landscaping the property until such time as such
buildings or structures are constructed;
(7) Such other information as the Building Inspector may deem
reasonable and proper in order to safeguard the public, the owners
and occupants of adjoining properties, and the structures on
adjoining properties.
F. No demolition permit shall be approved or issued pursuant to this
section unless at or before the time of such approval or issuance the
property owner also obtains approval and issuance of a building permit
for buildings or structures to be erected on the property to replace the
buildings or structures to be removed pursuant to the demolition permit
or, if no such buildings or structures are presently proposed, a plan for
clearing and landscaping the property until such time as such buildings
or structures are constructed. [Added 1-10-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
(1) Any demolition permit issued pursuant to this section shall be
deemed to contain a condition requiring construction of buildings
and structures in accordance with such building permit within the
time required by such permit, or clearing and landscaping the
property in accordance with such approved plan within a time
specified by the Building Official in issuing the approval. The
condition of compliance with a clearing and landscaping plan shall
terminate where a building permit is issued prior to the time when
compliance with the clearing and landscaping plan was required.
§ 95-8 BOATS § 95-8
91:113
§ 95-9. Central air-conditioning permit. [Added 9-13-1982 by L.L.
No. 7-1982]
(2) When approving a clearing and landscaping plan required by this
section, the Building Official is authorized to require the owner to
post security in the form of a surety bond (in a form approved by
the Village Attorney), or a cash deposit, in an amount determined
by the Building Official, or such other security as may be
authorized by the Board of Trustees, to guarantee compliance with
the terms and conditions of any such clearing and landscaping
plan.
G. Any person who demolishes or causes to be demolished all or any
portion of a building or structure in the Village of Great Neck Estates
without first obtaining a required permit shall be guilty of a violation.
Upon conviction of such offense, such person shall be subject to
punishment by fine in an amount to be determined by the court, but not
more than $50,000, or imprisonment for no more than 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. [Added 4-11-2005 by L.L. No.
5-2005]
A. Permit required. Any person, firm or corporation hereafter installing a
central air-conditioning unit within the Village of Great Neck Estates
shall comply with the requirements of this section and obtain a central
air-conditioning permit from the Building Inspector. Such permit and
compliance shall not be required for the installation of the standard
window-mounted unit.
B. Installation application; information required; fee.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to install a central airconditioning
unit or units on or in any structure within the Village
shall submit to the Building Inspector a sketch plan of the proposed
location of the condenser installation, indicating thereon the
distances, in feet, to all property lines and the structures in
existence on adjoining properties.
(2) In addition, there shall also be submitted a brief description of the
type of unit, approximate area to be cooled, British-thermal-unit
capacity and such other information that may from time to time be
requested by the Building Inspector.
(3) A permit fee shall accompany said application. The amount of the
permit fee shall be as provided for in this Code.29
C. Issuance of a central air-conditioning permit.
(1) The Building Inspector shall review the plans and specifications
and, if necessary, make a visual inspection of the proposed
installation and site. He shall have the power to designate any
29.Editor's Note: For current permit fee provisions, see Ch. 109, Fees.
§ 95-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-9
91:114
§ 95-10. Outdoor generators or other machinery. [Added 12-3-2003
by L.L. No. 5-2003]
changes he deems necessary as consistent with the public health
and welfare, including the power to designate where appropriate
screening of the unit may be required.
(2) If the Building Inspector deems said application and proposed
installation to be satisfactory, he shall issue a central airconditioning
permit to the applicant.
(3) If exterior cooling towers are required or proposed in connection
with the proposed installation, either such towers shall be
equipped with silencers or no permit shall be issued for such
installation until the owner or applicant posts with the Village a
bond with corporate surety, or cash deposit, in the sum of $1,000,
to the effect that, if required by the Village within the period of one
year after the completion of the installation, such owner or
applicant will forthwith install such silencers at his sole cost and
expense.
A. Permit required. Any person, firm or corporation hereafter installing
outdoor generator equipment, or other outdoor machinery (other than
central air-conditioning or pool equipment) within the Village of Great
Neck Estates shall comply with the requirements of this section, and
obtain a permit from the Building Inspector prior to any such
installation. No person shall maintain or operate any such equipment
installed without a permit as required by this section.
B. Installation application; information required; fee.
(1) An application for a permit pursuant to this section shall include a
sketch plan of the proposed location of the equipment to be
installed, indicating thereon the distances in feet to all property
lines. Equipment to be installed or maintained pursuant to this
section shall be located a distance from the nearest property line
not less than that required for individual yard setbacks, but need
not comply with requirements for aggregate setbacks. [Amended
1-9-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012; 2-13-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
(2) Such application shall also include a brief description of the
equipment proposed to be installed, and such other information as
may from time to time be requested by the Building Inspector.
(3) Such application shall also be accompanied by payment of a permit
fee, in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
C. Review of application; issuance of permit.
(1) The Building Inspector shall review the application, and the plans
and specifications included therein, and, if necessary, shall make a
§ 95-9 BOATS § 95-10
91:115
§ 95-11. Filing of applications; amendments.
§ 95-12. Ordinary repairs excepted.
Ordinary repairs to buildings, structures or the plumbing and drainage
thereof may be made without notice to the Building Inspector, but such
repairs shall not be construed to include the cutting away of any wall or
any portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any beams or supports or
the removal, change or closing of any stairway or required means of exit,
the alteration of any house sewer, private sewer or drainage system or the
construction of any waste pipe.
§ 95-13. Compliance with Labor Law.
Any application for permit for the construction or alteration of any building
which is required to conform to the requirements of the New York State
Labor Law shall be accompanied by evidence of approval by the Industrial
Commissioner of the State of New York.
§ 95-14. Signatures on permit; proof of workmen's compensation
coverage.30
visual inspection of the proposed installation and site. The Building
Inspector shall have the power to designate any changes deemed
necessary as consistent with the public health and welfare,
including the power to require or designate where appropriate
screening of the equipment may be required. In issuing a permit
hereunder, the Building Inspector may include such conditions as
may be reasonable and proper to protect the public health, safety
and general welfare, including protection of adjoining properties
from visual impacts, noise and odors.
(2) If the Building Inspector determines that the application and the
proposed installation are satisfactory, and in accord with the public
health, safety, and general welfare, the Building Inspector shall
issue a permit pursuant to this section, with such conditions as may
be required as provided herein.
A. Place of filing. All applications, notices and sworn statements required
by this article, and copies of the approved plans shall be kept on file in
the office of the Village. Applications shall be promptly docketed as
received. For purpose of identification and reference, all such papers
shall be marked with the block and lot number of the property to which
they apply and with the street and house number when possible.
B. Amendments. Nothing in this code shall prohibit the filing of
amendments to any application at any time before the completion of the
work for which permit was sought, and such amendments, after
approval, shall be made a part of the application and shall be filed as
such. Such amendments shall state the additional cost, if any, involved
and shall be accompanied by the fee as set forth in Chapter 109, Fees.
§ 95-10 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-14
91:116
§ 95-14.1. Supervision of construction. [Added 2-14-2004 by L.L.
No. 2-2005]
A. Every permit issued under the provisions of this code shall have affixed
thereto the signatures of the Building Inspector and such other officer
or employee of the Village as may be required by law. [Amended
7-10-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
B. No such permit shall be issued until proof, in form satisfactory to the
Industrial Commissioner of the State of New York, that workmen's
compensation insurance covering all operations on the building for
which a permit is requested has been submitted to the Building
Inspector and recorded by him for inspection by representatives of the
New York State Department of Labor.31
A. All construction, including alterations, of structures which have or shall
have upon completion of the proposed work a total floor area in excess
of 2,000 square feet shall be performed under the inspection of a
licensed architect or engineer.
B. The driving of piles shall be inspected by a licensed architect or
engineer, who shall keep a written record of the drivings and who shall
certify to the bearing capacity of each pile. A copy of said record and
the certification shall be filed with the Building Inspector prior to the
placement of pile caps.
30.Editor's Note: Former § 44-14, Approval of applications; issuance of permits; was repealed
6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996.
31.Editor's Note: Former § 44-16, Expiration of permits, and § 44-17, Revocation of permits,
as amended, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 6-24-1996 by L.L. No.
5-1996.
§ 95-14 BOATS § 95-14.1
91:117

ARTICLE III
Certificates of Occupancy
§ 95-15. Certificates of occupancy. [Amended 6-24-1996 by L.L. No.
5-1996]
A. No building, structure, driveway or parking area hereafter erected,
enlarged, extended or altered shall be occupied or used, in whole or in
part, until a certificate of occupancy, certifying that the building,
structure, driveway or parking area conforms to the approved plans and
the requirements of this chapter and the provisions of the zoning and
other laws and regulations of the Village, and stating the purposes for
which the building may be used in its several parts, and any special
stipulations on such use shall be issued and signed by the Building
Inspector or other duly authorized person. If the occupancy or use of a
building is not discontinued during the work or alteration, the
occupancy of the building shall not continue for more than 30 days after
completion of the alteration, unless a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "certificate
of occupancy" shall include a certificate of completion. Where the plans
or specifications are required to be prepared and stamped by a licensed
architect or licensed professional engineer as provided in this chapter,
the Building Inspector may, in the exercise of discretion, require the
certification of a licensed architect or licensed professional engineer to
the foregoing effect.
B. Change of occupancy.
(1) No change in the nature or character of occupancy or use shall be
made in a building or structure that is not consistent with the most
recently issued certificate of occupancy for such building or
structure, unless an amended certificate of occupancy is obtained
from the Building Inspector for such change of use. In the case of a
lawfully existing building or structure for which no certificate of
occupancy is required, no change in the nature or character of
occupancy or use shall be made that is not consistent with the most
recently authorized use, unless a certificate of occupancy is
obtained from the Building Inspector authorizing such change of
use.
(2) After a change in occupancy has been made, the reestablishment in
a building of a prior use which would not be permitted in a new
building of the same type of construction is prohibited. No change
shall be made from any prohibited use to another prohibited use.
C. Surveys. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no
certificate of occupancy shall issue for any building or structure, the
footprint of which has been changed, altered, expanded or diminished,
unless the Village first receives a satisfactory survey of the said building
or structure in as-built status.32
§ 95-15 BOATS § 95-15
91:119
D. No certificate of occupancy will be issued for a structure or an
alteration thereto having a total floor area in excess of 2,000 square
feet until a final certificate is filed with the Building Inspector by the
architect or engineer who inspected the construction certifying that the
structure was in fact erected or altered in conformity with the plans
therefor filed with the Building Inspector. [Added 2-14-2004 by L.L.
No. 2-2005]
E. No certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion will be issued in
any case where the approvals for the work, including, but not limited to,
the building permit, required proper completion of landscaping and/or
grading. A certificate of an architect, engineer or other qualified
professional who supervised or inspected the construction, certifying
that the work was completed in substantial conformity with the
approved plans, shall be submitted with the application for such
certificate. [Added 7-14-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
32.Editor's Note: Former § 44-19, Required certifications of compliance, added 9-9-1947 by
Ord. No. 41, as amended, and which immediately followed this section, was repealed
6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996.
§ 95-15 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-15
91:120
ARTICLE IV
Driveways
[Added 11-5-1956 by Ord. No. 80]
§ 95-16. New driveways: plans; grade.
§ 95-17. Existing driveways.
Every driveway now existing which fails to comply with the requirements of
§ 95-16B shall be reconstructed and/or relocated so as to comply with such
section on or before January 1, 1960.
§ 95-18. Exceptions.
If the Board of Trustees, upon application by the property owner concerned,
should determine in a particular case that it is impossible or impracticable
to comply with the requirements of this article, or that there would be
extreme difficulty or hardship in so doing, the Board of Trustees may fix
other requirements for such driveway which will, in its opinion, promote
safety and avoid danger to persons using the public street.
A. Plans. Plans for new construction shall show the location of the
driveway, if any, and the grade thereof.
B. Grade. No driveway constructed or intended to be constructed at an
elevation higher than the street which it intersects shall have a grade of
more than 10% between its intersection with the pavement of such
streets and a point on the driveway 25 feet distant therefrom.
§ 95-16 BOATS § 95-18
91:121

ARTICLE V
Unsafe Buildings and Structures
§ 95-19. Unsafe buildings or structures; premises in disrepair.
[Amended 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
A. Removal or repair.
(1) Any building or structure that may be or shall at any time hereafter
become dangerous or unsafe, structurally or as a fire hazard, shall,
unless made safe and secure, be taken down and removed when
and as ordered by the Building Inspector. A vacant building
unguarded or open at door or window shall be deemed dangerous
or unsafe as a fire hazard within the meaning of this section.
(2) A building or structure damaged by fire, explosion, collision, act of
God or act of public enemy may, pursuant to a permit issued within
three months after such event, be reconstructed as it previously
existed, and a building or structure declared unsafe by duly
constituted authority may be restored to safe condition, provided
that if the damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in
excess of 50% of the value of the building or structure if
reconstructed or restored, it shall be made to conform to the
requirements for new buildings and structures as to materials and
forms of construction.
(3) Any building or structure or premises that may be or shall at any
time fall into a state of disrepair shall be repaired as may be
directed by the Building Inspector. In the event that the owner or
occupant of such property shall not comply with such direction, the
Board of Trustees, after reasonable notice to the property owner
and occupant and an opportunity for them to be heard, may direct
that such work as may reasonably be required to comply with such
direction be performed at the expense of the property owner.
B. Emergency work. Where, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, there
is actual immediate danger of the collapse or falling of a building or
structure so as to endanger life or property, the Building Inspector may
direct or cause the necessary work to be done, at the expense of the
owner, to render such building or structure temporarily safe, whether
or not steps to abate the unsafe conditions have been instituted.
C. Vacating buildings and closing streets. When a building or structure is
in an unsafe condition so that life is endangered thereby, the Building
Inspector may order and require the occupants to vacate the same
forthwith. When necessary for public safety, the Building Inspector may
temporarily close sidewalks, streets, buildings, structures and places
adjacent thereto and prohibit the same from being used. Any Chief of
Police, police officer, and any Fire Chief, when called upon by the
Building Inspector to cooperate, shall assist in the enforcement of such
orders or requirements.
§ 95-19 BOATS § 95-19
91:123
D. Contractors, laborers and materials. For the purposes of this chapter,
the Building Inspector may employ such contractors and/or laborers
and purchase such supplies as may be necessary to perform said work
as speedily as practicable, provided that the same complies with all
applicable legal requirements.
E. Recovery of costs. Wherever it is provided in this chapter that work may
be done at the expense of the owner of property, such costs may be
recovered by assessment of a lien upon such property in the same
manner as provided for real property taxes levied by the Village, or by
action instituted by the Village Attorney, on behalf of the Village,
against the owner of such premises.33
33.Editor's Note: Former § 44-24, Report of violation; notice to owner, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996.
§ 95-19 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-19
91:124
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement; Penalties
§ 95-20. Notice of requirements or violations.
§ 95-21. Penalties for offenses.35
Any person found guilty of a violation of the Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000, imprisonment
for up to one year, or both.
A. Issuance. All notices of violation of any of the provisions of this code and
all notices required or authorized by the code directing anything to be
done, including notices that any building, structure, premises or any
part thereof is deemed to be unsafe or dangerous, shall be issued by the
Building Inspector and shall have his name affixed thereto.
B. Contents. Each such notice or order, in addition to the statement of
requirements, shall contain a description of the building, premises or
property affected.
C. Personal service. All such notices may be served by delivering to and
leaving a copy of the same with any person violating the provisions of
this code or who may be liable thereunder. Such notice may be served
by any officer or employee of the Village or by any other person
designated or authorized by the Board of Trustees.
D. Notice of posting. If the person to whom such order or notice is
addressed cannot be found within the Village of Great Neck Estates
after diligent search shall have been made for him, then such notice or
order may be served by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the
premises where such violation is alleged to have been placed or to exist
and to which such notice or order may refer, or which may be deemed
unsafe or dangerous, and also by depositing a copy thereof in the post
office at Great Neck, New York, enclosed in a sealed, postpaid wrapper,
addressed to said person at his last known place of residence, which
shall be equivalent to a personal service of said notice or order upon all
parties for whom such search shall have been made whether residents
or nonresidents of the State of New York.34
34.Editor's Note: Former § 44-26, Enforcement official; § 44-27, Review; and § 44-28,
Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 6-24-1996
by L.L. No. 5-1996.
35.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 95-20 BOATS § 95-21
91:125

ARTICLE VII
Appeals; Variances
[Added 10-2-1961 by Ord. No. 100]
§ 95-22. Appeals. [Amended 11-8-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993;
6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
Except where another procedure for appeal is provided in this chapter, any
determination of the Building Inspector made pursuant to this chapter may
be appealed to the Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be taken by written
application, pursuant to the rules of said Board, made within 60 days after
the date of the determination from which the appeal is taken.36
36.Editor's Note: Former §§ 44-30 through 44-34, concerning the procedure for appeals,
which immediately followed this section, were repealed 11-8-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993.
§ 95-22 BOATS § 95-22
91:127

Part 2
Plumbing
ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions
§ 95-23. Title.
Part 2 of this chapter shall be known and cited as the "Plumbing Code of the
Village of Great Neck Estates."37
§ 95-24. Applicability.
All matters concerning, affecting or relating to the installation, alteration
or removal of plumbing, heating or ventilating fixtures are presumptively
provided for in this chapter, except insofar as such provisions are contained
in the Village Law, the Labor Law, the Building Code of the Village of Great
Neck Estates38 or the rules promulgated in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter by the Board of Trustees or such agent as it may appoint for
that purpose.
§ 95-25. Construal of provisions.
This code is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed liberally
to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof.
§ 95-26. Conformance required.
No plumbing or drainage or other equipment of any building, structure
or premises, so far as provided for in this code, shall be constructed or
altered in the Village except in conformity with the provisions of this code.
No building already erected or hereafter to be built in said Village shall be
altered in any manner that would be in violation of any of the provisions of
this code or any rule of the Board of Trustees or its agents made and issued
thereunder.
§ 95-27. Definitions; interpretation of terms.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
HOUSE DRAIN — That part of the main horizontal drain and its
branches inside of the walls of a building, vault or area and extending
to and connecting with the house sewer.
37.Editor's Note: Inasmuch as the Village has accepted the applicability of the State Building
Construction Code (see editor's note to chapter history), a portion of which is applicable
to plumbing, and since the Village enforces the provisions of such code in place of the
standards and specifications originally contained in this Ordinance No. 24, references in
Part 2 of this chapter to the "Plumbing Code" or "this code" should presumably be
construed as including the provisions of the State Code.
38.Editor's Note: See Part 1 of this chapter.
§ 95-23 BOATS § 95-27
91:129
HOUSE SEWER — That part of the main drain or sewer extending from
a point two feet outside of the outer front wall of the building, vault or
area to its connection with a septic tank.
SOIL LINE — Any vertical line of pipe having outlets above the floor of
a first story for water closet connections.
VENT PIPE — Any special pipe provided to ventilate a system of piping
and to prevent trap siphonage and back pressure.
WASTE LINE — Any vertical line of pipe having outlets above the first
floor for fixtures other than water closets.
B. Any term not defined herein but defined in Village Building Zone
Ordinance No. 939 or in the Village Building Code40 shall be construed
for the purpose of this code as so defined.
C. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word "person"
includes a corporation as well as an individual; "writing" includes
printing and printed or typewritten matter; "oath" includes
"affirmation"; and "signature" or "subscription" includes "mark" when
the person cannot write, his name being written near it.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
40.Editor's Note: See Part 1 of this chapter.
§ 95-27 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-27
91:130
ARTICLE IX
Licensing of Plumbers
§ 95-28. License required to engage in business of plumbing.
No person shall engage in the business of plumbing within the Village
of Great Neck Estates until he shall obtain a license from the Board of
Trustees. Any applicant for a certificate of competence shall submit
documentary proof that he is a duly licensed plumber in Nassau County or
the City of New York.
§ 95-29. Fees; expiration.41
Each applicant for a license shall pay the sum set forth in Chapter 109, Fees,
for a license to engage in the plumbing business in this Village. All licenses
shall expire on the last day of each year, irrespective of the date of issue.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 95-28 BOATS § 95-29
91:131

ARTICLE X
Plans and Specifications
§ 95-30. Filing required; contents.
Detailed plans and specifications of proposed plumbing and drainage
installations must be filed in duplicate in the Village office by the owner
or his properly authorized agent for approval by the Plumbing Inspector
along with such other information as may be required by the Plumbing
Inspector. Such plans, which shall consist of ink drawings or paper prints,
must be drawn to scale and shall include such floor plans and sections as
may be required by the Plumbing Inspector in order to show clearly all the
plumbing work to be installed and the proposed method of ventilating.
§ 95-31. Approval required prior to commencement of work.
No work on plumbing or drainage installations shall be commenced until the
detailed drawings and specifications which are required to be filed under
the preceding section shall have been approved by the Plumbing Inspector
or such other agent as may be appointed by the Board of Trustees for that
purpose.
§ 95-32. Modifications and amendments.
Subsequent to the filing of the plans and specifications, no modification
or amendment shall be permitted unless amended plans and specifications
therefor are submitted to and approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 95-33. Performance of work in accordance with standards.
All plumbing and drainage installations must be made in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and such rules and regulations as may be
prescribed by the Board of Trustees, the Plumbing Inspector or such other
duly authorized agent as may be designated by the said Board.
§ 95-34. Exception for repairs and certain alterations.
Plans and specifications shall not be required for repairs or alterations to
plumbing or drainage systems in cases where such repairs or alterations do
not provide for the installation of vertical or horizontal soil, waste or vent
pipes.
§ 95-35. Notice of commencement of work.
Before work is started on any repairs or alterations to plumbing or drainage
systems, notice thereof shall be filed with the Plumbing Inspector. Unless
otherwise regulated by the provisions of this chapter, such repairs and
alterations shall be made in accordance with regulations prescribed by the
Board of Trustees or the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 95-30 BOATS § 95-36
91:133
§ 95-36. Repairs or alterations made pursuant to order of Board of
Health.
Plans and specifications for repairs or alterations to be made pursuant to an
order or requirement of the Board of Health must be filed with the Plumbing
Inspector for approval, except in cases where the repairs or alterations do
not involve the installation of vertical and horizontal lines of soil, waste,
vent or leader pipes.
§ 95-37. Materials used in repairs or alterations.
All materials used in connection with the repairs and alterations must be
equal in quality to the materials included in the plumbing or drainage
system in the building in which such repairs or alterations are to be made.
In cases where existing soil, waste or vent lines have been damaged by fire
or other causes to an extent of 50% or more of their entire length, such lines
must be replaced in accordance with the rules and regulations governing
the installation of new lines.
§ 95-38. Signing of specifications by plumber; affidavit.
No plumbing or drainage work shall be commenced until the plumber who
is to do the work shall sign the specifications and make affidavit that he is
duly authorized to proceed with the work. Such affidavit must be in the form
prescribed by the Village.
§ 95-39. Limitation on number of houses constructed pursuant to
one set of plans.
Not more than 10 houses shall be constructed pursuant to one set of plans
and specifications and then only when such houses are on adjoining lots and
the plumbing therein is exactly alike.
§ 95-40. Notice that work is ready for inspection.
Written notice must be given to the Plumbing Inspector when any work
is commenced and at such times as the work is ready for inspection. All
requests for inspections shall be made at least 24 hours in advance.
§ 95-41. Applications for water connections.
Applications for water connections must be made to the water district or
company, and copies thereof shall be filed at the Village office. All fees shall
be paid at the time of filing the application, and the necessary information
as called for on the application shall be filled in before water service
connections shall be made and before a permit shall be issued for such
connection.
§ 95-36 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-41
91:134
ARTICLE XI
Enforcement; Penalties
§ 95-42. Notice of requirements or violation.42
§ 95-43. Review.
Any person, association or corporation deeming himself, themselves or itself
aggrieved by any ruling, decision or order of the Plumbing Inspector or
the Board of Trustees made under this chapter may apply in writing to
the Board of Trustees at any meeting thereof for a review of such ruling,
decision or order, and after such review the Board of Trustees may modify
or revoke such ruling, decision or order and, upon good and sufficient cause
being shown therefor, remit any penalty which may have been incurred.43
A. Issuance. All notices of violation of any of the provisions of this code and
all notices required or authorized by the code directing anything to be
done, including notices that the plumbing, heating or ventilating
systems of any building, structure, premises or any part thereof are
deemed to be unsafe or dangerous, shall be issued by the Plumbing
Inspector and shall have his name affixed thereto.
B. Contents. Each such notice or order, in addition to the statement of
requirements, shall contain a description of the plumbing, heating or
ventilating systems or portions thereof affected.
C. Personal service. All such notices may be served by delivering to and
leaving a copy of same with any person violating the provisions of this
code or who may be liable thereunder. Such notice may be served by
any officer or employee of the Village or by any other person designated
or authorized by the Board of Trustees.
D. Notice by posting. If the person to whom such order or notice is
addressed cannot be found within the Village of Great Neck Estates
after diligent search shall have been made for him, then such notice or
order may be served by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the
premises where such violation is alleged to have been placed or to exist
and to which such notice or order may refer, or which may be deemed
unsafe or dangerous, and also by depositing a copy thereof in the post
office in Great Neck, New York, enclosed in a sealed, postpaid wrapper,
addressed to said person at his last known place of residence, which
shall be equivalent to a personal service of said notice or order upon all
parties for whom such search shall have been made whether residents
or nonresidents of the State of New York.
42.Editor's Note: Former § 44-54, Enforcement official, which immediately preceded this
section, was repealed 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996.
43.Editor's Note: Former § 44-57, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996. Additionally, Former Article XII,
Appeals; variances, added 10-2-1961 by Ord. No. 100, which immediately followed this
article, was repealed 4-2-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990.
§ 95-42 BOATS § 95-43
91:135
Chapter 102
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 82. Building construction and plumbing — See
Ch. 95.
§ 95-43 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 95-43
102:136
ARTICLE I
Standards
[Adopted 5-6-1968 by Ord. No. 113 (Ch. 56, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 102-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the Village of Great
Neck Estates."
§ 102-2. Purpose.
Since there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical
energy, this article is enacted to regulate the installation and alteration of
wiring for electric light, heat or power and signal systems operating on 50
volts or more in or on all real property within the Village of Great Neck
Estates.
§ 102-3. Adoption of standards by reference; compliance.
All electrical installations heretofore mentioned shall be made in conformity
with the requirements of the National Electrical Code except where the
provisions of this article or any other local law, ordinance or Building
Code of the Village of Great Neck Estates shall differently prescribe, in
which event compliance with the provisions of such local law, ordinance or
Building Code44 shall be recognized as proper compliance with this article.
The requirements of the National Electrical Code shall be those known as
"National Fire Association Pamphlet No. 70," as approved and adopted by
the American Standards Association.
§ 102-4. Electrical Inspector designated; cost of inspections.
[Amended 10-9-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
The Board of Trustees may designate one or more qualified persons or
entities as the duly appointed Electrical Inspector(s) of the Village to make
inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations and to approve or
disapprove the same. Such appointments shall be for a period of one official
year or until a successor inspector is appointed, whichever is later. The cost
or expense for any such inspection shall be established by the Village, but
in no event shall the cost or expense of any such inspection or reinspection
be a charge against the Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 102-5. Duties of Electrical Inspector.
A. It shall be the duty of each inspector to report, in writing, to the Village
Building Inspector, whose duty it shall be to enforce all the provisions of
this article and all violations of or deviations from or omissions of the
electrical provisions of the National Electrical Code and of all local
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Building Construction and Plumbing.
§ 102-1 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 102-5
102:137
§ 102-6. Violations.
§ 102-7. Nonapplicability of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the electrical installations in
mines, ships, railway cars or automotive equipment or the installations or
equipment employed by a railway or electrical or communication utility in
the exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings
used exclusively for that purpose. This article shall not apply to any work
involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical
machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as its principal business. It
laws, ordinances and the Building Code as referred to in this article
insofar as any of the same apply to electrical wiring.45 Such Inspector
shall make inspections and reinspections of electrical installations in
and on properties in the Village of Great Neck Estates, upon the written
request of an authorized official of the Village of Great Neck Estates or
as herein provided. Such Inspector is authorized to make inspections
and reinspections of electrical wiring installations, devices, appliances
and equipment in and on properties within the Village of Great Neck
Estates where he deems it necessary for the protection of life and
property. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the Inspector to
make electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer
of the Village of Great Neck Estates.
B. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to furnish written reports to the
proper officials of the Village of Great Neck Estates and owners and/or
lessees of property where defective electrical installations and
equipment are found upon inspection. He shall authorize the issuing of
a certificate of compliance when electrical installations and equipment
are in conformity with this article. He shall direct that a copy of the
certificate of compliance be sent to the Village of Great Neck Estates to
the attention of the Village Building Inspector.
A. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation
to install or cause to be installed or to alter electrical wiring for light,
heat or power in or on properties in the Village of Great Neck Estates
until an application for inspection has been filed with the New York
Board of Fire Underwriters.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for a person, firm or corporation to
connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring, in or on properties
for light, heat or power, to any source of electrical energy supply, prior
to the issuance of a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance
by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters.46
45.Editor's Note: As to other duties of the Building Inspector, see Ch. 95, Building
Construction and Plumbing.
46.Editor's Note: Former § 56-7, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 102-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 102-7
102:138
shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by
the Government of the United States or the State of New York.
§ 102-8. Waiver or assumption of liability.
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Village
of Great Neck Estates or the New York Board of Fire Underwriters be
deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of any inspection made
pursuant to this article.
§ 102-7 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 102-8
102:139

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Electricians
[Adopted 8-5-1968 by Ord. No. 114 (Ch. 56, Art. II, of the 1982
Code)]
§ 102-9. License required.
No person, firm or corporation, including the owner, tenant or occupant
of the premises concerned or his servants, employees and agents, shall
alter, add to or perform any work in relation to the electrical system,
wiring, equipment or installations of any building or structure in the Village,
regardless of whether a permit for the work has been applied for, issued
or required, unless he holds unsuspended and unrevoked an electrician's
license issued by the Town of North Hempstead.
§ 102-10. Exhibition of license upon request or demand.
The licensee shall keep the license in his possession at all times while
performing any such work in the Village and shall exhibit it to the Building
Inspector or the Village Inspector or any other representative of the Village
forthwith upon request. The failure of any person to exhibit on demand a
license required under this article shall be presumptive evidence that he
does not hold such a license.47
47.Editor's Note: Former § 56-12, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 102-9 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 102-10
102:141
Chapter 105
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PRACTICE
§ 105-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 105-2. General requirements.
No building or structure may be used for emergency preparedness practice
except with a permit as required by this chapter.
§ 105-3. Permits.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for
occupancy or storage.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PRACTICE — Any practice or exercise
performed by any person or entity for the purpose of training in
emergency preparedness, evacuation, fire prevention, rescue
procedure and/or extinguishment of fire or other preparation for
emergency conditions; provided, however, that this definition shall not
include such activities by the owner of a property in the Village
conducted solely with the participation of persons occupying or
residing on such property and no more than one other individual.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, public agency, public utility or organization of any kind, or
agent thereof.
A. Permits required. No person, entity or owner of real property shall
cause or permit any building or structure to be used for emergency
preparedness practice without first having obtained a permit therefor
from the Mayor, or a Village official or employee designated by the
Mayor to exercise any power of the Mayor pursuant to this chapter,
after application pursuant to this chapter.
B. Form of application. An application for a permit pursuant to this
chapter shall be submitted in such form as may be prescribed by the
Building Department; and if no such form is prescribed, such
application may be made in any petition form which provides at least
the information required by this chapter.
C. Applications. Application for permits shall be made only by the owner of
the property where the activity is proposed to be conducted or by the
authorized agent of such owner. Such application shall be filed with the
§ 102-10 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 105-3
102:142
Building Department and shall contain such information as reasonably
may be required by the Village, including, without limitation, the
following:
(1) A statement of the full name and residence of each of the persons
having an interest in the premises as owner, tenant, lienor or
otherwise.
(2) Written authorization from each such person having an interest in
the premises describing the emergency preparedness practice
proposed to be conducted on the premises.
(3) Written authorization from each relevant emergency service
provider having jurisdiction to serve the property where the
emergency preparedness practice is proposed to be conducted and
from the Village Police Chief advising that the proposed practice
has been authorized by such persons.
(4) The date and time when the emergency preparedness practice will
take place.
D. Conditions. In granting any permit pursuant to this chapter, the Mayor
may impose reasonable conditions and restrictions as the Mayor shall
deem appropriate to protect the health, safety or welfare of the
community, including, without limitation:
(1) A requirement for a bond or insurance policy, or both such bond
and insurance policy, to protect and indemnify the Village for any
claims or damages resulting from the proposed activity.
(2) Agreements from each emergency service provider participating in
the proposed activity and from the owner of the property holding
the Village of Great Neck Estates, its agents, officers and
employees, harmless from and indemnifying them against any and
all claims or losses, including attorneys' fees, which may result
from the proposed practice activity or the consequences thereof.
Such agreements shall be in a form approved by the Village
Attorney prior to issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter.
(3) Limitations or restrictions regarding the nature and type of
chemicals or other substances which may be used as part of such
emergency preparedness practice. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
unless otherwise specifically allowed by a permit condition, no
chemical or other substance which emits a noxious, unpleasant or
irritating odor shall be used as part of such practice.
(4) Requirements for notice to be given to owners and occupants of
property in the immediate vicinity of the site where the emergency
preparedness practice is to occur. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
unless other or different notice is specifically required by a permit
condition, no such practice shall occur unless prior written notice
has been given, at least 72 hours prior to the practice, to the owner
§ 105-3 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 105-3
102:143
§ 105-4. Utilities.
No building, structure or property may be used for emergency
preparedness practice unless all utility services have been disconnected,
removed or sealed in conformity with the applicable regulations of the
public utility or the agency having jurisdiction, unless the Mayor dispenses
with such requirement.
§ 105-5. Demolition permit required.
In addition to any other requirement of this chapter, where a building
or structure proposed to be used in any such emergency preparedness
practice is proposed to be demolished in whole or in part, no such building
or structure may be used for such practice purposes until a demolition
permit has been obtained in accordance with the requirements of this Code.
§ 105-6. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to emergency preparedness
activities conducted at any municipal property or at property where an
emergency services provider maintains a regular location for the provision
of such services, nor to the use of a school classroom or place of public
assembly for the purpose of instruction on emergency preparedness,
provided that no portion of any such building or property shall be set on fire
intentionally as part of such activity.
§ 105-7. Prohibitions.
No person shall cause or permit any fire to be set intentionally in or to
any portion of a building or structure or property pursuant to a permit
granted pursuant to this chapter unless such permit expressly authorizes
such activity.
§ 105-8. Disclaimer of liability.
This chapter shall not be construed, interpreted or applied to create liability
on the part of the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any loss or
damage that may result from reliance on this chapter or any determination
lawfully made thereunder.
or occupant of each property located in whole or in part within
500 feet of the practice site. Written documentation of such notice
having been given shall be filed in satisfactory form with the
Building Department prior to any practice taking place.
§ 105-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 105-8
102:144
Chapter 107
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development of filled-in land — See Ch. 113.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 126.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 129.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 190.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 107-1. Findings of fact.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates hereby finds and
determines as follows:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species;
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat;
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation;
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality;
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities;
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety;
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
§ 105-8 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 107-1
102:145
§ 107-2. Purpose.
The Village of Great Neck Estates has developed a stormwater management
program for coverage under the New York State Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES) requirements. The purpose of this chapter is
to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls
to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the
public residing within this jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact
in this chapter. This chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the
following objectives:
§ 107-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New
York, the Board of Trustees ("Board") of the Village of Great Neck Estates
("Village") has the authority to enact local laws and amend local laws and
for the purpose of promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the
Village and for the protection and enhancement of its physical environment.
The Board may include in any such local law provisions for the appointment
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as
amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Construction Activities GP-02-01 or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in creek and
channel temperature, and bank erosion, and maintain the integrity of
creeks and channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
§ 107-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 107-3
102:146
of any municipal officer, employees, or independent contractor to
effectuate, administer and enforce such local law.
§ 107-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities as defined
in this chapter.
§ 107-5. Stormwater Management Officer duties and authority.
The Stormwater Management Officer shall accept and review all
stormwater pollution prevention plans and forward such plans to the
applicable municipal board. The Stormwater Management Officer may:
§ 107-6. Reviewed development activities.
All land development activities subject to review and approval by the Board
under the Village Code regulations shall be reviewed subject to the
standards contained in this chapter.
§ 107-7. Development activities not subject to review.
All land development activities not subject to review as stated in section
§ 107-6 shall be required to submit a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management Officer, who shall approve the
SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 107-8. Exemptions.
The following activities shall be exempt from review under this chapter:
A. Review the plans;
B. Upon approval by the Board, engage the services of a registered
professional engineer to review the plans, specifications and related
documents at a cost not to exceed the fee schedule established by said
governing board; or
C. Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
A. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than one acre and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility;
B. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer;
C. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the Board on or before the effective date of this chapter;
D. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this chapter;
§ 107-3 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 107-8
102:147
§ 107-9. Definitions.
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth in
this section:
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version including applicable updates, that serves as
the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.); impervious
surface.[Amended 10-10-2016 by L.L. No. 9-2016]
E. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles;
F. Emergency protective measures necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources;
G. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that individual
and the family members of such individual;
H. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure or use;
I. Fire-fighting activities that produce runoff waters to enter the MS4 or
US waters.
§ 107-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 107-9
102:148
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than 10,000 square feet
(unless the amount of impervious cover created is not more than 1,000
square feet), or activities disturbing less than 10,000 square feet of total
land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even
though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take
place at different times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including any person
or entity holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person
or entity holding proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, and
habitats for threatened, endangered or special-concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
§ 107-9 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 107-9
102:149
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment. This
shall include the practices listed on Schedule A48 included in this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — The Code Official, or other
person designated by the Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Trustees,
to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans, forward the
plans to the applicable municipal board, inspect stormwater management
practices, and exercise the powers and duties specified for such official in
this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPS) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
48.Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 107-9 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 107-9
102:150
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons, which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 107-10. Schedule A: Stormwater Management Practices
Acceptable for Water Quality.
Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 107-11. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
No application for approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed
until the appropriate board has received a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the specifications in this
chapter.
A. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans. All SWPPPs shall
provide the following background information and erosion and
sediment controls:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project.
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show the
total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that
will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be
affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes;
locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage
areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharges(s). The site
map shall be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet.
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site.
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with
§ 107-9 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 107-11
102:151
the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and
Sediment Control (Erosion Control Manual), not more than one
acre shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP.
(5) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris
from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff.
(6) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response.
(7) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to
be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control
for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing
to project closeout.
(8) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice.
(9) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all
erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and
sizing of any temporary sediment basins.
(10) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control
measures.
(11) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in place.
(12) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice.
(13) Name(s) of the receiving water(s).
(14) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site.
(15) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable.
(16) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
B. Land development activities meeting one or more of the following
conditions shall also include water quantity and water quality controls
(post-construction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in § 107-11C
below as applicable:
§ 107-11 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 107-11
102:152
§ 107-12. Plan certification.
The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape architect, certified
professional or professional engineer and must be signed by the
professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the design of all
stormwater management practices meet the requirements in this chapter.
(1) Stormwater runoff from land development activities discharging a
pollutant of concern to either an impaired water identified on the
Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters, or total maximum
daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which pollutants in
stormwater have been identified as a source of the impairment; or
(2) Stormwater runoff from land development activities disturbing five
or more acres; or
(3) Stormwater runoff from land development activity disturbing
between one and five acres of land during the course of the project.
C. SWPPP requirements. Land development activities meeting one or
more of the foregoing conditions:
(1) All information in this chapter.
(2) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms.
(5) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with
predevelopment conditions.
(6) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(7) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(8) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and
repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in
effect with transfer of title to the property.
(9) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the on-site stormwater management
measures in accordance with this chapter.
§ 107-11 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 107-13
102:153
§ 107-13. Other environmental permits.
The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits
have been or will be acquired for the land development activity prior to
approval of the final stormwater design plan.
§ 107-14. Contractor certification.
Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who will be
involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice
installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification
statement before undertaking any land development activity: "I certify
under penalty of law that I understand and agree to comply with the
terms and conditions of the stormwater pollution prevention plan. I also
understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to
a violation of water quality standards." The certification must include the
name and title of the person providing the signature; the address and
telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying
description) of the site; and the date the certification is made. The
certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for the land
development activity.
§ 107-15. SWPPP to be retained on site.
A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land development
activity during construction from the date of initiation of construction
activities to the date of final stabilization.
§ 107-16. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual").
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control, (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
§ 107-13 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 107-17
102:154
§ 107-17. Water quality standards.
No land development activity shall cause an increase in turbidity that will
result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface waters
of the State of New York.
§ 107-18. Maintenance and repair during construction.
§ 107-19. Maintenance easement(s).
Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a stormwater management
facility as one of the requirements, the applicant or developer must execute
a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the stormwater management facility. The easement
shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic
inspection by the Village to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the grantor
in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the Village Attorney.
§ 107-20. Maintenance after construction.
The owner or operator of permanent stormwater management practices
installed in accordance with this chapter shall be operated and maintained
to achieve the goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also
includes, as a minimum, the following:
A. The applicant or developer of the land development activity shall at all
times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed
or used by the applicant or developer to achieve compliance with the
conditions of this chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment
traps or sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been
reduced by 50%.
B. The applicant or developer or their representative shall be on site at all
times when construction or grading activity takes place and shall
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices. Inspection reports shall be completed every seven
days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of
precipitation or more. The reports shall be delivered to the Stormwater
Management Officer and also copied to the site log book.
A. A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical facilities
and systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which
are installed or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of
this chapter.
B. Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new
maintenance personnel.
§ 107-17 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 107-20
102:155
§ 107-21. Maintenance agreements.
§ 107-22. Subdivisions.
The following requirements shall be applicable to subdivisions of property
in addition to any other applicable laws, rules or regulations pertaining to
subdivisions of property in the Village:
§ 107-23. Site plan approvals.
In any case where a site plan approval is required pursuant to this Code,
no such approval shall be granted unless a stormwater pollution prevention
plan consistent with the requirements of this chapter has been provided
as part of the application for site plan approval. The SWPPP shall meet
the performance and design criteria and standards in this chapter. The
approved site plan shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause or
contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance with this
chapter.
A. The Board shall approve a formal maintenance agreement for
stormwater management facilities binding on all subsequent
landowners, which agreement shall be in a form approved by the
Village Attorney, and recorded by the owner in the office of the County
Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval.
B. In lieu of such maintenance agreement, the Board, in its sole discretion,
may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements
of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
A. Prior to approval of any preliminary subdivision plat, a satisfactory
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of this chapter shall be provided. The SWPPP shall meet
the performance and design criteria and standards in this chapter. The
approved preliminary subdivision plat shall be consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Prior to approval of any final subdivision plat, a stormwater pollution
prevention plan consistent with the requirements of this chapter and
with the terms of preliminary plan approval shall be required for final
subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and
design criteria and standards in this chapter. The approved final
subdivision plat shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 107-20 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 107-24
102:156
§ 107-24. Administration and enforcement.
The following provisions for construction inspection, performance
guarantees and bonds, and enforcement are applicable to any project or
development subject to this chapter in addition to the other provisions of
this Code; provided, however, that this section shall not be applicable to
the extent that any other provision of this Code contains a stricter or more
stringent requirement:
A. Inspections.
(1) Erosion and sediment control inspection. The Stormwater
Management Officer may require such inspections as necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter and may either approve
that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein
the work fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter and
the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. To
obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the Stormwater
Management Officer at least 48 hours before any of the following,
as required by the Stormwater Management Officer:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found as a result of any such inspection, the
applicant and developer shall be notified in writing of the nature of
the violation and the required corrective actions. No further work
shall be conducted except for site stabilization until any violations
are corrected and all work previously completed has received
approval by the Stormwater Management Officer.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The Stormwater
Management Officer is responsible for conducting inspections of
stormwater management practices (SMPs). All applicants are required
to submit as-built plans for any stormwater management practices
located on site after final construction is completed. The plan must
show the final design specifications for all stormwater management
facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
§ 107-24 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 107-24
102:157
§ 107-25. Submission of reports.
The Stormwater Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting
from entities subject to this chapter as are necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
§ 107-26. Right-of-entry for inspection.
When any new stormwater management facility is installed on private
property or when any new connection is made between private property and
the public stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the Village, or
its designee, the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a
reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in this chapter.
§ 107-27. Construction completion guarantee.
In order to ensure the full and faithful completion of all land development
activities related to compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village
in its approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Board
may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction,
a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an
appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees satisfactory
completion of the project and names the Village as the beneficiary. The
security shall be in an amount to be determined by the Board based on
submission of final design plans, with reference to actual construction and
landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until
the surety is released from liability by the Board, provided that such period
shall not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such
other certification that the facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and that a one-year inspection
has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be acceptable to
the Board. Per-annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested
in the account until the surety is released from liability.
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations;
inspections of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical
sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections
of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual
discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type
which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations
of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES
stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
§ 107-24 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 107-28
102:158
§ 107-28. Maintenance guarantee.
Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities
are to be operated and maintained by the developer or by a person or
entity that owns or manages a nonresidential facility, the developer, prior
to construction, may be required to provide the Village with an irrevocable
letter of credit from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure
proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and
erosion control facilities both during and after construction, and until the
facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails
to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control facilities, the Village may draw upon the account to cover
the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering and
inspection costs.
§ 107-29. Recordkeeping.
Entities subject to this chapter shall maintain records demonstrating
compliance with this chapter.
§ 107-30. Enforcement.
A. Notice of violation. When the Stormwater Management Officer or other
authorized Village official determines that a land development activity
is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, such official may issue a written notice of violation to the
landowner. The notice of violation shall contain, at a minimum:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the Board by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of
service of notice of violation.
B. Stop-work orders. The Stormwater Management Officer or Code
Official may issue a stop-work order for violations of this chapter.
Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be required to halt all land
development activities, except those activities that address the
violations leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be
§ 107-28 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 107-30
102:159
§ 107-31. Remedies.
In addition to any other remedy or penalty applicable by law, any land
development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this
chapter, may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner
provided by law.
§ 107-32. Penalties for offenses.
Unless a higher or more strict penalty is otherwise provided by law, any
person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both for conviction of a first offense;
for conviction of a second offense both of which were committed within
a period of five years, such person shall be punishable by a fine not less
than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed
six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense
all of which were committed within a period of five years, such person
shall be punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 107-33. Withholding of certificate of occupancy.
If any building or land development activity is installed or conducted in
violation of this chapter, the Stormwater Management Officer or the Code
Official may prevent or prohibit the occupancy of said building or land.
§ 107-34. Restoration of lands.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be required to
restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is
not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the Board may take
necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the
property until paid.
§ 107-35. Fees for services.
Any person undertaking land development activities regulated by this
chapter shall pay the fees and costs required pursuant to the Village's fee
regulations, such costs to be paid at prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs,
inspections, or SMP maintenance performed by the Village or performed by
a third party for the Village.
Chapter 109
in effect until the official issuing such order, or the Board, confirms that
the land development activity is in compliance and the violation has
been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in
a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
§ 107-30 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 107-35
102:160
FEES
§ 109-1. Fees enumerated. [Amended 3-5-1984 by L.L. No. 5-1984;
3-5-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984; 5-14-1990; 5-21-1996; 8-17-1998;
9-19-2002; 4-14-2003; 6-9-2003; 12-3-2003; 4-12-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004; 11-3-2004; 12-13-2004; 11-12-2005; 12-1-2011]
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the following fees shall be
applicable in the Village of Great Neck Estates: [Amended 3-14-2005;
6-10-2013]
Item Fee
Architectural Review Board
[Amended 7-11-201649]
Alterations/additions $200
New dwelling $400
Sign permit review $75
Facade permit review $150
Building permit [Amended
7-11-2016]
Building permit extension $500/3 months (only one
permitted)
Additional building permit
extension
As per Board of Trustees
Building permit amendment $100 + $15 each M
Demolition permit $250 + $15 each M; in addition,
the fee for such permit shall
include reimbursement of
reasonable fees and expenses
incurred by the Village for
professional consultants to
monitor or regulate the
demolition work, and the Village
Clerk may require the applicant
to pay a deposit toward such fees
and expenses in the same manner
as provided in Village Code
§ 109-B(2) and (5).
Exam of work done without permit $1,000
49.Editor’s Note: This resolution also provided that, in addition to the fee for any such review
by the Architectural Review Board which, in the opinion of the Chair of the Board, will
require the services of professional consultants, the applicant shall also be required to
reimburse the reasonable fees and expenses incurred by the Village for professional
consultants for such review, and the Village Clerk shall require the applicant to pay a
deposit toward such fees and expenses in the same manner as provided in Village Code
§ 109-1B(2) and (5).
§ 107-35 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 109-1
102:161
Item Fee
Reinspection, old permit or when
required due to failure of prior
inspection
$250
Cable television system facility for
the reception of radio and
television signals
$1,000
Central air $150 + $10 each M
Deck $150 + $10 each M
Emergency generator $200 + $15 each M
New heating system $100 + $10 each M
Certificate of completion $125
Certificate of occupancy $125
Certified certificate of occupancy
search
$75 + $10 each CO or CC
Cesspool permit $250
Copies, miscellaneous $0.25 per page
Copies of building plans Vendor cost
Curb cut permit $150 + $400 refundable deposit
Driveway permit $150 + $10 each M
Dumpster permit
Construction $50/60 days + $50 each renewal;
max. 2 renewals
Nonconstruction $50/14 days + $50 each renewal;
max. 3 renewals
Public property $50/48 hours + $50 each
additional day
Electrician's license $50/year
Filming permit [Added
8-21-2017]
Application fee $1,000
Deposit To be determined by Village
Administrator
Fence permit $100
Fireplace permit $150 + $10 each M
Gas Station License $250/year
Landscaper's license
Application filing fee $50
License fee $50/year
§ 109-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 109-1
102:162
Item Fee
Organized play groups:
Supervisor's license
If application is granted: $100
If application is denied: $50 will be returned to the
applicant, and the balance of $50
will be retained by the Village to
cover the cost of processing the
application.
Parades and gatherings on public
property permit
$100
Plumber's license $50/year
Plumbing permit $125 + $10 each M
Property redemption fee $25 plus the sum of $3 per day in
excess of two days that the
property is held by the
Superintendent of Public Works
Restaurant license $200/year
Roofing permit $150 + $10 each M
Secondhand dealer's license $250/year
Security gate permit $50
Sewer connection permit $50
Sign permit
Unlit $100
Lighted $150
Solar heat permit $300
Solid waste storage containers
On private property $50 for 2-week period
In conjunction with a building
permit
No fee for first 60 days; $50 for
each of 2 additional periods of 60
days
Sprinklers
Lawn $150 1st 1M + $10/1M added
Building $150 1st 1M + $10/1M added
Street/sidewalk opening permit $125 + 400 refundable deposit
Swimming pool $250 + $15 each M
Tag sale permit $50/day, 2-day limit
§ 109-1 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 109-1
102:163
Item Fee
Telecommunications license or
franchise
$250 or 1% of the estimated cost
of construction of the applicant's
proposed or existing
telecommunications facilities,
whichever is greater
Theater license $100
Theater matron or supervisor $25
Topsoil removal permit $25 for an area not exceeding
2,500 square feet; $10 for each
additional 2,000 square feet
Towing
Owner's license, restricted or
unrestricted
$60
Driver's license $20; replacement fee: $5
Unrestricted vehicle license,
owner in town
First vehicle: $110; each
additional vehicle: $60
Restricted vehicle license, owner
in town
First vehicle: $35; each additional
vehicle: $20
Tow car substitution $20
replacement of a license or
medallion
$20
Unrestricted reciprocal license,
owner out of town
$110
Restricted reciprocal license,
owner out of town
$35
Reciprocal license replacement $20
Transient dwelling unit application
[Added 7-9-2018]
$100
Tree removal permit $25 + $5 each additional tree
Vendor's, peddler's and solicitor's
filing fee
$100
Noncommercial solicitation
processing fee
$50
Applications to the Board of
Trustees for permits or approvals
relating to land use or land use
development, other than
extensions of building permits
[Amended 1-6-2014]
Residential $1,500 + cost of consultants
Commercial $2,500 + cost of consultants
§ 109-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 109-1
102:164
Item Fee
Subdivision
Residential $2,000 + cost of consultants
Commercial $4,000 + cost of consultants
Board of Appeals
Residential $2,000 + cost of consultants
Commercial $4,000 + cost of consultants
Zoning Code + supplements $50
Code Book + supplements $150
B. Payment or reimbursement of consulting and other fees. [Amended
8-14-200850]
(1) Whenever, in the judgment of the Board of Trustees or any other
Village board or agency which is considering or reviewing an
application or conducting review pursuant to the State
Environmental Quality Review Act, it is necessary to retain the
services of one or more independent consultants to assist in such
consideration or review, the fees or expenses reasonably incurred
by the Village for the services of such consultant(s) shall be
reimbursed to the Village by the applicant.
(2) The Village Administrator may require any such applicant to pay a
reasonable advance deposit to the Village, in an amount not to
exceed $10,000 unless otherwise authorized by the Board of
Trustees. Such deposit may be applied by the Village to payment of
fees or expenses incurred by the Village as described in this
section, and which the applicant is required to pay or reimburse. At
any time the current balance of such deposit is $5,000 or less, the
Village Administrator is authorized to require a reasonable
additional deposit, in an amount not to exceed any amount which
may be required for the initial deposit. [Amended 5-11-2015 by
L.L. No. 5-2015]
(3) In addition to the consulting fees described in this section, the
applicant is also responsible to pay or reimburse, and any deposit
required hereunder may be applied to, fees or costs incurred by the
Village for publication of legal notices, stenographic transcripts of
proceedings, and reasonable legal fees incurred by the Village for
the processing or review of any application for which a deposit for
consultants' fees is required pursuant to this section. [Amended
1-6-2014]
50.Editor's Note: This resolution also provided that it would be effective immediately, would
apply to all applications pending upon such effective date, or filed on or after such
effective date, and would not affect the responsibility of any person or entity to pay or
reimburse fees or expenses incurred by the Village prior to the date of its adoption.
§ 109-1 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 109-1
102:165
§ 109-2. Establishment or amendment of fee schedule. [Added
6-12-1989 by L.L. No. 7-1989]
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Board of Trustees may, from
time to time, by resolution, amend or change any fee described in § 109-1
of this Code or add any additional fee for any matter in the discretion of
the Board of Trustees. Any fee so established or changed or amended may
thereafter be changed, established or amended by resolution of the Board
of Trustees, and any such fee so established, changed or amended shall
supersede any previous fee established for the same item or application.
§ 109-3. Work commenced prior to issuance of permit. [Added
1-9-1995; amended 2-11-2002]
Where any work or other activity is commenced prior to issuance of a
required permit for such work or activity, the fee for the permit shall be
three times the fee otherwise provided for in this chapter.
§ 109-4. Parking permit fees. [Added 4-12-1996; amended
4-14-2003; 4-12-2004; 5-14-2018]
By order of the Board of Trustees, effective June 1, 2018, parking permit
fees will be as follows:
Type Fee
24-hour
Maple Drive
9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
$75/month
$75/month
$60/month
(4) No approval of any application, permit, certificate of occupancy or
certificate of completion shall be issued or effective with respect to
any application until all required fees and/or deposits have been
paid to the Village.
(5) Upon written request from an applicant upon or after the
completion of processing any application for which a deposit was
made, and upon the payment of all expenses to which that deposit
may be applied, the Village Administrator may return any
unexpended balance of such deposit.
§ 109-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 109-4
102:166
Chapter 113
FILLED-IN LAND, DEVELOPMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 25.
Building construction and plumbing — See
Ch. 95.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 126.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 129.
Gardeners and landscapers — See Ch. 136.
Parks and playgrounds; pool — See Ch. 150.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 113-1. Title.
This chapter may be referred to as the "Development Code of the Village of
Great Neck Estates."
§ 113-2. Areas of Village to which provisions applicable.
The area to which this chapter applies includes the marsh and meadow land
(part of which has been or may be filled in) in the basin at the head of Little
Neck Bay and consists of Lots 32, 36, 54, 57, 59, 61, 328, 357, 364, 365,
366, 367 and 368 in Block L-13, Section 2, on the Land Map of Nassau
County as it existed on July 12, 1954, being Lots 32, 36, 54, 57, 59, 60, 61,
328, 357, 364, 366, 368, 384, 391, 400, 401, 402, and 403 in said Block L-13
as it existed on December 15, 1959.
§ 113-3. Purpose and scope.
A. The area which this chapter applies consists principally of marsh and
meadow land immediately adjacent to and crossed by tidal creeks and
streams, the greater part of which marsh and meadow land is covered
with water during spring tides and during storms. The development of
this area involves many problems which do not exist elsewhere in the
Village and which directly affect the safety and health of persons who
may live, work or be present there, the protection of their property and
the protection of public improvements which may be located therein.
Among such problems are:
(1) The flooding of the area to a considerable depth of water, such as
occurred during the hurricanes of 1938 and 1944, which, in case of
recurrence, might result in heavy loss of life and great destruction
of property.51
51.Editor's Note: As to flood damage control regulations generally, see Ch. 126, Flood
Damage Prevention.
§ 109-4 FILLED-IN LAND, DEVELOPMENT OF § 113-3
113:167
§ 113-4. Development plan required.
No work shall be performed or commenced, including filling, dredging,
bulkheading, clearing, grading, excavating, building construction
(temporary or permanent), road construction, installation of streets,
pavements, sewers, drains, gas, water, electricity and other utilities, or
work of any character whatsoever, except preliminary surveying and
engineering, unless and until a plan of development therefor shall have
been filed and approved by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Great
Neck Estates.
(2) The unstable nature of the surface and subsurface soil of the marsh
and meadow land which, among other things, tends to:
(a) Result in uneven subsidence of the fill which may be placed
thereon.
(b) Result in changes in grade and consequent fractures and
disalignment of sewers, drains, curbs and pavements.
(c) Make difficult the permanent retention of the fill in place.
(d) Endanger the stability of foundations of dwellings and other
structures.
(3) The small elevation above tide water which:
(a) Makes unsafe and unsanitary the use of cesspools, septic
tanks, tile fields52 and similar facilities for sewage disposal.
(b) Requires direct connection with properly designed and
maintained sewage disposal plants.
(c) Causes stormwater drains to back up and operate
unsatisfactorily during period of high tides, storms and heavy
rainfall.
B. For these reasons and other reasons, the Board of Trustees finds that it
is expedient and desirable for the good government of the Village, its
management and business, the protection of its property, the safety and
health of its inhabitants, the protection of their property, the
preservation and protection of the public streets, the preservation of
public health and the regulating of the construction, alteration, removal
and inspection of all buildings and structures erected or to be erected
therein that the provisions of this chapter be enacted and made
applicable to the area hereinbefore described, in addition to the
requirements of the several ordinances, rules and regulations
applicable generally throughout the Village.
52.Editor's Note: As to other standards and regulations for cesspools, wells, ditches and
excavations, see Ch. 167, Property Maintenance.
§ 113-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 113-5
113:168
§ 113-5. Development plan: required information.
Such development plan shall be comprehensive and shall show all of the
property owned or controlled by the applicant, and adjacent property, and
shall show all creeks, streams and waterways and all topographical
features. So far as practicable, it shall contain all of the information and
details required by the Planning Ordinance of the Village of Great Neck
Estates.53 It shall show all proposed streets, stormwater drains, sanitary
sewers, pumping stations and disposal plants and shall show the method by
which the various streets, drains, sewers and other facilities and utilities
are to be connected with the nearest existing facilities. Where the proposed
development would block or change the location of existing drains, ditches,
streams or creeks, or interfere with the runoff of surface or subsurface
water from adjacent property, the plan shall make adequate provision for
the unobstructed flow of such water to tide water. It shall also contain
accurate contours showing existing and finished grades. The plan shall be
accompanied by the logs of test borings made through any soft, silty, clayey
or peat soils to rock, or, where there is no rock, into at least five feet of firm,
hard strata of sand, gravel or soils of like character. Such test borings shall
be certified by a professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics. It
shall also contain construction data showing in detail the method by which
the applicant intends to comply with the requirements of this chapter and a
time schedule therefor. It shall also contain such additional data as may be
required by the Board of Trustees or the Planning Board.
§ 113-6. Public hearing on plan.
The Board of Trustees may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing in relation
to any plan submitted for its approval as provided in this chapter, upon such
notice as it may determine, at which public hearing the developer and all
persons interested may have an opportunity to be heard.
§ 113-7. Conditions to approval of plan.
The Board of Trustees may impose such conditions to the approval of
any development plan that it may deem necessary to assure that the
development will be carried out in accordance with the plan and in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such conditions may include
requirements as to the manner in which the work shall be performed and
the order in which the various portions thereof shall be carried out, the
dedication to the Village free and clear of encumbrances of all streets,
sanitary sewers, sewage pumping stations, sewage disposal plants,
stormwater drains, catch basins and appertaining structures and any
control strips, access strips, rights-of-way, easements and other facilities.
The Board may also require that a five-year maintenance bond be furnished
upon the completion and acceptance of the work, which bond shall also
assure compliance with the requirements of § 113-12 and the replacement
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Subdivision of Land.
§ 113-5 FILLED-IN LAND, DEVELOPMENT OF § 113-7
113:169
or restoration of pavements, curbs, sewers, drainage systems and
bulkheads damaged because of settlement or workmanship.
§ 113-8. Bond to assure work completion.
The Board of Trustees may also require the developer to furnish a surety
bond in form, amount and content satisfactory to the Board, not exceeding
the estimated cost of the work, including bulkheads, to assure completion of
the work shown on the approved plan and the performance by the developer
of any conditions or requirements that may be imposed. Such bond may be
in addition to any bond that the Planning Board or the Board of Trustees
may require under Article 7 of the Village Law. The Board of Trustees may,
however, permit said bonds to be consolidated or a single bond to be given
to cover the entire work and improvement.
§ 113-9. Approval of plan.
The approval of the Board of Trustees shall be entered in the minutes of the
Board and shall be noted on the face of the development plan, together with
a statement of or reference to the conditions that may have been imposed.
§ 113-10. Work and materials.
All work and materials shall comply with the requirement of this chapter.
§ 113-11. Fill and filling.
Fill shall consist of sand or gravel or sandy or gravelly soils graded as
"fair to good" or better for foundation purposes on the Casagrande soil
chart. Silts and very fine sands, clays of low to medium plasticity, sandy
clays, silty clays, peat and other highly organic swamp soils, as described
on said soil chart, shall not be used. Fill may be either dry or placed by
hydraulic means. Fill must be graded to a stable elevation at least 10 feet
above Nassau County datum established by the Topographic Section of the
Department of Public Works, that is, mean sea level at Sandy Hook, New
Jersey, determined by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. Fill
shall be planted with beach grass or other vegetation sufficient to avoid dust
in times of heavy wind.
§ 113-12. Settlement; additional fill.
If mud, peat or silt is not removed before the fill is placed, an additional
elevation of at least two feet is required for the fill to assure against
settlement below the elevation required in § 113-11. In such case, no
building permit shall be issued for a building upon a lot so filled in for
a period of at least two years from and after the date that the final fill
and grading was completed. In no case shall a building permit be issued
for a building upon a lot that has settled below the elevation required in
§ 113-11, unless and until additional fill has been placed thereon sufficient
to reestablish the required elevation.
§ 113-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 113-13
113:170
§ 113-13. Bulkhead placement.
Bulkheads complying with the requirements of this chapter must be
installed adjacent to all creeks, streams and waterways of every kind. If
filling is carried on in sections, temporary sod bulkheads may be erected at
the interior boundaries of each of such sections.
§ 113-14. Bulkhead specifications.
Bulkheads may be of steel or other metal of equal strength and durability,
wood, poured concrete or stone. Where wood is used it shall be of southern
yellow pine not less than three inches in thickness and treated by a pressure
process to retain not less than 20 pounds of No. 1 creosote oil per cubic
foot of wood. Where concrete is used it shall be reinforced with structural
steel bars having a minimum cover of two inches and shall consist of
three-thousand-pounds-per-square-inch concrete. An admixture such as
Plastiment for densifying shall be used. Where steel is used it shall be
protected with a coating of bitumastic paint. In general, the bulkhead
design should follow the methods outlined in the steel sheet piling
handbook published by the United States Steel Corporation, or its
equivalent.
§ 113-15. Bulkhead permit required.
No bulkhead shall be constructed unless a special permit therefor has been
previously applied for and issued by the Village. The provisions of Chapter
230, Zoning, relating to applications for a building permit, the issuance of a
building permit and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall apply to
the construction of a bulkhead.54
§ 113-16. Stormwater drains and appurtenant structures.
Stormwater drains, catch basins and appurtenant structures shall be
constructed of a size and so located as to provide adequate drainage, in
conformity with the requirements of the Commissioner of Public Works of
the County of Nassau, or other Nassau County official having jurisdiction,
and any additional requirements which may be imposed by the Board of
Trustees. An stormwater drains must be of reinforced concrete or cast iron.
§ 113-17. Sanitary sewers.55
Sanitary sewers shall be provided of a size and so located as to conform to a
comprehensive sewerage plan approved by the State Department of Health.
In addition, sewage pumping stations and other accessory structures shall
also be provided where required by the Board of Trustees. If the sewerage
system is to connect with the sewerage system of the Belgrave Sewer
54.Editor's Note: As to building permits and certificates of occupancy generally, see Ch. 95,
Building Construction and Plumbing. As to current fees for building permits and
certificates of occupancy, see Ch. 109, Fees.
55.Editor's Note: As to sewer regulations generally, see Ch. 184, Sewers.
§ 113-13 FILLED-IN LAND, DEVELOPMENT OF § 113-17
113:171
District, the requirements of the Commissioners of said Sewer District shall
also be complied with. In cases where it is not feasible to connect with
an existing sewerage system, a complete sewage disposal plant must be
provided of a size, capacity and design approved by the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Great Neck Estates and the New York State Department
of Health. Sanitary sewers shall be constructed of cast-iron pipe with
watertight joints, unless otherwise provided by the Board of Trustees.
§ 113-18. Drain and sewer support.
All stormwater drains and sanitary sewers shall be constructed on a
stabilized bed at least three feet thick, composed of three-fourths-inch stone
or selected gravel confined by tight shoring, or such equivalent as may be
approved by the Board of Trustees.
§ 113-19. Shoring of trenches.
All trenches must be shored. Unless otherwise specified by the Board of
Trustees, shoring must remain in place.
§ 113-20. Surface and subsurface waters.
Whenever a natural flow of surface or subsurface water is encountered,
including a spring or artesian well or pipes connected therewith, or any
creek or ditch serving as a surface drain, such flow shall be adequately
piped into the street drainage system or through a culvert, drainage pipe or
gravel trench or into tide water.
§ 113-21. Building requirements.
In addition to the requirements of Chapter 130, Zoning, Chapter 95,
Building Construction and Plumbing, and other applicable Village
ordinances now or hereafter adopted, the following requirements shall
apply.
A. Every building having sanitary facilities shall be connected to sanitary
sewers. No cesspools, septic tanks, tile fields or other sewage disposal
facilities will be permitted. Under no circumstances may sewage be
permitted to discharge directly or indirectly into a stormwater drain or
into tidal waters or any waters tributary thereto.
B. Every building designed or used for dwelling purposes or which
contains living accommodations shall be constructed at such an
elevation that the lowest point of the first or ground floor level shall be
at least 12 feet above Nassau County datum as defined in § 113-11, and
no openings in the exterior walls of an excavated cellar or basement
shall be permitted below said elevation.
C. Unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Trustees, all buildings,
other than temporary workmen's shacks, shall be constructed with pile
§ 113-17 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 113-21
113:172
§ 113-22. Additional requirements imposed by Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees may, in particular cases or in particular classes of
cases, impose such additional requirements as it may deem necessary or
proper to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
§ 113-23. Deposit required upon filing of development plan.
Upon filing a development plan, the applicant shall pay to the Village, upon
demand, the reasonable cost, to be determined by the Board of Trustees,
of engineering and inspection services which may be required in the study
of the terrain covered by the application and the study of the engineering
matters involved, and the Board of Trustees shall not be required to act
upon the application unless and until such sum of money has been paid
to the Village. In addition, the Board of Trustees may, from time to time
during the progress of the development, require the developer to pay such
additional sums of money as the Board of Trustees may determine to
defray the cost of supervision, inspection and engineering in behalf of the
Village, to assure the compliance by the developer or his contractor with
the requirements of this chapter and other applicable Village ordinances.
§ 113-24. Inspections; tests.
The Village Engineer and such other persons as may be designated by the
Board of Trustees shall have full right of inspection during the progress of
the work and access to all parts of the development. The Village Engineer
may also cause tests to be made, at the cost and expense of the developer,
of any work or materials or to determine the nature and bearing capacity
of the soil and any other physical or other condition that he may deem
necessary to assure compliance with this chapter.
§ 113-25. Stop-work orders; appeals.
If the Village Engineer shall determine that any work performed or intended
to be performed or any materials used or intended to be used do not
comply with the development plan or the provisions of this chapter or
any conditions imposed by the Board of Trustees, he may order the work
affected by his determination to be stopped until he is satisfied that the
violations or proposed violations have been corrected. No work shall be
performed while such order is in effect. The developer may appeal in writing
to the Board of Trustees from such order of the Village Engineer, and
upon such appeal the Board of Trustees may affirm, modify or reverse the
determination appealed from. If the Board of Trustees shall fail to meet or
take action within 10 days from the date of filing such written notice of
appeal in the office of the Village Clerk, the work may proceed, without
prejudice, however, to the determination which the Board of Trustees may
make upon such appeal or to any other action which the facts may justify.
foundations of a size and capacity approved by the Board, which shall
be driven to a point of resistance that will carry the required load.
§ 113-21 FILLED-IN LAND, DEVELOPMENT OF § 113-26
113:173
§ 113-26. Conditions required before construction commencement.
§ 113-27. Interpretation of provisions; severability.
This chapter is remedial and shall be construed liberally to carry out the
legislative purposes hereinbefore stated. In case any section, subdivision,
clause or phrase thereof shall be held invalid, such determination shall not
affect the other sections, subdivisions, clauses and phrases thereof.
§ 113-28. When effective; provisions to apply to new construction.
This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption and shall apply throughout
the area described in this chapter, whether heretofore or hereafter filled
in; but in case of property already filled in, in whole or in part, or in case
a subdivision plat has been heretofore approved by the Planning Board
or Board of Trustees, no additional plan need be filed or work performed
by reason of this chapter, unless or until buildings are proposed to be
constructed thereon, in which case this chapter shall apply to all such new
construction.
Chapter 116
FILMING, COMMERCIAL
§ 116-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees hereby finds that it would serve the public interest
to require a permit for use of property in the Village for commercial filming
and to establish the standards that will govern application for such permits.
A. No building shall be constructed unless and until a development plan of
the area in which such building is proposed shall have been approved
by the Board of Trustees and unless and until the method for providing
such building with access to public streets and with sewers and other
public utilities has been approved by the Board of Trustees.
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be granted for any such building
unless and until such sewers and public utilities shall have been
completed to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees and unless and
until the Board of Trustees shall have accepted a dedication of such
streets, drains, sewers and other utilities (other than gas, water,
telephone, electricity and utilities installed and maintained by private
utility companies) or, in the case of streets, unless and until a bond shall
have been posted and shall continue in force, in an amount approved by
the Board of Trustees, sufficient in the opinion of the Board to assure
the completion of such street, including curbs and drains and
appertaining structures, in accordance with Village specifications.56
56.Editor's Note: Former § 62-27, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 113-26 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 116-2
116:174
§ 116-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The recording, on film, tape or other medium, of motion
pictures, commercials, documentaries, shows, performances, athletic or
sport events or other similar events or activities, including still photography,
with the intention that the end product be distributed commercially or
shown or exhibited at any place or locale where an admission fee is charged.
The term "filming" shall not include recording of news, political events and
local sports or school district events by any person for the purposes of
providing news or information about such activities or events, or activities
contained wholly within any building in the Village and which involve no
physical activity or presence outside such building. The term "filming" also
shall not include any recording by the Village.
§ 116-3. Permit required.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall commence, conduct,
permit or cause filming in the Village of Great Neck Estates unless a
permit therefor has been issued by the Mayor, and unless such filming is in
compliance with the terms and conditions of such permit. As used herein,
filming shall include the use of public property for persons, equipment,
vehicles, props, cameras and any other items or materials used in
connection with such filming.
§ 116-4. Permit application.
A. An application for a filming permit shall be made on forms provided by
the Village Clerk and shall contain at least the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person or entity
owning the rights to the film.
(2) Name, address, telephone number and written consent of the
owner of the property where the proposed filming is to be
conducted, and the name, address and telephone number of the
location coordinator or other contact person.
(3) Purpose of the filming.
(4) Specific location of the property to be used.
(5) Dates and times of day that the property will be used.
(6) A description of all vehicles and bulky equipment to be used in
connection with the filming, together with the vehicle registration
identification of all such vehicles.
(7) Such other information as may be required by the Mayor or Board
of Trustees.
§ 116-2 FILMING, COMMERCIAL § 116-4
116:175
§ 116-5. Denial of issuance; permit contents; restrictions.
B. Any change in the planned filming activities for which a permit has been
requested or obtained shall be submitted in advance of the proposed
changes and shall be approved or denied in the same manner as the
original application.
C. Application for a filming permit must be submitted at least 10 business
days prior to the first date of filming, unless the Mayor waives this
condition for good cause.
A. The Mayor may deny an application for a filming permit if it does not
comply with the purpose and intent of this chapter or if the public
interest will be served by such denial. The Mayor may also deny any
application for a permit in connection with filming which, in the Mayor's
judgment, would conflict with other scheduled events in the area of the
filming location, would be detrimental to the community because of
anticipated excessive noise, illumination or other effect caused by the
proposed filming, including but not limited to the use of explosives, or
would unduly interfere for an extended period of time with the day-today
activities of citizens, property owners or merchants. The applicant
may appeal such denial to the Board of Trustees, whose decision
thereon will be final.
B. Every permit shall contain a date of commencement and an expiration
date and shall contain the specific hours during which filming shall
occur. No filming shall take place except in accordance with the terms
and conditions of the permit.
C. At no time shall filming or the use of equipment therefor be conducted
in the residential area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. At no time shall filming or the use of equipment thereof be conducted in
the downtown area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
except that the Mayor may permit filming during such hours upon good
cause shown and upon a finding that such filming will not have any
adverse effect on a resident or business in the Village.
E. On Sundays, no filming in any area of the Village may commence before
10:00 a.m.
F. No filming activity shall intrude or interfere with the privacy or
property of any resident or property owner in the Village unless a
written consent is obtained from said resident or property owner.
G. There shall be no rerouting of traffic in connection with the filming
activity except as specifically authorized by the Mayor as a condition of
the permit approval.
H. The filming shall be conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire
stations and fire hydrants. Equipment, materials or obstructions shall
not be placed within 15 feet of fire hydrants. Passageways leading to
§ 116-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 116-5
116:176
§ 116-6. Fees.
§ 116-7. Suspension or revocation of permit.
§ 116-8. Insurance and bond.
fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of equipment,
materials or obstructions. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be
kept free of equipment, materials or obstructions.
I. The Mayor may place further reasonable conditions and/or limitations
on the activity, including hours of operation, based on the needs of the
particular neighborhood or the existence of conflicting scheduled
events, or to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
A. The fee for a filming permit shall be established, and may be amended,
by the Board of Trustees by resolution. The fee shall be paid in cash or
certified check prior to the issuance of the permit.
B. In addition, the applicant shall pay the actual cost for the use of any
Village personnel, services or equipment in connection with the filming.
The applicant shall, prior to the issuance of a permit, pay such costs on
an estimated basis and shall also post adequate security to ensure the
payment of any such costs which cannot be reliably estimated.
A. Upon the Mayor's own initiative or upon notice from any person, the
Mayor may suspend or revoke a filming permit for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Violation of any law, rule or regulation of the United States, the
State of New York, the County of Nassau, the Village of Great Neck
Estates or any department or agency thereof.
(2) Violation of any condition of the permit.
(3) Conduct that is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the Village of Great Neck Estates or that is detrimental
to public or private property within the Village.
B. A decision of the Mayor to suspend or revoke a permit shall be
appealable to the Board of Trustees, whose decision thereon shall be
final.
C. In the event that a permit is suspended or revoked, the fee paid therefor
shall be forfeited and shall not be refunded to the applicant.
D. Revocation of a filming permit shall bar the offender from applying for a
new permit within one year from the date of the revocation and shall
bar any further application for a filming permit at the same premises for
a period of one year from the date of revocation.
A. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has deposited with the
Village Clerk a certificate or policy of liability, personal, bodily injury
§ 116-5 FILMING, COMMERCIAL § 116-8
116:177
§ 116-9. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 120
FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 120-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FIREARM — Includes, without limitation, any gun, handgun, pistol, rifle,
fowling piece, shotgun, cannon, blank-cartridge pistol, air gun or spring
gun.
FIREWORKS — Includes, without limitation, firecrackers, rockets,
torpedoes or toy pistols which can be loaded with powder (other than paper
caps).
§ 120-2. Storage and use of firearms and explosives restricted.
The storage, firing, discharge or use of firearms, ammunition, fireworks
and other explosives and the explosion of gun powder and/or gun cotton
in the Village of Great Neck Estates is hereby prohibited, except where
specifically permitted by this chapter or by state law.
and property damage insurance coverage in an amount not less than
$3,000,000 naming the Village of Great Neck Estates, its officers,
agents and employees as additional insured, thereby providing defense
and indemnity from and against any claim, loss or damage resulting
from the filming for which the permit is issued.
B. In addition, the applicant shall deposit with the Village Clerk a cash
bond or letter of credit in an amount to be determined by the Mayor to
guarantee the reconstruction or restoration of any public or private
property damaged as a result of the filming. Such bond or letter of
credit shall be in a form acceptable to and approved by the Village
Attorney.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail, neglect or
refuse to comply with any provision of this chapter or any rule or
determination made thereunder, or who shall undertake filming without
a permit therefor, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation
and shall be punished as provided for violations of this Code.57
B. In addition to the penalties set forth hereinabove, the Village may
enforce any provision of this chapter by injunction or by civil action to
recover a civil penalty in an amount not greater than $2,500 for each
day on which a violation occurs.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, General Penalty.
§ 116-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 120-3
120:178
§ 120-3. Sale of firearms or explosives prohibited.
The sale or exposure for sale of firearms, ammunition, fireworks or other
explosives within the Village is hereby prohibited.
§ 120-4. Permit required for storage, possession or use of
explosives and blasting caps.
The Board of Trustees may grant permission for the storage, possession
or use of high or low explosives or fuse or electrical blasting caps in the
Village, subject to reasonable conditions or restrictions, upon application in
writing, setting forth facts to demonstrate that such storage, possession or
use is in conformity with laws of the State of New York otherwise applicable.
§ 120-5. Permit required for storage of firearms or ammunition.
The Board of Trustees may grant permission for the storage of any firearm
or ammunition therefor within the Village, subject to reasonable conditions
or restrictions, upon written application setting forth facts demonstrating
that the said storage is in conformity and in compliance with all other
applicable laws of the State of New York.
§ 120-6. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to firearms or
ammunition therefor in the possession of members of the military forces of
the United States or the State of New York or law enforcement officers duly
authorized to possess such firearms or ammunition therefor under the laws
of the State of New York or the United States of America.58
Chapter 123
FIRE LANES
§ 123-1. Intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates hereby finds that
it is necessary for the Village to establish procedures so that fire lanes be
designated on private property located within its jurisdiction. The Board of
Trustees further finds that it is necessary to control ingress and egress in
connection with these fire lanes. The Board of Trustees believes that these
actions are essential in connection with the protection of life and property
and that they are an appropriate exercise of the Village's police power.59
58.Editor's Note: Former § 64-7, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
59.Editor's Note: As to other fire safety requirements, see Ch. 167, Property Maintenance,
Art. IV, Fire Safety Requirements.
§ 120-3 FIRE LANES § 123-2
123:179
§ 123-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LANE — A right-of-way for the passage of fire vehicles and equipment,
as well as the entrances and exits associated therewith.
§ 123-3. Establishment of fire lanes.
The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village is authorized to designate
fire lanes on private property located within the Village when he finds that
such action is necessary to ensure the adequate passage of fire vehicles and
equipment on the property. In designating a fire lane, the Superintendent
shall define its precise location and dimensions and shall have the power to
require the owner of the property to grade and pave the fire lane, provide
for drainage and make such other improvements as are necessary to permit
the ingress and egress of fire vehicles and equipment. The Superintendent
shall also have the power to require the owner of the property to provide
signs and such other markings as are suitable to assure public notice of the
existence of the fire lane.
§ 123-4. Property owners to be notified of proposed designation.
The Superintendent of Public Works, prior to designating a fire lane, shall
be required to notify the owner of the property of the proposed designation
and any improvements that will be required in connection therewith. Such
notice shall be given not less than 14 days prior to any such designation
and shall be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner's last known address. The notice shall also advise
the owner that if he requests the right to appear before the Superintendent
to discuss the proposed designation, then he shall be given the opportunity
to do so, provided that he so notifies the Village Clerk by certified mail,
return receipt requested, posted on or before the proposed date of
designation.
§ 123-5. Meetings to discuss impact of designation on property.
If the owner of the subject property appears before the Superintendent
of Public Works as provided in § 123-4 above, then he shall be given an
opportunity to present such information as he deems relevant to the
designation, including but not limited to the impact that the designation will
have on his use of the property and the cost, if any, that will be incurred by
him in connection with the improvements associated therewith.
§ 123-6. Fire lanes to be kept unobstructed by property owner.
An area designated as a fire lane pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be kept unobstructed at all times by the owner of the property, as well
as all other persons.60
§ 123-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 123-6
123:180
Chapter 126
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and plumbing — See
Ch. 95.
Development of filled-in land — See Ch. 113.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 129.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 197.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
60.Editor's Note: Former § 66-7, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 123-6 FIRE LANES § 123-6
123:181

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 126-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates finds that
the potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a
problem to the residents of the Village and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 126-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 126-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 126-1 FIRE LANES § 126-3
123:183
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 126-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-3
123:184
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 126-4. Word usage; terms defined.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION — The portion of the SFHA
landward of a V Zone or landward of an open coast without mapped
V Zones, in which the principal sources of flooding are astronomical
tides, storm surges, seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine sources. Areas of
moderate wave action may be subject to wave effects, velocity flows,
erosion, scour, or combinations of these forces and are treated as V
Zones. The area of moderate wave action is an area within a Zone AE
that is bounded by a line labeled "Limit of Moderate Wave Action."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred
to as the "base floodplain" or "100-year floodplain." For purposes of this
chapter, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in
meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation
system.
BUILDING — See structure.
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
§ 126-4 FIRE LANES § 126-4
123:185
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave
action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a
FIRM as Zone V1-V30, VE, VO or V. The coastal high-hazard area shall
also include areas on a FIRM within a Zone AE that is bounded by a line
labeled "Limit of Moderate Wave Action."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
CRITICAL FACILITIES —
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case
of a building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D,
to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in
Zone V1-30, VE, or V, or in an area of moderate wave action, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile,
flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
(1)
Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain occupants
who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during
a flood;
(2)
Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage
facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed for
flood response activities before, during, and after a flood; and
(3)
Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or
restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after
a flood.
(4)
§ 126-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-4
123:186
the case of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE,
or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed
by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "Flood Elevation Study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
Flood or flooding also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) above.
(2)
§ 126-4 FIRE LANES § 126-4
123:187
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of
"flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The Code Official.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 126-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-4
123:188
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, where such structure is otherwise permitted by law.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale, where such use is otherwise permitted by
law.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward
slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject
to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major
coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at
the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope
to a relatively mild slope.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 126-4 FIRE LANES § 126-4
123:189
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 126-14B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges
or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual "start of construction"
means the first placement of permanent construction of a building
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
a slab or footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as
clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also
means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. Substantial improvement also means
cumulative substantial improvement. The term includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
(1)
§ 126-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-4
123:190
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VILLAGE — The Village of Great Neck Estates.
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 126-4 FIRE LANES § 126-4
123:191

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 126-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Great Neck Estates, Nassau County.
§ 126-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 126-7. Interpretation; conflict with other provisions.
§ 126-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 126-9. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Great Neck Estates,
Community Number 360466, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36059C0092G,
36059C0111G, 36059C0113G, the effective date of which is
September 11, 2009, and any subsequent revisions to these map
panels that do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Nassau County, New York, All Jurisdictions," dated September 11,
2009.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
office of the Village Clerk, 4 Atwater Plaza, Great Neck Estates, New
York.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted laws, rules or regulations, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 126-5 FIRE LANES § 126-9
123:193
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements
of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied
for and received an approved variance under Article VI will be declared
noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
§ 126-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 126-9 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-10
123:194
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 126-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Code Official is hereby appointed local administrator to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development
permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 126-12. Floodplain development permits.
§ 126-13. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 126-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee in an amount established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees. In addition, the applicant shall be
responsible for reimbursing the Village for any additional costs
necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project. The local
administrator may require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover
these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of
the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located
in Zone V1-V30 or VE, or Zone V if base flood elevation data are
available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall
§ 126-11 FIRE LANES § 126-13
123:195
submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
C. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 126-16C, Utilities.
E. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the flood proofing
criteria in § 126-19, Nonresidential structures (except in coastal highhazard
areas).
F. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 126-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
G. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
H. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
I. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation data
are available, or in an area of moderate wave action, designs and
specifications, certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect,
for any breakaway walls in a proposed structure with design strengths
in excess of 20 pounds per square foot.
J. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation data
are available, or in an area of moderate wave action, for all new and
substantial improvements to structures, floodplain development permit
applications shall be accompanied by design plans and specifications,
§ 126-13 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-13
123:196
§ 126-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to the
following.
prepared in sufficient detail to enable independent review of the
foundation support and connection components. Said plans and
specifications shall be developed or reviewed by a licensed professional
engineer or architect, and shall be accompanied by a statement,
bearing the signature of the architect or engineer, certifying that the
design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice and with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 126-13, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this law.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards and, in
particular, § 126-15B, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., streambank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
§ 126-13 FIRE LANES § 126-14
123:197
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 126-13G, as criteria for requiring that
new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, the local administrator shall obtain from the permit
holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The certificate
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed
land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate
of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. A
certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
(unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation
data are available, or in an area of moderate wave action, upon
placement of the lowest floor of a new or substantially improved
structure, the permit holder shall submit to the local administrator
a certificate of elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the
bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings and columns). The certificate shall be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. An elevation certificate
§ 126-14 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-14
123:198
must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a
site 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and
ready for highway use).
(3) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 126-9 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 126-9 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 126-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, flood proofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
§ 126-14 FIRE LANES § 126-14
123:199
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1),
and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedures; and
(5) Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 126-14 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-14
123:200
ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 126-15. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 126-6.
A. Coastal high-hazard areas. The following requirements apply within
Zones V1-V30, VE and V, or in an area of moderate wave action:
(1) All new construction, including manufactured homes and
recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer and not fully
licensed for highway use shall be located landward of the reach of
high tide.
(2) The use of fill for structural support of buildings, manufactured
homes or recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer is
prohibited.
(3) Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential
flood damage is prohibited.
B. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
C. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones Al-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision,
§ 126-15 FIRE LANES § 126-15
123:201
§ 126-16. Standards for all structures.
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the
Village for all fees and other costs in relation to the application.
The applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping
and reimburse the Village for all costs related to the final map
revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 126-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping
and reimburses the Village for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village for all
costs related to the final map revisions.
(3) Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
development, the volume of space occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for
and balanced by an hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation
taken from below the base flood elevation at or adjacent to the
development site. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely to the watercourse. No area below the waterline of a pond or
other body of water can be credited as a compensating excavation.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
§ 126-15 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-16
123:202
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zone Al-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
are available, new and substantially improved structures shall have
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria: a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding; and the bottom of all such openings no higher
than one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade. Openings
may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings
or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are considered
basements and are not permitted.
(4) Within Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also within Zone V if base flood
elevation are available, or in an area of moderate wave action, new
construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the lowest floor either free from obstruction or constructed
with nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or
insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
system. The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used
only for parking vehicles, building access or storage. Use of this
space for human habitation is expressly prohibited. The
construction of stairs, stairwells and elevator shafts is subject to
the design requirements for breakaway walls.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation or
be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
§ 126-16 FIRE LANES § 126-16
123:203
§ 126-17. Residential structures (except in coastal high-hazard
areas).
§ 126-18. Residential structures (in coastal high-hazard areas).
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 126-15A, Coastal
high-hazard areas, and § 126-15B, Subdivision proposals, and § 126-16,
Standards for all structures, apply to new and substantially improved
residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard shown as
Zones V1-V30, VE or V, or in an area of moderate wave action, on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 126-6.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially
improved residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard,
in addition to the requirements in § 126-15B, Subdivision proposals,
and § 126-15C, Encroachments, and § 126-16, Standards for all
structures.
(1) Within Zones Al-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 126-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Elevation. New construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings, columns or shear walls such that the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member supporting the lowest elevated
§ 126-16 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-18
123:204
floor (excluding columns, piles, diagonal bracing attached to the piles
or columns, grade beams, pile caps and other members designed to
either withstand storm action or break away without imparting
damaging loads to the structure) is elevated to or above two feet above
base flood elevation so as not to impede the flow of water.
B. Determination of loading forces. Structural design shall consider the
effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously during the base
flood on all building components.
(1) The structural design shall be adequate to resist water forces that
would occur during the base flood. Horizontal water loads
considered shall include inertial and drag forces of waves, current
drag forces, and impact forces from waterborne storm debris.
Dynamic uplift loads shall also be considered if bulkheads, walls, or
other natural or man-made flow obstructions could cause wave runup
beyond the elevation of the base flood.
(2) Buildings shall be designed and constructed to resist the forces due
to wind pressure. Wind forces on the superstructure include
windward and leeward forces on vertical walls, uplift on the roof,
internal forces when openings allow wind to enter the house, and
upward force on the underside of the house when it is exposed. In
the design, the wind should be assumed to blow potentially from
any lateral direction relative to the house.
(3) Wind loading values used shall be those required by the Building
Code.
C. Foundation standards.
(1) The pilings or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water pressures acting
simultaneously on all building components. Foundations must be
designed to transfer safely to the underlying soil all loads due to
wind, water, dead load, live load and other loads (including uplift
due to wind and water).
(2) Spread footings and fill material shall not be used for structural
support of a new building or substantial improvement of an existing
structure.
D. Pile foundation design.
(1) The design ratio of pile spacing to pile diameter shall not be less
than 8:1 for individual piles. (This shall not apply to pile clusters
located below the design grade.) The maximum center-to-center
spacing of wood piles shall not be more than 12 feet on center
under load-bearing sills, beams, or girders.
§ 126-18 FIRE LANES § 126-18
123:205
(2) Pilings shall have adequate soil penetration (bearing capacity) to
resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift)
associated with the base flood acting simultaneously with typical
structure (live and dead) loads, and shall include consideration of
decreased resistance capacity caused by erosion of soil strata
surrounding the piles. The minimum penetration for foundation
piles is to an elevation of five feet below mean sea level (msl) datum
if the BFE is +10 msl or less, or to be at least 10 feet below msl if
the BFE is greater than +10 msl.
(3) Pile foundation analysis shall also include consideration of piles in
column action from the bottom of the structure to the stable soil
elevation of the site. Pilings may be horizontally or diagonally
braced to withstand wind and water forces.
(4) The minimum acceptable sizes for timber piles are a tip diameter of
eight inches for round timber piles and eight inches by eight inches
for square timber piles. All wood piles must be treated in
accordance with requirements of EPEE-C3 to minimize decay and
damage from fungus.
(5) Reinforced concrete piles shall be cast of concrete having a twentyeight-
day ultimate compressive strength of not less than 5,000
pounds per square inch, and shall be reinforced with a minimum of
four longitudinal steel bars having a combined area of not less than
1% nor more than 4% of the gross concrete area. Reinforcing for
precast piles shall have a concrete cover of not less than 1 1/4
inches for No. 5 bars and smaller and not less than 1 1/2 inches for
No. 6 through No. 11 bars. Reinforcement for piles cast in the field
shall have a concrete cover of not less than two inches.
(6) Piles shall be driven by means of a pile driver or drop hammer,
jetted, or augered into place.
(7) Additional support for piles in the form of bracing may include
lateral or diagonal bracing between piles.
(8) When necessary, piles shall be braced at the ground line in both
directions by a wood timber grade beam or a reinforced concrete
grade beam. These at-grade supports should be securely attached
to the piles to provide support even if scoured from beneath.
(9) Diagonal bracing between piles, consisting of two-inch by eightinch
(minimum) members bolted to the piles, shall be limited in
location to below the lowest supporting structural member and
above the stable soil elevation, and aligned in the vertical plane
along pile rows perpendicular to the shoreline. Galvanized steel
rods (minimum diameter 1/2 inch) or cable type bracing is
permitted in any plane.
(10) Knee braces, which stiffen both the upper portion of a pile and the
beam-to-pile connection, may be used along pile rows
§ 126-18 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-18
123:206
perpendicular and parallel to the shoreline. Knee braces shall be
two-by-eight lumber bolted to the sides of the pile/beam, or fourby-
four or larger braces framed into the pile/beam. Bolting shall
consist of two five-eighths-inch galvanized steel bolts (each end) for
two-by-eight members, or one five-eighths-inch lag bolt (each end)
for square members. Knee braces shall not extend more than three
feet below the elevation of the base flood.
E. Column foundation design. Masonry piers or poured-in-place concrete
piers shall be internally reinforced to resist vertical and lateral loads
and be connected with a movement-resisting connection to a pile cap or
pile shaft.
F. Connectors and fasteners. Galvanized metal connectors, wood
connectors, or bolts of size and number adequate for the calculated
loads must be used to connect adjoining components of a structure. Toe
nailing as a principal method of connection is not permitted. All metal
connectors and fasteners used in exposed locations shall be steel, hotdipped
galvanized after fabrication. Connectors in protected interior
locations shall be fabricated from galvanized sheet.
G. Beam to pile connections. The primary floor beams or girders shall span
the supports in the direction parallel to the flow of potential floodwater
and wave action and shall be fastened to the columns or pilings by
bolting, with or without cover plates. Concrete members shall be
connected by reinforcement, if cast in place, or (if precast) shall be
securely connected by bolting and welding. If sills, beams, or girders
are attached to wood piling at a notch, a minimum of two five-eighthsinch
galvanized steel bolts or two hot-dipped galvanized straps 3/16
inch by four inches by 18 inches, each bolted with two one-half-inch lag
bolts per beam member shall be used. Notching of pile tops shall be the
minimum sufficient to provide ledge support for beam members without
unduly weakening pile connections. Piling shall not be notched so that
the cross section is reduced below 50%.
H. Floor and deck connections.
(1) Wood two-by-four-inch (minimum) connectors or metal joist
anchors shall be used to tie floor joists to floor beams/girders.
These should be installed on alternate floor joists, at a minimum.
Cross bridging of all floor joists shall be provided. Such cross
bridging may be one-by-three-inch members, placed eight feet on
center maximum, or solid bridging of the same depth as joists at
the same spacing.
(2) Plywood should be used for subflooring and attic flooring to provide
good torsional resistance in the horizontal plane of the structure.
The plywood should not be less than 3/4 inch total thickness, and
should be exterior grade and fastened to beams or joists with 8d
annular or spiral thread galvanized nails. Such fastening shall be
§ 126-18 FIRE LANES § 126-18
123:207
supplemented by the application of waterproof industrial adhesive
applied to all bearing surfaces.
I. Exterior wall connections. All bottom plates shall have any required
breaks under a wall stud or an anchor bolt. Approved anchors will be
used to secure rafters or joists and top and bottom plates to studs in
exterior and bearing walls to form a continuous tie. Continuous fifteenthirty-
seconds-inch or thicker plywood sheathing, overlapping the top
wall plate and continuing down to the sill, beam, or girder, may be used
to provide the continuous tie. If the sheets of plywood are not vertically
continuous, then two-by-four nailer blocking shall be provided at all
horizontal joints. In lieu of the plywood, galvanized steel rods of onehalf-
inch diameter or galvanized steel straps not less than one inch wide
by 1/16 inch thick may be used to connect from the top wall plate to the
sill, beam, or girder. Washers with a minimum diameter of three inches
shall be used at each end of the one-half-inch round rods. These anchors
shall be installed no more than two feet from each corner rod, no more
than four feet on center.
J. Ceiling joist/rafter connections. All ceiling joists or rafters shall be
installed in such a manner that the joists provide a continuous tie
across the rafters. Ceiling joists and rafters shall be securely fastened
at their intersections. A metal or wood connector shall be used at
alternate ceiling joist/rafter connections to the wall top plate. Gable
roofs shall be additionally stabilized by installing two-by-four blocking
on two-foot centers between the rafters at each gable end. Blocking
shall be installed a minimum of eight feet toward the house interior
from each gable end.
K. Projecting members. All cantilevers and other projecting members
must be adequately supported and braced to withstand wind and water
uplift forces. Roof eave overhangs shall be limited to a maximum of two
feet and joist overhangs to a maximum of one foot. Larger overhangs
and porches will be permitted if designed or reviewed and certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect.
L. Roof sheathing.
(1) Plywood, or other wood material, when used as roof sheathing,
shall not be less than 15/32 inch in thickness, and shall be of
exterior sheathing grade or equivalent. All attaching devices for
sheathing and roof coverings shall be galvanized or be of other
suitable corrosion-resistant material.
(2) All corners, gable ends, and roof overhangs exceeding six inches
shall be reinforced by the application of waterproof industrial
adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces of any plywood sheet used
in the sheathing of such corner, gable end, or roof overhang.
(3) In addition, roofs should be sloped as steeply as practicable to
reduce uplift pressures, and special care should be used in
§ 126-18 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-18
123:208
§ 126-19. Nonresidential structures (except in coastal high-hazard
areas).
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 126-15B,
Subdivision proposals, and § 126-15C, Encroachments, and § 126-16,
Standards for all structures.
securing ridges, hips, valleys, eaves, vents, chimneys, and other
points of discontinuity in the roofing surface.
M. Protection of openings. All exterior glass panels, windows, and doors
shall be designed, detailed, and constructed to withstand loads due to
the design wind speed of 75 miles per hour. Connections for these
elements must be designed to transfer safely the design loads to the
supporting structure. Panel widths of multiple panel sliding glass doors
shall not exceed three feet.
N. Breakaway wall design standards.
(1) The breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of
not less than 10 and not more than 20 pounds per square foot, with
the criterion that the safety of the overall structure at the point of
wall failure be confirmed using established procedures. Grade
beams shall be installed in both directions for all piles considered
to carry the breakaway wall load. Knee braces are required for
front row piles that support breakaway walls.
(2) Use of breakaway wall strengths in excess of 20 pounds per square
foot shall not be permitted unless a registered professional
engineer or architect has developed or reviewed the structural
design and specifications for the building foundation and
breakaway wall components, and certifies that the breakaway walls
will fail under water loads less than those that would occur during
the base flood; and the elevated portion of the building and
supporting foundation system will not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components
(structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be
those required by the Building Code.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two, feet above the base flood elevation; or
§ 126-18 FIRE LANES § 126-19
123:209
§ 126-20. Nonresidential structures (in coastal high-hazard areas).
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components
located below the base flood elevation must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 126-16C.
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of Subsection
A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. In Zones V1-V30, VE and also Zone V if base flood elevations are
available, or in an area of moderate wave action, new construction and
substantial improvements of any nonresidential structure, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall have the bottom of
the lowest member of the lowest floor elevated to or above two feet
above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing of structures is not an
allowable alternative to elevating the lowest floor to two feet above the
base flood elevation in Zones V1-V30, VE and V.
B. Critical facilities. In order to prevent potential flood damage to certain
facilities that would result in serious danger to life and health, or
widespread social or economic dislocation, no new critical facility shall
be located within any area of special flood hazard, or within any fivehundred-
year flood zone shown as a B Zone or a Shaded X zone on the
Community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
§ 126-19 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-21
123:210
§ 126-21. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 126-15, General
standards, and § 126-16, Standards for all structures, apply as indicated in
areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
A. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE, AH,
V1-V30, V, and VE shall either be on site fewer than 180 consecutive
days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet the
requirements for manufactured homes in Subsection B, C and D. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30, V, and VE shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet
above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is
prohibited.
C. Within Zone A or V, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated
such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that
are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of
dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 126-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified). Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks
is prohibited.
§ 126-21 FIRE LANES § 126-21
123:211

ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 126-22. Appeals board.
A. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal
such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Appeals shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
§ 126-22 FIRE LANES § 126-22
123:213
§ 126-23. Conditions for variances.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood elevation, provided that the provisions
of § 126-22D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E, and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
§ 126-22 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 126-23
123:214
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing laws or
regulations.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
over the signature of a community official that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
lowest floor elevation.
§ 126-23 FIRE LANES § 126-23
123:215
Chapter 129
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 25.
Development of filled-in land — See Ch. 113.
Flood damage control — See Ch. 126.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 129-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act of
the Village of Great Neck Estates."
§ 129-2. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the public policy of the Village of Great Neck Estates
to preserve, protect and conserve freshwater wetlands and the benefits
derived therefrom, to prevent the despoliation and destruction of
freshwater wetlands, and to regulate the development of such wetlands
in order to secure the natural benefits of freshwater wetlands, consistent
with the general welfare and beneficial economic, social and agricultural
development of the Village. It is further declared to be the policy of the
Village of Great Neck Estates to exercise its authority pursuant to Article 24
of the State Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 129-3. Statement of findings.
A. The freshwater wetlands located in the Village of Great Neck Estates
are invaluable resources for flood protection, wildlife habitat, open
space and water resources.
B. Considerable acreage of freshwater wetlands in the Village has been
lost, despoiled or impaired by unregulated draining, dredging, filling,
excavating, building, pollution or other acts inconsistent with the
natural uses of such areas. Other freshwater wetlands are in jeopardy
of being lost, despoiled or impaired by such unregulated acts.
C. Recurrent flooding aggravated or caused by the loss of freshwater
wetlands has serious effects upon natural ecosystems.
D. Freshwater wetland conservation is a matter of Village concern.
E. Any loss of freshwater wetlands deprives the people of the Village of
Great Neck Estates of some or all of the many and multiple benefits to
be derived from wetlands, for example:
§ 126-23 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 129-3
129:216
§ 129-4. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the
meanings given herein:
ADJACENT AREA — Any land in the Village of Great Neck Estates
immediately adjacent to a freshwater wetland, lying within 200 feet,
measured horizontally, of the boundary of a freshwater wetland.
AGENCY — The Board of Trustees of the Village.
APPLICANT — Any person who files an application for any permit issued by
the agency pursuant to this chapter and includes the agent of the owner or
a contract vendee.
BOARD — The Freshwater Wetlands Appeals Board established by Article
24 of the State Environmental Conservation Law.
(1) Flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption and storage
capacity of freshwater wetlands.
(2) Wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting and feeding
grounds and cover for many forms of wildlife, wildfowl and
shorebirds, including migratory wildfowl and rare species.
(3) Protection of subsurface water resources and provision for
valuable watersheds and recharging groundwater supplies.
(4) Recreation by providing areas for hunting, fishing, boating, hiking,
bird watching, photography, camping and other uses.
(5) Pollution treatment by serving as biological and chemical oxidation
basins.
(6) Erosion control by serving as sedimentation areas and filtering
basins, absorbing silt and organic matter and protecting channels
and harbors.
(7) Education and scientific research by providing readily accessible
outdoor biophysical laboratories, living classrooms and training
and education resources.
(8) Open space and aesthetic appreciation.
(9) Sources of nutrients in freshwater food cycles and nursery grounds
and sanctuaries for freshwater fish.
F. Regulation of freshwater wetlands, in accordance with the agricultural
exemption established in § 129-5 hereof, is consistent with the
legitimate interests of farmers and other landowners to graze and
water livestock, make reasonable use of water resources, harvest
natural products of the wetlands, selectively cut timber and otherwise
engage in the use of land for agricultural production.
§ 129-3 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 129-4
129:217
BOUNDARIES OF A FRESHWATER WETLAND — The outer limit of the
vegetation specified in Subsections A and B of the definition of "freshwater
wetlands" of this section and of the waters specified in Subsection C of said
definition.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — Lands and waters lying within the boundaries
of the Village, as shown on a freshwater wetlands map, which contain any
or all of the following:
Lands and submerged lands, commonly called marshes, swamps,
sloughs, bogs and flats, supporting aquatic or semiaquatic vegetation
of the following vegetative types:
Wetland trees, which depend upon seasonal or permanent flooding
or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other trees, including, among others, red maple
(Acer rubrum), willows (Salix spp.), black spruce (Picea mariana),
swamp white oak (Quercus bicolor), red ash (Fraxinus
pennsylvanica), American elm (Ulmus americana) and larch (Larix
laricina).
(1)
Wetland shrubs, which depend upon seasonal or permanent
flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other shrubs, including, among others, alder (Alnus
spp.), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bog rosemary
(Andromeda glaucophylla) and leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne
calyculata).
(2)
Emergent vegetation, including, among others, cattails (Typha
spp.), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), bulrushes (Scirpus spp.),
arrow-arum (Peltandra virginica), arrowheads (Sagittaria spp.),
reed (Phragmites communis), wild rice (Zizania aquatica), bur
reeds (Sparganium spp.), purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria),
swamp loosestrife (Decodon verticillatus) and water plantain
(Alisma plantago-aquatica).
(3)
Rooted, floating-leaved vegetation, including, among others, waterlily
(Nymphae odorata), water shield (Brasenia schreberi) and
spatterdock (Nuphar spp.).
(4)
Free-floating vegetation, including, among others, duckweed
(Lemna spp.), big duckweed (Spirodela polyrhiza) and watermeal
(Wolffia spp.).
(5)
Wet meadow vegetation, which depends upon seasonal or
permanent flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give it a
competitive advantage over other open land vegetation, including,
among others, sedges (Carex spp.), rushes (Juncus spp.). cattails
(Typha spp.), rice cut-grass (Leersia oryzoides), reed canary grass
(Phalaris arundinacea), swamp loosestrife (Decodon verticillatus)
and spikerush (Eleocharis spp.).
(6)
A.
§ 129-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 129-4
129:218
FRESHWATER WETLANDS MAP — A map on which are indicated the
boundaries of any freshwater wetland and which has been filed with the
Clerk of the Village by the State Department of Environmental Conservation
pursuant to § 24-0301 of the State Environmental Conservation Law.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT — A city, county, town or village.
PARTY IN INTEREST — The applicant, the agency, the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, each local government in which the regulated
activity or any part thereof is located and any person who appears and
wishes to be a party in interest at the public hearing held pursuant to
§ 129-7 of this chapter.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, trust, estate,
one or more individuals and any unit of government or agency or
subdivision thereof.
POLLUTION — The presence in the environment of human-induced
conditions or contaminants in quantities or characteristics which are or may
be injurious to humans, plants, animals or property.
PROJECT — Any action which may result in direct or indirect physical
impact on a freshwater wetland, including but not limited to any regulated
activity.
Bog mat vegetation, including, among others, sphagnum mosses
(Sphagnum spp.), bog rosemary (Andromeda glaucophylla),
leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne calyculata), pitcher plant (Sarracenia
purpurea) and cranberries (Vaccinium macrocarpon and Vaccinium
oxycoccus).
(7)
Submergent vegetation, including, among others, pondweeds
(Potamogeton spp.), naiads (Najas spp.), bladderworts (Ultricularia
spp.), wild celery (Vallisneria americana), coontail (Ceratophyllum
demersum), water milfoils (Myriophyllum spp.), muskgrass (Chara
spp.), stonewort (Nitella spp.), waterweeds (Elodea spp.) and water
smartweed (Polygonum amphibium).
(8)
Lands and submerged lands containing remnants of any vegetation that
is not aquatic or semiaquatic that has died because of wet conditions
over a sufficiently long period, provided that such wet conditions do
not exceed a maximum seasonal water depth of six feet, and provided
further that such conditions can be expected to persist indefinitely,
barring human intervention.
B.
Lands and water enclosed by aquatic or semiaquatic vegetation as
set forth herein in Subsection A and dead vegetation as set forth
in Subsection B, the regulation of which is necessary to protect and
preserve the aquatic and semiaquatic vegetation.
C.
The waters overlying the areas as set forth in Subsections A and B and
the lands underlying as set forth in Subsection C.
D.
§ 129-4 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 129-4
129:219
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any form of draining, dredging, excavation or
removal of soil, mud, sand, shells, gravel or other aggregate from any
freshwater wetland, either directly or indirectly; any form of dumping,
filling or depositing of any soil, stones, sand, gravel, mud, rubbish or fill
of any kind, either directly or indirectly; erecting any structure or roads,
the driving of pilings or placing of any other obstructions whether or not
changing the ebb and flow of the water; any form of pollution, including but
not limited to installing a septic tank, running a sewer outfall or discharging
sewage treatment effluent or other liquid wastes directly into or so as to
drain into a freshwater wetland; that portion of any subdivision of land that
involves any land in any freshwater wetland or adjacent area; and any other
activity which substantially impairs any of the several functions served by
freshwater wetlands or the benefits derived therefrom which are set forth
in § 129-3 of this chapter.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — The annual or periodic removal of trees,
individually or in small groups, in order to realize the yield and establish
a new crop and to improve the forest, which removal does not involve the
total elimination of one or more particular species of trees.
STATE — The State of New York.
STATE AGENCY — Any state department, bureau, commission, board or
other agency, public authority or public benefit corporation.
SUBDIVISION OF LAND — Any division of land, including any grading,
road construction, installation of utilities or other improvements or any
other land use and development preparatory or incidental to any such
division, into two or more lots, parcels or sites, whether adjoining or not,
for the purpose of sale, lease, license or any form of separate ownership
or occupancy, by any person or by any other person controlled by, under
common control with or controlling such person or by any group of persons
acting in concert as part of a common scheme or plan. "Subdivision of land"
shall include any map, plat or other plan of division of land, whether or
not previously filed. "Subdivision of land" shall not include the lease of land
for hunting and fishing and other open space recreation uses and shall not
include the division of land by bona fide gift, devise or inheritance.
VILLAGE — The Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 129-5. Permit required; exceptions.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no person shall
conduct a regulated activity on any freshwater wetland or adjacent area
unless such person has first obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter.
B. No permit under this chapter shall be required for:
(1) The deposition or removal of the natural products of freshwater
wetlands and adjacent areas by recreational or commercial fishing,
shellfishing, aquiculture, hunting or trapping where otherwise
legally permitted and regulated.
§ 129-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 129-5
129:220
§ 129-6. Application for permit; processing.
(2) The activities of farmers and other landowners in grazing and
watering livestock, making reasonable use of water resources,
harvesting natural products of wetlands or adjacent areas,
selective cutting of timber, draining land or wetlands for growing
agricultural products and otherwise engaging in the use of
wetlands or other land for growing agricultural products, except
that structures are not required for enhancement or maintenance
of the agricultural productivity of the land, and any filling activities
shall not be excluded hereunder. Each farmer or other landowner
who intends to conduct an otherwise regulated activity shall notify
the agency in writing, prior to conducting the activity, of his or her
intention to engage in such activity, stating the approximate
acreage of freshwater wetland or adjacent area affected, the
location thereof, the methods to be employed and the uses to be
made of such land. A soil and water conservation plan prepared by
a Soil and Water Conservation District and filed with the agency
shall be deemed sufficient notification for the purposes of this
subsection.
(3) Public health activities, orders and regulations of the Nassau
County Department of Health undertaken in compliance with
§ 24-0701(5) of the State Environmental Conservation Law.
(4) Activities authorized pursuant to determination of the New York
State Public Service Commission or other state agency pursuant to
the Public Service Law.61
(5) Any actual and ongoing emergency activity which is immediately
necessary for the protection and preservation of life or property or
the protection or preservation of natural resource values. Such
emergency activities include, for example, search and rescue
operations; preventive or remedial activities related to large-scale
contamination of streams or other bodies of water; floods,
hurricanes and other storms; and public health concerns. Within
five days of the end of such an emergency involving the
undertaking of any activity which otherwise would be treated as a
regulated activity under this chapter, the person chiefly responsible
for undertaking such emergency activity shall send a written
statement to the agency, setting forth the pertinent facts regarding
such emergency, including an explanation of the life, property or
resource values such activity was designed to protect or preserve.
(6) Any activity located in a freshwater wetland where such wetland is
located in more than one local government.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 129-5 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 129-6
129:221
A. Any person proposing to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated
activity requiring a permit under this chapter upon any freshwater
wetland or adjacent area shall file an application for a permit with the
Clerk of the Village. The Clerk shall immediately forward such
application to the agency.
B. Application requirements.
(1) An application for a permit shall be filed by the applicant on a form
prescribed by the agency. Such application shall set forth the
purpose, character and extent of the proposed regulated activity.
The application shall include a detailed description of the regulated
activity, a map showing the area of freshwater wetland or adjacent
area directly affected with the location of the proposed regulated
activity thereon, a deed or other legal description describing the
subject property and such additional information as the agency
deems sufficient to enable it to make the findings and
determinations required under this chapter.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by a list of the names of the
owners of record of lands adjacent to the freshwater wetland or
adjacent area upon which the project is to be undertaken and the
names of known claimants of water rights, of whom the applicant
has notice, which relate to any land within, or within 200 feet of the
boundary of, the property on which the proposed regulated activity
will be located.
(3) An application shall not be deemed to be completed or received
until the Agency determines that all such information, including
any additional information requested, has been supplied in a
complete and satisfactory form.
C. The Clerk of the Village shall cause a copy of such completed
application to be mailed to all local governments where the proposed
activity or any part thereof is located.
D. Notice of application.
(1) Within five days of the receipt of a completed application for a
permit regarding a proposed regulated activity, the agency shall
provide the applicant with a notice of application, which the
applicant shall publish at his or her own expense at least once in
each of at least two newspapers having a general circulation in the
Village.
(2) Said notice of application shall be in a form prescribed by the
agency and shall specify:
(a) That persons wishing to object to the application should file a
notice of objection by a specified date, together with a
statement of the precise grounds of objection to the
application, with the agency.
§ 129-6 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 129-6
129:222
(b) That if no notices of objection are timely filed or if the agency
determines that the proposed activity is of such a minor nature
as to not affect or endanger the balance of systems within any
freshwater wetland, then the agency, in its discretion, may
determine that a hearing is not necessary and dispense with
the public hearing.
(c) That the application, including all documents and maps
therewith, is available for public inspection at the office of the
Clerk of the Village.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the agency
may in its discretion dispense with the requirement for a notice of
application and require a notice of hearing pursuant to Subsection
F of this section.
E. Public hearing.
(1) No sooner than 30 days and not later than 60 days after its receipt
of a completed application for a permit regarding a proposed
regulated activity, and after the publication of a notice of
application pursuant to Subsection D of this section, the agency
shall hold a public hearing on such application at a suitable location
in the Village, which hearing shall be held pursuant to the
provisions of § 129-7 of this chapter.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E(1) of this section,
where no notice of objection to the notice of application published
pursuant to Subsection D of this section shall have been filed within
the time specified by that notice or where the agency determines
that the proposed activity is of such a minor nature as not to affect
or endanger the balance of systems within any freshwater wetland,
the agency may, in its discretion, dispense with such hearing.
Where the agency finds that a public hearing is not necessary, it
shall publish a decision setting forth its reasons therefor, which
decision shall be a matter of public record and shall be mailed to
each local government where the proposed regulated activity or
any part thereof will be located. Public notice of such decision that
a public hearing is not necessary shall be provided in the same
manner as notice of application set forth in Subsection D of this
section.
F. Notice of hearing.
(1) The agency shall, within 21 days of receipt of a completed
application, provide the applicant with a notice of hearing, which
the applicant shall publish at his or her own expense, at least 15
days prior to the date set for the hearing, at least once in each of at
least two newspapers of general circulation in the Village.
(2) At least 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing the agency
shall, by certified mail, provide a notice of hearing to each local
§ 129-6 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 129-6
129:223
government within whose boundaries the proposed regulated
activity or any portion thereof will be located.
(3) At least 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing the agency
shall, by certified mail, provide notice of hearing to all owners of
record of land adjacent to the affected freshwater wetland or
adjacent area and to all known claimants of water rights, of whom
the applicant has notice, which relate to any land within, or within
100 feet of the boundary of, the property on which the proposed
regulated activity will be located.
(4) The notice of hearing shall:
(a) State the name of the applicant.
(b) Specify the location and outline the scope of the proposed
regulated activity.
(c) Specify the date, time and place of the public hearing on the
application.
(d) Specify that persons wishing to be parties in interest and
eligible to be heard at such public hearing, if any, should file a
notice of appearance by a specified date, together with a
statement of the precise grounds of support of, opposition to or
interest in the application, with the agency.
(e) Specify that any person who wishes to be a party in interest
without filing a notice of appearance may do so by appearing at
the public hearing and indicating his or her desire to be a party
in interest, if a public hearing is held.
(f) Specify that, if no notices of appearance are timely filed by any
party in interest and if the applicant waives any public hearing,
then the public hearing may be canceled by the agency.
(g) Specify that the application, including all documents and maps
therewith, is available for public inspection at the office of the
Clerk of the Village.
G. The agency shall make the application, including all documents and
maps associated with it, available for public inspection at the office of
the Clerk of the Village.
H. If no timely notice of appearance has been filed as provided in the
notice of hearing published pursuant to Subsection F of this section and
the applicant waives in writing any public hearing on his or her
application, the agency may dispense with a public hearing and in such
instance shall provide public notice of the cancellation of the hearing.
I. For any notice canceling a hearing which has been scheduled, notice
shall be given on the same basis as the notice of public hearing
provided in Subsection F of this section.
§ 129-6 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 129-6
129:224
§ 129-7. Public hearing on permit application.
§ 129-8. Decision on permit application.
J. The agency may establish permit fees to assist in its implementation of
this chapter.
A. Any public hearing held on a permit application received under this
chapter shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the
agency. The hearing officer shall have full authority to control the
conduct and procedure of the hearing and shall be responsible that a
complete record of the hearing be kept. The public hearing shall be held
within the Village.
B. Appearance of parties in interest.
(1) Any person may appear as a party in interest, notwithstanding the
failure of such person to file a timely notice of appearance, by
appearing at the hearing and making known his or her desire to be
a party in interest. Persons who are not parties in interest may be
allowed to participate in the hearing where the hearing officer finds
that such participation would be in the public interest.
(2) All parties in interest shall be afforded an opportunity to present
oral and written arguments on issues of law and policy and an
opportunity to call witnesses in their behalf and to present oral and
written evidence on issues of fact. The hearing officer shall permit
the parties in interest to cross-examine witnesses but may limit
such cross-examination to avoid the introduction of irrelevant or
repetitious material in the record of the hearing.
A. Where a public hearing has been held regarding a permit application,
the agency shall either issue the permit requested, with or without
conditions, or deny the application. The decision by the agency to issue
or deny a permit after public hearing shall be based on the record of the
hearing and shall be made in writing within 30 days of the agency's
receipt of the hearing record.
B. Where no public hearing regarding a permit application has been held,
either because a hearing was determined not to be necessary pursuant
to § 129-6E(2) of this chapter or because no notice of appearance was
filed with regard to the public hearing and a hearing was canceled
pursuant to § 129-6H of this chapter, the agency shall compile an
official file consisting of documents submitted by the applicant and any
additional documents relied on by the agency with respect to the
application. The agency may also take notice of general, technical or
scientific facts within the specialized knowledge of the agency. Any
document made part of such official file shall be available for inspection
by the applicant and any interested member of the public. On the basis
of such file, the agency shall either issue the permit requested, with or
§ 129-6 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 129-8
129:225
§ 129-9. Standards for permit decisions.
without conditions, deny the application or order a public hearing to be
held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The decision by the agency to issue or deny a permit or to order that a
hearing be held shall be based on the official file and shall be made in
writing within 30 days of its completion of the official file and in any
event within 60 days of its receipt of a completed application, provided
that, in the case where there have been no objections filed regarding a
proposed project, the issuance of a permit shall be deemed to be a
written decision by the agency.
D. A copy of the decision of the agency on each application for a permit
under this chapter shall be mailed by the agency as soon as practicable
following such decision to the applicant and to each local government
within whose boundaries the proposed regulated activity or any portion
thereof is located and, if a public hearing has been held regarding the
application, to each party in interest.
A. In granting, denying or conditioning any permit, the agency shall
consider the effect of the proposed activity with reference to the public
health and welfare, fishing, flood, hurricane and storm dangers and
protection or enhancement of the several functions of the freshwater
wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom which are set forth in
§ 129-3 of this chapter.
B. Standards.
(1) No permit shall be issued by the agency pursuant to this chapter
unless the agency shall find that:
(a) The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the policy of
this chapter to preserve, protect and conserve freshwater
wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom, to prevent the
despoliation and destruction of freshwater wetlands and to
regulate the development of such wetlands in order to secure
the natural benefits of freshwater wetlands, consistent with
the general welfare and beneficial economic, social and
agricultural development of the Village.
(b) The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the land use
regulations application in the Village pursuant to § 24-0903 of
Article 24 of the State Environmental Conservation Law.
(c) The proposed regulated activity is compatible with the public
health and welfare.
(d) The proposed regulated activity is reasonable and necessary.
§ 129-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 129-9
129:226
§ 129-10. Permit conditions.
§ 129-11. General powers of the agency.
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the agency
shall have the following powers:
(e) There is no reasonable alternative for the proposed regulated
activity on a site which is not a freshwater wetland or adjacent
area.
(2) The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the
proposed regulated activity will be in accord with the standards set
forth in this subsection.
C. Duly filed written notice, by the state or any agency or subdivision
thereof, to the agency, that the state or any such agency or subdivision
is in the process of acquiring the affected freshwater wetland on which
a proposed regulated activity would be located by negotiation or
condemnation shall be sufficient basis for denial of a permit for such
regulated activity. Such notice may be provided at any time prior to the
agency's decision to issue or deny a permit for the regulated activity.
A. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be issued with
conditions. Such conditions may be attached as are necessary to assure
the preservation and protection of affected freshwater wetlands and to
assure compliance with the policy and provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of the agency's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter.
B. Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following
conditions:
(1) The agency shall have the right to inspect the project from time to
time.
(2) The permit shall expire on a date certain.
(3) The permit holder shall notify the agency of the date on which
project construction is to begin, at least five days in advance of
such date.
(4) The agency's permit shall be prominently displayed at the project
site during the undertaking of the activities authorized by the
permit.
C. The agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application, its findings and reasons for all conditions attached
to any permit.
A. To appoint officers, agents, employees and prescribe their duties and
qualifications and fix their compensation.
§ 129-9 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 129-11
129:227
§ 129-12. Other laws and regulations.
§ 129-13. Bonding requirements.
§ 129-14. Suspension or revocation of permit.
B. To adopt, amend and repeal, after public hearing (except in the case of
rules and regulations that relate to the organization or internal
management of the agency), such rules and regulations, consistent with
this chapter, as it deems necessary to administer this chapter and to do
any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purpose and
policies of this chapter.
C. To contract for professional and technical assistance and advice.
D. To hold hearings and subpoena witnesses in the exercise of its powers,
functions and duties provided for by this chapter.
A. To the greatest extent practicable, any public hearing held pursuant to
§ 129-7 of this chapter shall be incorporated with any public hearing
required by or pursuant to the New York State Town Law, Village Law,
General City Law, General Municipal Law or Environmental
Conservation Law relating to approvals or permits otherwise required
for the undertaking of regulated activities on the freshwater wetland or
adjacent area in question.
B. No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall remove any person's
obligation to comply in all respects with the applicable provisions of any
other federal, state or local law or regulation, including but not limited
to the acquisition of any other required permit or approval.
A. The agency may require that, prior to commencement of work under
any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall post a
bond with the agency, in an amount determined by the agency,
conditioned upon the faithful compliance with the terms of such permit
and for the indemnification of the Village for restoration costs resulting
from failure to so comply. Such bond shall be issued by a corporate
surety authorized to do business in the state and shall be in favor of the
Village. It shall remain in effect until the agency certifies that the work
has been completed in compliance with the terms of the permit or the
bond is released by the agency or a substitute bond is provided.
B. The agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application, its findings and reasons for imposing a bond
pursuant to this section.
A. The agency may suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter where it finds that the permittee has not complied with any or
all terms of such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in the
permit or has failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in
the application.
§ 129-11 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 129-14
129:228
§ 129-15. Penalties for offenses.
Administration sanctions. Any person who violates, disobeys or disregards
any provision of this chapter, including any provision of any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by the agency
pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable to the people of the state for a civil
penalty of not to exceed $3,000 for every such violation, to be assessed,
after a hearing or opportunity to be heard upon due notice and with the
rights to specification of the charges and representation by counsel at such
hearing, by the agency. Such penalty may be recovered in an action brought
by the Attorney General at the request and in the name of the agency in
any court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil penalty may be released or
compromised by the agency before the matter has been referred to the
Attorney General, and such penalty may be released or compromised and
any action commenced to recover the same may be settled and discontinued
by the Attorney General with the consent of the agency. In addition, the
agency shall have the power, following a hearing held in conformance
with the procedures set forth in § 71-1709 of the State Environmental
Conservation Law, to direct the violator to cease his or her violation of this
chapter and to restore the affected freshwater wetland to its condition prior
to the violation, insofar as that is possible within a reasonable time and
under the supervision of the agency. Any such order of the agency shall be
enforceable in an action brought by the Attorney General at the request and
in the name of the agency in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any civil
penalty or order issued by the agency pursuant to this subsection shall be
reviewable in a proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the State Civil Practice
Law and Rules.62
§ 129-16. Enforcement.
§ 129-17. Review and appeal.
B. The agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application, its findings and reasons for revoking or suspending
a permit pursuant to this section.
A. The Attorney General, upon his or her own initiative or upon complaint
of the agency, shall prosecute persons alleged to have violated any such
order of the agency pursuant to this chapter.
B. The agency shall have the right to seek equitable relief to restrain any
violation or threatened violation of any provisions of this chapter.
A. Any decision or order of the agency or any officer or employee thereof
made pursuant to or within the scope of this chapter may be reviewed
at the instance of any person affected thereby, including but not limited
to any owner of the affected wetland or adjacent area and any resident
or citizen of the Village, by the Board in accordance with Title 11 of
62.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Criminal sanctions, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 129-14 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 129-17
129:229
§ 129-18. Provisions effective upon filing of map.
This chapter shall take effect upon the filing with the Clerk of the Village
of the final freshwater wetlands map by the State Department of
Environmental Conservation pursuant to § 24-0301 of the New York State
Environmental Conservation Law applicable to any or all lands within the
Village.
Chapter 133
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 133-1. Games of chance restricted.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person
shall operate or conduct a game of chance within the Village of Great
Neck Estates. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "game of chance"
shall mean and include specific games of chance, in which prizes are
Article 24 of the State Environmental Conservation Law, provided that
such review is commenced by the filing with the Board of a notice of
review within 30 days after service of such order or notice of such
decision given, as the case may be.
B. Any party to any proceeding before the agency may make an appeal to
the Board in accordance with Title 11 of Article 24 of the State
Environmental Conservation Law from any order or decision of the
agency or any officer or employee thereof issued or made pursuant to or
within the scope of this chapter, provided that such appeal is
commenced by the filing with the Board of a notice of appeal within 30
days after service of such order or after notice of such decision given,
as the case may be.
C. Any decision or order of the agency or any officer or employee thereof
made pursuant to or within the scope of this chapter may be reviewed
at the instance of any person, including but not limited to any owner of
the affected wetland or adjacent area and any resident or citizen of the
Village, in accordance with Article 78 of the State Civil Practice Law
and Rules, provided that such review is commenced within 30 days of
the filing of such decision or order; and the limitation upon the
availability of such remedy as prescribed in § 7801 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules shall not be applicable to the applications for review of
determinations and orders made pursuant to this chapter.
D. The institution of a judicial proceeding to review a determination or
order of the agency shall preclude the institution of a proceeding before
the Board to review such a determination or order. The availability of
such review by the Board shall not affect the right of any person to seek
review of a determination of the agency as provided in Article 78 of the
State Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 129-17 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 133-1
133:230
awarded on the basis of a designated winning number or numbers, color or
colors, symbol or symbols determined by chance, but not including games
commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto," which are controlled under Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, and also
not including slot machines, bookmaking and policy or numbers games, as
defined in § 225.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
§ 133-2. When effective.
This chapter shall not take effect unless and until a proposition therefor
submitted at the next general election of village officers shall be approved
by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon. Upon
approval by said electors, this chapter shall be effective immediately upon
filing pursuant to § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.63
Chapter 136
GARDENERS AND LANDSCAPERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109. Property maintenance — See Ch. 167.
§ 136-1. License required. [Amended 5-12-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
Except as provided herein, all persons, companies or corporations,
collectively referred to as "landscaper," who perform any gardening or
landscaping functions in the Village of Great Neck Estates shall be licensed
in accordance with this chapter. Landscaping functions may be performed
without a license by the owner or occupant of property on which the work
is being performed, or by the agent or employee of such owner or occupant.
§ 136-2. Regulated activities defined.
For purposes of this chapter, a "landscaping function" shall include but
is not limited to the cultivation, fertilization, seeding, planting, cutting,
trimming, pruning or maintenance of grass, shrubs, plants, trees or other
foliage.
§ 136-3. Work done without license prohibited; responsibility for
license.
No landscaper shall perform any landscaping function within the Village
without first obtaining a license to do so from the Village. All landscaping
work by an unlicensed landscaper is hereby prohibited. No property owner
or occupant shall cause or permit any unlicensed landscaper to perform any
63.Editor's Note: The proposition for approval of L.L. No. 1-1977 was submitted to the
electors and was passed at the general village election 3-15-1977.
§ 133-1 GARDENERS AND LANDSCAPERS § 136-3
136:231
landscaping function on his or her property. Licenses shall be obtained by
the proprietor or corporate officer of the landscaping business.
§ 136-4. Application procedure.
Any landscaper desiring a license required by this chapter shall make
application on forms prescribed by the Village Clerk.
§ 136-5. Fees.64
Each applicant for a license shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee with the
application. A license fee shall be paid upon issuance of the license. The
application filing fee and license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 109,
Fees.
§ 136-6. Expiration of license; renewal.65
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the last day of
December in the year in which they have been issued. Licenses may be
renewed upon payment of an annual fee, as set forth in Chapter 109, Fees,
before February 1 of the next year. If the licensee fails to make proper
timely application for renewal, he shall be required to reapply and pay the
additional license fee, as described in § 136-5.
§ 136-7. General regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall apply, in addition to all other
applicable laws:
A. No licensee shall cause or permit anyone to blow or rake leaves, grass
or other debris onto the public highway or right-of-way or onto
adjoining property. As a precondition to the issuance of a license, a
landscaper will be required to furnish proof that he, she or it has a
permit to deposit leaves, grass clippings and other debris at a duly
licensed depository.
B. No licensee shall cause or permit anyone to spill or dump oil, gasoline
or other petroleum products or any pesticides on the public highway or
right-of-way or anywhere on the ground. No equipment shall be filled or
refilled except over a drop cloth or other device designed to catch and
retain any accidental spillage.
C. No licensee shall cause or permit anyone to remove any tree in violation
of Chapter 213, Trees, of this Code nor operate machinery in violation
of Chapter 154 of this Code.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 136-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 136-7
136:232
§ 136-8. Penalties for offenses.
Each and every violation of any provision of this chapter or of any of
the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall be punishable as
provided by law.
§ 136-9. Revocation or suspension of license.
In addition to the penalties set forth in § 136-8, the Board of Trustees may
revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to this chapter after notice
to the licensee and a reasonable opportunity for the licensee to be heard.
The Board of Trustees may take such action if, in its discretion, such action
is warranted due to the licensee's deliberate or willful disregard of the
standards imposed by this chapter or by any other village, county, state or
federal law, or due to two or more violations of this chapter or any other
law.
§ 136-10. Display of license or decal.
Each vehicle used for landscaping functions in the Village shall prominently
display a decal provided by the Village. The fee for each such decal shall be
established by the Board of Trustees.
§ 136-11. Review procedure.
Any review of the revocation of any license shall be pursuant to Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
Chapter 142
MECHANICAL BUCKING DEVICES
§ 142-1. Legislative intent.
It is the duty of the Village of Great Neck Estates to protect and preserve
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village. In furtherance
of that duty, the Village has investigated and found that the use of
mechanical bucking devices, commonly referred to as "mechanical bulls,"
has caused and is capable of causing severe personal injury to the user
thereof. The Village hereby declares that it is the intent of this chapter to
D. All work shall be performed in accordance with the laws, ordinances
and rules and regulations of the United States, New York State, Nassau
County and the Village. Every applicant for a license shall review the
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall so state
that the applicant and all of its employees are familiar with such prior to
the issuance of any license.
E. The Board of Trustees may promulgate or amend, by resolution, such
additional rules and regulations as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 136-7 MECHANICAL BUCKING DEVICES § 142-1
142:233
protect the residents of the Village from the dangers inherent in the use of
mechanical bucking devices.
§ 142-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MECHANICAL BUCKING DEVICE — Any mechanically operated machine,
apparatus, contrivance or device, the design or purpose of which is to
simulate or copy the movement of a steer, bull or other animal, whether
or not the same has been constructed in the shape, form and likeness of a
steer, bull or other animal, upon which a person or persons is or are seated
as a rider or riders and which machine, apparatus, contrivance or device is
operated or operates in a vibrating, pulsating, jerking, bucking or similar
fashion in order to or in an attempt to dislodge, unseat or expel the rider or
riders.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association or corporation that is
an owner, landlord, lessee, tenant, occupant or operator, or an executor,
administrator, trustee or other legal representative of an owner, landlord,
lessee, tenant, occupant or operator, of any public place as defined herein.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place available to or used by the general public,
whether or not an admission fee is charged, including but not limited to
restaurants, discotheques, cabarets, bars, social clubs, amusement parks,
penny arcades, game rooms and other similar establishments.
§ 142-3. Devices prohibited.
No mechanical bucking device shall be installed, operated or used in any
public place, whether or not a fee is charged for the operation or use
thereof.66
Chapter 146
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances by dogs and other animals — See
Ch. 86.
Abandoned property — See Ch. 164.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 167.
66.Editor's Note: Former § 83-4, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 142-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 146-1
146:234
§ 146-1. Filing of complaint; service of notice; hearing; failure to
comply.
In case any resident of the Village of Great Neck Estates shall file a
complaint, in writing, with the Village Clerk, alleging that there exists on
the property of another, or through the act or neglect of another, conditions
which constitute a public nuisance or which endanger or tend to endanger
the property, safety or health of any inhabitant of the Village or the peace
and good order of the Village or the public health of the Village, the Village
Clerk shall cause such complaint to be investigated and shall submit the
same together with a written report of his findings to the Board of Trustees
at its next regular meeting or at a special meeting called for the purpose.
The Board of Trustees may direct that the person or persons owning or
occupying the premises upon which such conditions exist, or the person or
persons believed to be responsible for the alleged conditions, shall appear
before the Board of Trustees at the time and place designated and show
cause why such conditions should not be abated or corrected. Such notice
may be served either personally or by registered mail or in the same
manner as a precept in summary dispossess proceedings. At the time and
place designated, the Board of Trustees shall meet and hear the persons
interested and may make such investigations and inquiries as the Board
may determine. Thereupon, the Board of Trustees may, by resolution, make
such orders and directions as may seem necessary or proper under the
circumstances. The failure of the person or persons to whom such notice
has been sent to appear shall be deemed an admission of the truth of the
allegations and a consent to such action by the Board of Trustees. The
failure of any person to comply with the provisions of such orders and
directions shall constitute a violation of this chapter.67
Chapter 148
PARADES AND GATHERINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 154.
Permits and approvals — See Ch. 160.
Streets, sidewalks and public property — See
Ch. 191.
§ 148-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARADE — Any gathering or procession consisting of people, animals or
vehicles, or any combination thereof, upon any public property, roadway,
67.Editor's Note: Former § 87-2, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 146-1 NUISANCES § 148-1
146:235
street, sidewalk or alley that will affect the ordinary use of such public
property, roadway, street, sidewalk or alley.
§ 148-2. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 148-3. Permit application.
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained pursuant to this
chapter.
B. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in
academic activities.
A. Application required. Any person or organization seeking issuance of a
parade permit shall file a written application with the Village Clerk in
conformity with the requirements of this section.
B. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Village Clerk not less than 20 business days prior to the first date on
which the parade is proposed to take place. Upon good cause shown for
late filing, and provided that sufficient time is available for the Village
to review the application and act upon the same in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Village Clerk may accept any application
which is filed before the first date such parade is proposed to be
conducted. [Amended 4-8-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
C. Fee. The fee for a parade permit application, in an amount fixed by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, shall be paid at the time of filing the
permit application. An additional fee, in an amount fixed by resolution
of the Board of Trustees, shall be paid upon issuance of a parade
permit.
D. Insurance. The application shall include documentation of an approved
surety indemnity bond or approved comprehensive liability insurance
policy, or endorsement to such policy, naming the Village as an
additional insured. Such insurance requirement shall be in a principal
amount not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit, and shall be
issued an insurer licensed to do business in the State of New York and
having a Best rating of not less than A, or equivalent. The Village shall
not be deemed to have assessed the risks that may be applicable to the
event, and each permittee shall be responsible for assessing the risks of
the event and obtaining additional insurance coverage for itself if
appropriate and prudent.
E. Contents of application. Each application for a parade permit shall
contain the following information, at a minimum:
§ 148-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 148-3
146:236
§ 148-4. Issuance of permit.
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person or entity
seeking to conduct such parade. If the proposed parade is to be
conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name,
address and telephone number of the office of the organization, and
of the authorized and responsible officers or representatives of
such organization.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will
serve as agent of the organization with respect to the proposed
parade and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(3) The date(s) and times when the proposed parade will be conducted.
(4) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(5) The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which
will constitute such parade, the type of animals and a description of
the vehicles.
(6) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(7) The location of any assembly areas for such parade.
(8) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(9) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
(10) If the parade is to be held by and on behalf of or for any person or
entity other than the applicant, the application shall include the
written consent from the person or entity proposing to hold the
parade, and the person or entity on whose behalf the parade is
proposed to be held.
(11) Whether the parade will involve the use of any device for the
reproduction or amplification of sound, and if so, a description of
each such device and the nature and extent of such reproduction or
amplification;
(12) The arrangements for disposal of waste materials generated or
discarded during the parade, and in the period of time immediately
preceding and following the parade;
(13) Any additional information which the Village Clerk or Mayor shall
find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.
§ 148-3 NUISANCES § 148-4
146:237
§ 148-5. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the approval or denial of a parade permit pursuant
to this chapter may appeal the determination to the Board of Trustees.
Such appeal shall be made in writing, within ten (10) days after such
determination. The Mayor shall have the right to participate in, and vote
with respect to, such appeal.
§ 148-6. Permit conditions.
Each parade permit shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
§ 148-7. Duties of permittee.
A. Upon receipt of a complete permit application, the Village Clerk
promptly shall transmit the same to the Mayor, or a person designated
by the Mayor for such purpose.
B. The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, shall issue a parade permit in
accordance with this chapter, unless such official determines that:
(1) The parade will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of other traffic;
(2) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles will unduly
interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance
service to the village;
(3) The application contains false information or incomplete
information of a substantive nature or otherwise fails to conform to
the requirements of this chapter;
(4) The applicant has not satisfied all the terms and conditions of the
permit, including proof of insurance.
A. The date(s) and starting and concluding time(s);
B. The public property which may be used in conjunction with the
proposed parade;
C. Such other conditions as the issuing official may determine are
reasonable and necessary to preserve public order, to protect public
property, and to preserve the health, safety and general welfare,
including restrictions on the use of sound amplifying devices.
A. A permittee shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and
with all applicable laws and regulations;
B. A permittee shall be responsible to inform all participants in the parade
of the terms and conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of
such parade, and shall be responsible in the event any participant fails
to comply with a condition of the permit;
§ 148-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 148-7
146:238
§ 148-8. Parking regulations.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to
prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a public street or roadway,
or part thereof, constituting all or part of the route of a parade. The Chief
of Police may direct that appropriate signs be posted to such effect, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof of any such parking restriction.
§ 148-9. Revocation.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be temporary and shall
not vest any permanent rights in the permittee. The Mayor may revoke a
parade permit based upon emergency conditions, or failure of the permittee
to abide by the conditions of the permit. Revocation of a parade permit may
be appealed to the Board of Trustees by the same process as provided for
an appeal from the issuance or denial of a permit.
§ 148-10. Funeral and memorial demonstrations. [Added 5-14-2012
by L.L. No. 4-2012]
C. The permittee shall carry the parade permit upon the permittee's
person at all times during the event. In the event the permittee is not
present at the event, the person in charge of the event shall carry the
permit, and inform the Village Police Department of such person's name
and address.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEMONSTRATION — A preplanned gathering of five or more persons
who are invited or organized by an organizer to convene on public
property and in the vicinity of a funeral or memorial event for the
purpose of a public exhibition, including a procession, parade, protest,
picket, march or rally.
FUNERAL OR MEMORIAL EVENT — A wake, funeral, burial or
memorial service conducted within 30 days after the death of the
person who is the subject of such event.
ORGANIZER — One or more persons or entities that plan or coordinate
a demonstration for which a permit may be required pursuant to this
section.
B. No person shall organize or participate in a demonstration which takes
place in whole or in part within 1,000 feet of a funeral or memorial
event unless a permit has been issued by the Village Clerk for such
demonstration pursuant to this section. No person shall organize or
participate in a demonstration in violation of the conditions of a permit
issued pursuant to this section.
§ 148-7 NUISANCES § 148-10
146:239
C. The permit application for any demonstration subject to this section
shall be filed with the Village Clerk not less than five business days
prior to the proposed demonstration date, unless the Mayor, for good
cause, waives such advance filing requirement. The Mayor may
delegate to the Village Clerk or any other designated Village officer the
authority to grant such waivers or to exercise any other authority
vested in the Mayor in this section.
D. Upon receipt of such application, the Mayor shall promptly review such
application, and if the application satisfies the requirements of this
section, as well as any other lawful requirements which the Mayor may
impose, then the Mayor shall issue such permit. The Mayor may include
in such permit such reasonable conditions as may be appropriate to
maintain peace and good order and to facilitate the purposes of this
section.
E. Such permit shall specify expressly and in detail the time and place and
any lawful restrictions or conditions that may be imposed regarding
such demonstration. If the permit application is denied, the Mayor shall
issue a written denial which specifies in detail the manner in which the
application is deficient or the grounds upon which the application was
denied, together with the procedure by which the permit applicant may
obtain timely reconsideration of such determination.
F. Any permit issued by the Mayor to this section may include reasonable
restrictions on the time, place and manner of the demonstration for
which the permit is issued.
G. If a fee for such applications is established by the Board of Trustees, the
Village Clerk shall not accept any application pursuant to this section
without payment of such fee. The Board of Trustees may establish, and
from time to time amend, a reasonable fee to compensate the Village for
administrative and processing costs.
H. Any person who has been determined to have organized or participated
in a demonstration for which a permit required pursuant to this section
has not been issued, or in violation of the conditions of a permit duly
issued pursuant to this section, shall be guilty of a violation, and shall
be subject to a civil penalty of up to $500 for the first such violation
determined to have been committed, up to $1,000 for a second such
violation determined to have been committed within three years of the
first such violation, and up to $2,000 for a third such violation
determined to have been committed within such three-year period.
§ 148-10 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 148-10
146:240
Chapter 150
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS; POOL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 154.
Peddling, soliciting and canvassing — See Ch.
157.
§ 148-10 NUISANCES § 148-10
146:241

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
§ 150-1. Purpose of park rules and regulations.
The regulations contained in this chapter are adopted for the care,
management and protection of the Village park, for the regulation of
conduct of persons within such park and the exclusion of improper persons
therefrom. In furtherance thereof, the Board of Trustees is authorized to
adopt, and from time to time amend, rules and regulations for the use of the
Village park and pool, which regulations may pertain to matters included
in this chapter or otherwise. If such rules and regulations conflict with any
provision of this chapter, the provisions of such rules and regulations shall
take precedence over the provisions of this chapter.
§ 150-2. Admission; authorized residents and nonresidents.
§ 150-2.1. Residents. [Added 5-6-2013]
Pursuant to § 150-2B of this Code, and for the purposes of this chapter, the
term "resident" shall mean:
A. The use of the park and its facilities is limited to residents of the Village
of Great Neck Estates, their guests as provided in this chapter and the
rules and regulations, and such other persons as may be authorized
pursuant to this chapter.
B. The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, define the term "resident" for
the purposes of this article and establish categories of residency and
fees for use of the park and its facilities by persons in such categories.
The Board of Trustees also may adopt regulations, including fee
requirements, for the admission of guests and other persons to the park
and its facilities; provided, however, that in no event shall guests be
permitted admission to the park and its facilities unless accompanied
by one or more resident sponsors.
C. Park admission cards will be issued by the Village Clerk to persons
eligible therefor upon application. Persons desiring admission to the
park or its facilities, or using the park or such facilities, shall identify
themselves by showing their admission cards and furnishing other
pertinent information upon request of the park attendants.
D. No person shall use or be within the boundaries of the park or its
facilities unless such person is an authorized resident or guest or unless
such use or presence is otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees.
A. An adult taxpayer who lawfully resides in the Village;
B. Each adult who is a member of the household of such adult taxpayer
and who lawfully resides in the Village; and
§ 150-1 NUISANCES § 150-2.1
146:243
§ 150-3. Park hours.
Unless otherwise determined in rules and regulations adopted or amended
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees, the park will be
open from 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. beginning on Memorial Day and ending
on Labor Day in each year. The park will be open at all other times from 8:00
a.m. to sundown and closed to the public at other hours. No person shall be
permitted in the park during hours when the park is closed to public use.
§ 150-4. (Reserved)
§ 150-5. (Reserved)
§ 150-6. Entering or leaving through established locations.
No person shall enter or leave the park premises except at the entrances
established for such purposes.
§ 150-7. Responsibility for conduct of guests.
Residents shall be responsible for the conduct of their guests.
§ 150-8. Use of tennis courts.
§ 150-9. Dock and float usage.
C. A minor who is a member of the household of such adult taxpayer and
who lawfully resides in the Village or is a full-time student in an
accredited course of study leading to a degree.
A. No person shall use the tennis courts at any time during which the Park
Superintendent determines that the condition of the courts does not
permit playing.
B. All players using the tennis courts must wear rubber-soled tennis shoes
without heels.
C. The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may enact reasonable rules and
regulations for the use of the tennis courts, including the establishment
or amendment of fees for such use.
D. Children under 16 should defer to adults in the use of the courts.
E. All men must wear outer shirts while on the tennis courts.
A. All persons using dock and float facilities do so at their own risk. No
person may use the dock or float facilities unless such person is a
resident boat owner who holds a locker permit, or an authorized guest
of such boat owner.
§ 150-2.1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 150-9
146:244
§ 150-10. Bathing in Little Neck Bay.
No bathing shall be permitted in the waters of Little Neck Bay fronting the
park unless such waters have been pronounced fit for bathing by the Nassau
County Department of Health.
§ 150-11. General rules of conduct.
§ 150-12. Hawking, peddling and advertising.
§ 150-13. Consent required for public meetings.
The park is not a public forum. No public meeting or gathering may be held
within the park premises without the prior written consent of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 150-14. Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions.
No person shall within the park:
B. The west side of all floats shall be reserved for loading and unloading of
boats only, and the maximum time for said loading and unloading shall
be 15 minutes.
A. No person on the park premises shall engage in disorderly or
intoxicated conduct. No person shall bring any alcoholic beverage into
the park premises or possess, consume, sell or otherwise provide any
alcoholic beverage in the park.
B. No person shall utilize profane, obscene, insulting or abusive language
in the park.
C. No person shall commit any disorderly or noisy conduct or obscene or
indecent acts tending toward a breach of the peace.
D. No disrobing is permitted in toilets.
E. No person shall mutilate, deface or otherwise damage or remove any
park property.
F. No person shall cut, pull or remove any flowers, shrubbery or trees
from the park or' in any way damage any of the shrubbery or gardens.
G. No person shall throw or deposit any wastepaper, newspaper, boxes or
rubbish of any kind upon park grounds.
H. Rubbish and refuse must be deposited in receptacles provided for such
purpose.
A. Hawking and peddling in the park or any entrance is prohibited.
B. No person shall post or distribute any card, pamphlet or circular within
the park premises without the consent of the Board of Trustees.
§ 150-9 NUISANCES § 150-14
146:245
§ 150-15. Motor vehicle parking and speed limits.
§ 150-16. Penalties for offenses.
§ 150-17. Liability for lost or stolen property.
The Village of Great Neck Estates shall not be responsible for any article of
property lost or stolen on the park premises.
§ 150-18. Right to modify rules and adopt new rules.
The Board of Trustees reserves the right within its discretion to modify
these rules and adopt such new rules, from time to time, by local law or by
resolution as it may deem advisable.
A. Drive golf balls or play football or baseball, other than softball, in the
park.
B. Skate on the tennis courts.
C. Engage in archery.
D. Ride a bicycle on sidewalks or any other place not designated for that
purpose.
A. No motor vehicle shall be permitted to park stop or stand at any place
in the park except at the parking area designated for that purpose, and
then only for a period of time authorized by law, rule or regulation.
B. Except as otherwise permitted pursuant to the park rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, no motor vehicle shall be
parked at any location in the park unless it displays a current parking
sticker or valid visitor pass issued by the Village of Great Neck Estates
as required by such rules and regulations.
C. No motor vehicle shall be operated in the park at a speed in excess of
10 miles per hour.
A. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter, or of
any rule or regulation adopted or promulgated pursuant to this chapter,
shall be guilty of a violation and shall be punishable in the manner
provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
B. In addition to any other punishment or penalty provided by law, the
Mayor, or the Board of Trustees, or the Village Justice Court, may
exclude from the use and privilege of the park for a period of time
determined by such official(s), but not to exceed one year, any person
who violates any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation
adopted or promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
§ 150-14 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 150-19
146:246
§ 150-19. Purpose of swimming pool regulations.
The regulations herein, and other regulations as may be adopted or
amended by the Board of Trustees from time to time, are for the care,
management and protection of the Village swimming pool and the locker
building and grounds appertaining thereto and for the conduct of persons
within such area and the exclusion of improper persons therefrom.
§ 150-20. Operating season for pool.
The normal operating season for the pool shall be from Memorial Day to
the Monday following Labor Day, but the time of opening or closing for the
season may be varied in the discretion of the Board of Trustees.
§ 150-21. Swimming pool hours.
Weather permitting, the pool shall be open for admission from 10:00 a.m.
until 7:30 p.m. each day. No person may remain in the pool or pool area
between 8:00 p.m. of any day and 10:00 a.m. of the following day, except as
authorized by the Village.
§ 150-22. Hours for swimming instructions.
Between 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m., except on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, children under the age of 14 shall, subject to the safety regulations
hereinafter set forth in § 150-27, have the exclusive use of the pool for
the purpose of receiving swimming instructions from pool lifeguards upon
payment of fees as hereinafter set forth in § 150-25. Such instructions will
not be permitted at other times.
§ 150-23. Use of pool by residents; identification card.
Residents of Great Neck Estates, hereinafter for convenience called
"residents," shall have the right to use the pool only on the basis of
unlimited seasonal use, the fees for which shall be established from time
to time pursuant to § 150-25. A signed duplicate identification card will
be issued, at the time of the payment of the fee, to each member of the
immediate family of each resident, the duplicate to be retained by the pool
management. Such card will set forth the name, sex and age of the holder
and shall be signed by each holder over the age of eight years. Residents
shall, at the time of each entry into the pool area, show their identification
card and shall, upon request of the pool attendant at the entrance desk, also
sign a registry book which shall be kept for the purpose at the desk at the
entrance to the pool.
§ 150-24. Use of pool by guests of residents.
A. Guests of residents may, subject to the payment of appropriate fees by
the resident, be permitted the use of the pool if accompanied by an
adult member of the resident host's family. All guests shall, at the time
§ 150-19 NUISANCES § 150-24
146:247
§ 150-25. Authority to enact regulations and establish fees.
The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may enact reasonable rules and
regulations for the use of the pool, including the establishment or
amendment of fees for such use.
§ 150-26. Sanitation regulations.
§ 150-27. Safety regulations.
of each entry to the pool area, sign the registry book that shall be kept
at the desk at the entrance to the pool.
B. For each resident host family, the number of guests permitted to use the
pool on any day is limited to two adult guests and the children of such
adult guests.
C. The same guest shall not be permitted the use of the pool more than
twice a month as a guest of any one or more resident families.
D. Resident families may secure, for not exceeding two houseguests at one
time, a weekly card permitting such houseguest to use the pool for a
continuous maximum period of one week in a season. Such houseguest
shall be permitted the use of the pool on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays as well as other days in the week covered by the card.
A. Every person using the pool is required to be familiar with and to obey
the rules promulgated by the State of New York covering the use of
pools. A copy of such rules will be posted at the entrance of the pool,
and an extract of such rules will be distributed at the beginning of each
season to each family registering for seasonal use of the pool.
B. Attention is called to the fact that these rules require every person to
take an adequate shower bath before entering the pool.
C. Care must be used to see that any refuse is placed in receptacles
provided for that purpose.
D. Dogs and other animals are not permitted within the pool area.
E. Consumption of food is strictly forbidden in the pool area.
A. No glass containers of any kind are permitted within the pool area.
B. At all times, children under the age of eight years must be accompanied
in the pool or pool area by an adult entitled to enter the pool as a
resident or guest. Children of eight years and over shall be permitted in
the pool unaccompanied by such an adult only upon evidence of ability
to swim.
C. No games of any kind, including card playing, shall be permitted within
the pool area, and no toys or athletic equipment other than inflated
rubber toys are permitted within the pool area.
§ 150-24 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 150-28
146:248
§ 150-28. Miscellaneous pool restrictions.
§ 150-29. Identification card misuse.
Any identification card tendered for the purpose of admission to the pool
or otherwise used by a person who is not the holder named therein will be
picked up by the pool attendant and turned in at the Village office, where
it will be retained pending action by the Board of Trustees. In any such
case, the Board of Trustees may cancel the identification card and revoke
the permission granted to the holder to use the pool, without refund of the
fee previously paid.
§ 150-30. Compliance with directions of authorized persons.
Every person present at the park, swimming pool, locker building, grounds
or other area to which the regulations stated in Article I may relate shall
comply with any order or direction of the person then in charge of such
area, who is hereby authorized to require any person whom he/she may
deem to be violating any of said regulations to leave such area and
thereafter, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, to exclude such
person therefrom.
A. Cars in the vicinity of the pool shall be parked only in the designated
parking area.
B. No person is permitted to dress or disrobe anywhere in the pool area
except in the locker room provided for that purpose.
C. The lifeguards, caretaker and other employees of the pool and pool area
have the authority to interpret and enforce these rules and regulations,
and residents and guests are subject to such interpretation.
D. Anyone violating any of these rules may be barred from use of the pool,
in addition to any other penalties provided by law for violation of the
Village Code or park and pool regulations.
§ 150-28 NUISANCES § 150-30
146:249

ARTICLE II
Organized Playgroups
§ 150-31. Application of regulations.
The following regulations are hereby adopted to apply to organized
playgroups of children using the Village park and pool.
§ 150-32. Playgroup restrictions.
Playgroups shall be limited to children who are residents of the Village and
entitled to use the park and pool. Membership in a group does not permit a
child to use the park and pool unless he/she is otherwise entitled to do so.
§ 150-33. Residency of supervisors; restriction of privileges.
Supervisors and assistant supervisors need not be residents of the Village,
but, unless they are residents, they shall not be entitled to the privileges of
the park and pool except in the course of their duties.
§ 150-34. License required for supervisors.
Each supervisor and assistant supervisor, before commencing his/her
duties, must apply for and obtain a license from the Board of Trustees, or
its representative designated for the purpose, and must pay the required
license fee.
§ 150-35. License conditions; authority to limit number.
Such license is a personal privilege and is not assignable, and no one is
entitled to a license as a matter of right. It will be granted only to such
persons as the Board of Trustees may deem qualified by age, character and
experience. The Board of Trustees may limit the number of such licenses to
be issued or the number of such licenses outstanding at any one time. The
determination of the Board of Trustees shall be final and conclusive.
§ 150-36. Application for license; fee; expiration.
An application for a license must be made in writing, signed by the applicant
and filed at the Village office. It must state the applicant's name, residence,
age, experience, qualifications and such other information as the Board may
require. In the case of applicants who have not previously had a license,
character references must be supplied. The applicant must pay, upon filing
his/her application, a sum as set forth in Chapter 109, Fees, by check to
the order of the Village of Great Neck Estates. Each license will expire on
December 31 of the year for which it is issued, and a new application must
be filed and a further fee paid for each succeeding year.
§ 150-31 NUISANCES § 150-37
146:251
§ 150-37. Liability insurance required; insurance limits;
indemnification.
Each supervisor, before receiving a license, must file with the Village
certificates of insurance, in a form approved by the Mayor, and proof of
the payment of the premium therefor, covering worker's compensation and
public liability. The public liability insurance shall have $200,000/$500,000
limits and shall include a provision that the insurer will defend, indemnify
and save harmless the Village of Great Neck Estates, its officers, agents and
employees from any claims, judgments or damages occurring in the course
of or arising out of the use of the park and pool by the supervisor, his/her
assistant supervisors and the members of his/her group.
§ 150-38. Revocation of license.
Any license may be revoked at any time without notice by the Board of
Trustees, which need not assign any reason therefor. Any license may be
suspended at any time by the Mayor or Acting Mayor or the Village Park
Commissioner until the next meeting of the Board of Trustees, which may
reinstate the license, continue the suspension or revoke the license. In case
of the suspension or revocation of a license, no refund will be made of the
license fee or any part thereof.
§ 150-39. Nonexclusive use of park or pool.
Groups and the members thereof are not granted the exclusive use of any
part of the park or pool at any time. They must not interfere with the use
and enjoyment of the park and pool by other children and adults entitled
thereto.
§ 150-40. Number of children limited.
Except for a short period during assembly time in the morning and during
lunch or the immediately succeeding rest period, the total number of
children of all groups using the park and pool area at any one time shall
be limited to 150 children, of whom not more than 100 shall be in the park
area, not more than 12 shall be in the kiddie pool area and not more than 40
shall be in the pool area at any one time. The Village official in charge of the
park or pool may permit a larger number in the park or pool area if a small
number of persons are using the park or pool at the time, but he/she is not
required to do so, and his/her determination in the matter shall be final.
§ 150-41. Use of parks by groups limited.
Groups are not permitted to use the park and pool on Sundays or holidays.
On Saturdays, they are not permitted to use the pool after 11:00 a.m. or the
park after 12:00 noon. On other weekdays, they are not permitted to use the
pool between 12:30 p.m. and 2:00 p.m.
§ 150-37 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 150-42
146:252
§ 150-42. Filing of written roster of groups.
At the opening of the season, each supervisor must file in the Village Office
a complete roster, in writing, of the names and residences of each assistant
and each member of his/her group and shall notify the Village Office, in
writing, each week of any changes that may occur.
§ 150-43. Duties and responsibilities of supervisors.
Supervisors or assistant supervisors must at all times remain in personal
charge of their groups. Supervisors will be held responsible for the conduct
and activities of their assistants and the children of the group. Supervisors,
assistant supervisors and children must comply with all of the park and
pool regulations and must obey the orders and directions of the Village
representatives in charge of the park and the pool.
§ 150-44. Amendment of regulations.
These regulations may be modified or amended at any time and from time
to time, and all licenses are issued subject to such possible modification or
amendment.
§ 150-42 NUISANCES § 150-44
146:253

ARTICLE III
Group Use of Nature Trails
§ 150-45. Purpose of nature-trail regulations; terms and conditions
for usage.
A. Purpose. The Village owns and has set aside a portion of its property
bordering on Little Neck Bay to be preserved in its natural state and
used for the purpose of nature trails. It is necessary, in order to
preserve that property for its intended purposes, to limit the extent and
frequency of use of that property by individuals and groups. Excessive
use of the property would be detrimental to its environmental
characteristics and would be likely to cause permanent and irreparable
harm to the ecology of the area.
B. Terms and conditions required for usage. Use of the Village's property
bordering on Little Neck Bay which is being preserved in its natural
state shall be permitted only by groups of more than three persons and
only upon the following terms and conditions:
(1) Any group of three or more individuals wishing to make use of the
nature trails shall make written application for a permit to the
Environmental Commissioner at least 10 days before the intended
date of use; provided, however, that family groups of Great Neck
Estates residents need not obtain a permit.
(2) The Environmental Commissioner may issue a permit only to a
group which is composed, in whole or in part, of persons who are
residents of the Village of Great Neck Estates, students or faculty
of the public schools of the Great Neck School District or members
of bona fide organizations dedicated to the improvement and
preservation of the environment.
(3) Any applicant for a permit shall state in the application the number
of persons who request permission to use the property, the date of
the proposed visit or visits, the hours and duration of the proposed
visit or visits, the qualifications of the person, persons or group
requesting the permit and the purpose of the proposed visit.
(4) The Environmental Commissioner may, in his/her or her sole
discretion, decline to issue a permit for a requested visit on the
ground that frequency of visits already scheduled or made to the
premises is becoming or has become excessive and that additional
visits on the requested dates would be detrimental to the natural
characteristics and quality of the area. Such a determination may
be made regardless of whether the applicant or applicants would
otherwise be entitled to a permit.
(5) Any person or persons granted a permit to visit the property shall
comply in all respects with any and all regulations promulgated by
§ 150-45 NUISANCES § 150-45
146:255
the Environmental Commissioner for the purposes of preserving
the characteristics of the property.
(6) Any person or persons aggrieved by any determination of the
Environmental Commissioner with respect to issuance or denial of
a permit may appeal that determination in writing to the Board of
Trustees, which will endeavor to act upon the same within 30 days
after receipt. Unless the Board of Trustees shall otherwise direct,
the determination of the Environmental Commissioner shall remain
in effect during the pendency of any such appeal.
§ 150-45 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 150-45
146:256
Chapter 154
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 154-1. Public nuisances, annoyances and inconveniences.
[Amended 12-10-2001 by L.L. No. 7-2001]
A. Public nuisance prohibited. No person or entity shall engage in,
perform, cause, allow or permit any of the following acts to occur on
any public property, including a public street or highway:
(1) Committing an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward
another whereby that other is placed in danger of life, limb or
health;
(2) Committing an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward
another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of
being destroyed or damaged;
(3) Any fight, brawl or riotous conduct in such manner as to endanger
the life, limb, health or property of another;
(4) Behaving in intimidating, violent or forceful conduct in such
manner that such conduct constitutes a clear and present danger to
the free and lawful movement of any person or to the extent that
any other person will be, or is likely to be, restrained, enjoined,
incapacitated or stopped in his lawful exercise of business,
occupation, amusement, recreation or any other lawful pursuit;
(5) Obstructing, either singly or together with other persons, the flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refusing to clear such public
way or public place when ordered to do so by the police or other
lawful authority known to be such;
(6) Drinking or consuming any alcoholic beverage, or possessing any
opened container thereof, in any public area or in public place not
duly licensed for such purposes at the time of such event;
(7) Disturbing the peace of another or others by violent, indecent,
offensive, hostile, boisterous or obscene conduct, which conduct is
designed or calculated or likely to cause anguish or injury to
another or others;
(8) Throwing any missile or object upon or at any person, vehicle,
building, tree, sign or other public or private property;
(9) Damaging, befouling, urinating or defecating upon, or disturbing a
public place so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically
offensive condition;
(10) Throwing, dropping or placing any bottle, can, paper or other
garbage, litter or waste in or upon a public place or property, with
§ 150-45 NUISANCES § 154-1
146:257
the intent of discarding the same, except in a container or
receptacle designated for such purpose;
(11) Making or causing to be made without reasonable cause any loud,
boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance
of any other person nearby or near to any public highway, road,
street, lane, alley, park square or common whereby the public
peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed;
(12) Failing to obey a lawful order by a police officer to disperse, when
such order is given by a person known to be such an official, where
one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in
the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is
imminently threatened;
(13) Maliciously or without good cause interrupting, harassing, or
molesting the speaker or speakers at any lawful assembly, meeting
or gathering, or impairing the lawful rights of others to participate
in such assembly, meeting or gathering when such conduct is
calculated or likely to provoke disorderly conduct and procedure of
the same or to cause turmoil or disturbance at same, after being
warned to refrain from such conduct by the person in charge of the
assembly, meeting or gathering;
(14) Acting in a manner designed, likely or tending to cause or provoke
disturbance in any public building or place of business wherein
matters affecting the public are being considered or deliberated
and which is designed, likely or tending to interfere with the
orderly conduct or procedure of such consideration or deliberation,
after being warned by any person in authority to refrain from such
conduct;
(15) Frequenting any public place with the intention to obtain money or
other things of value from another or others by illegal or fraudulent
schemes, tricks, artifices or devices;
(16) Assembling for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent schemes,
devices, artifices or tricks to obtain any moneys or things of value
in any place or places from any person or persons;
(17) Using any obscene language reasonably audible in any public
street or public place;
(18) In the case of any person over the age of six years, defecating or
urinating in any public place, as defined in Article 240 of the Penal
Law, or other public or private location except in a designated
public or private toilet or rest room;
(19) Creating or causing any condition which is detrimental to public
health, safety and welfare, the property of others or the use and
enjoyment of property.
§ 154-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 154-1
146:258
§ 154-1.1. Unmanned aerial vehicles or aircraft systems; other
airborne equipment. [Added 3-14-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
§ 154-1.2. Sale of tobacco and other related products prohibited.
[Added 6-12-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
B. No person or entity shall permit or allow in or upon any vacant lot or
other premises any water to collect and lie stagnant in which mosquito
larvae breed or are likely to breed. Water accumulations that relate to
conservation or recreation projects in wetland accumulation or relate to
stormwater management are excluded from this prohibition.
C. Exemptions. This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to
lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of
expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws or bylaws
nor to infringe upon the right of any law enforcement officer engaged in
the performance of his duties.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any unmanned aerial
system or aircraft, or other motorized or propelled airborne equipment
or machinery, at any outdoor location in or over the Village of Great
Neck Estates. The prohibition in this section shall not apply to any such
system, aircraft or equipment operated by or under the authority of any
governmental entity; or to any unmanned aerial system or aircraft, or
other motorized or propelled airborne equipment or machinery
operated more than 400 feet above ground level and regulated by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
B. Any person who violates this section shall be punishable by a fine for
the first such offense within any six-month period not to exceed $500,
and for each such additional offense within such six month period a fine
not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days.
A. Definitions.
(1) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this Code, have the meanings indicated in this section.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in
the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. Where
terms are not defined in this Code, then the words as defined in
New York State Public Health Law Article 13-F shall prevail; and if
the term is not defined in either, then the word as defined in the
most-current edition of Webster's Dictionary shall prevail.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the terms used herein are defined
as follows:
ACCESSORY —
Any product that is intended or reasonably expected to be used
with or for the human consumption of a tobacco product; does
(a)
§ 154-1 NUISANCES § 154-1.2
146:259
AGE-RESTRICTED PRODUCTS — Tobacco products, shisha, herbal
cigarettes, electronic aerosol delivery systems, and smoking
paraphernalia; and all other products prohibited from being sold to
minors by New York State Public Health Law Article 13-F, as the
same may be amended from time to time.
COMPONENT or PART —
ELECTRONIC AEROSOL DELIVERY SYSTEM — An electronic
device that, when activated, produces an aerosol that may be
inhaled, whether or not such aerosol contains nicotine. "Electronic
aerosol delivery system" includes any component or part but not
accessory, and any liquid or other substance to be aerosolized,
whether or not separately sold. "Electronic aerosol delivery
system" does not include drugs, devices, or combination products
authorized for sale by the state or United States Food and Drug
Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act.
not contain tobacco and is not made or derived from tobacco;
and meets either of the following:
Is not intended or reasonably expected to affect or alter
the performance, composition, constituents, or
characteristics of a tobacco product; or
[1]
Is intended or reasonably expected to affect or maintain
the performance, composition, constituents, or
characteristics of a tobacco product but:
Solely controls moisture and/or temperature of a
stored tobacco product; or
[a]
Solely provides an external heat source to initiate but
not maintain combustion of a tobacco product.
[b]
Accessory includes, but is not limited to, carrying
cases, lanyards and holsters.
[c]
[2]
Any software or assembly of materials intended or reasonably
expected:
To alter or affect the tobacco product's performance,
composition, constituents, or characteristics; or
[1]
To be used with or for the human consumption of a tobacco
product.
[2]
(a)
"Component" or "part" excludes anything that is an accessory
of a tobacco product and includes, but is not limited to, eliquids,
cartridges, certain batteries, heating coils,
programmable software and flavorings for electronic aerosol
delivery systems.
(b)
§ 154-1.2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 154-1.2
146:260
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any police officer, building official,
code enforcement officer or other person authorized to enforce this
Code.
SHISHA — Any product made primarily of tobacco or other leaf
or herbs, or any combination thereof, smoked or intended to be
smoked in a hookah or water pipe.
SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA — Any pipe, water pipe, hookah,
rolling papers, vaporizer or any other device, equipment or
apparatus designed for the inhalation of tobacco;.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product made or derived from tobacco
or which contains nicotine marketed or sold for human
consumption, whether consumption occurs through inhalation, or
oral or dermal absorption, including cigarettes, cigars, chewing
tobacco, powdered tobacco, bidis, gutka, other tobacco products,
and nicotine water. "Tobacco product" does not include drugs,
devices, or combination products authorized for sale by the state
or United States Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are
defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
VILLAGE — The Village of Great Neck Estates.
B. Prohibitions.
(1) No person shall sell or permit the sale of age-restricted products in
the Village to any person under the age of 21.
(2) The identification requirements contained in New York State Public
Health Law Article 13-F, § 1399-cc, Subdivision 3, as the same may
be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated into this
chapter by reference, except that the age to be proven by such
identification shall be 21.
(3) Age-restricted products may not be sold in vending machines
located in the Village.
(4) No person operating a place of business wherein age-restricted
products are sold or offered for sale shall sell, permit to be sold,
offer for sale or display for sale any age-restricted product in any
manner, unless such age-restricted product is stored for sale:
behind a counter in an area accessible only to the personnel of such
business, or in a locked container; provided, however, that such
restriction shall not apply to tobacco businesses as defined in
Subdivision 8 of § 1399-aa of the New York State Public Health Law
Article 13-F, as the same may be amended from time to time, and to
places to which admission is restricted to persons 21 of age or
older.
C. Posting of signs.
§ 154-1.2 NUISANCES § 154-1.2
146:261
§ 154-2. Operation of machinery: hours restricted; exceptions.
[Added 9-8-1980 by L.L. No. 4-1980; amended 8-8-1994 by L.L. No.
3-1994]
§ 154-3. Permit required for unloading and loading during certain
hours. [Amended 9-8-1980 by L.L. No. 4-1980; 8-8-1994 by L.L. No.
3-1994]
Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day or between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
(1) No person shall sell or permit the sale of an age-restricted product
in the Village unless a notice is posted in a conspicuous place at the
location where the age-restricted product is sold.
(2) The sign shall provide notice, which shall state: "SALE OF
CIGARETTES, CIGARS, CHEWING TOBACCO, POWDERED
TOBACCO, SHISHA, BIDIS, GUTKA OR OTHER TOBACCO
PRODUCTS, HERBAL CIGARETTES, LIQUID NICOTINE,
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, ROLLING PAPERS, OR SMOKING
PARAPHERNALIA, TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS
OF AGE, IS PROHIBITED BY LOCAL LAW."
(3) Such sign shall be printed on a white card in red letters at least 1/2
inch in height. Signs shall be protected from tampering, damage,
removal, or concealment.
D. Enforcement. Any person or entity which violates any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be
subject to a penalty as provided for violations of this Code.
A. No person shall permit or cause the operation of any machinery,
including lawn mowers, drills, power saws or other equipment, between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the following day, or at any time
on Sundays or holidays, if such operation causes the emission of noise
audible beyond the boundary of the property on which the machinery or
equipment is located. Notwithstanding the foregoing restrictions,
equipment for collection and disposal of solid waste pursuant to
governmental authority may be operated only between the hours
specified in the approval issued by the Village for such activity, but in no
event shall such equipment be operated earlier than 7:00 a.m. on a
weekday, 8:00 a.m. on Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or holiday,
nor later than 7:00 p.m. on any day. [Amended 6-13-2005 by L.L. No.
6-2005]
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no person shall
cause or permit the operation of any gasoline or diesel-powered blower
equipment within 300 feet of any residential property in the Village at
any time during the period of June 15 to and including September 15 in
any year. [Added 5-29-1997 by L.L. No. 7-1997; amended
4-13-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
§ 154-1.2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 154-3
146:262
no person shall load or unload from or upon any truck, vehicle or other form
of conveyance any trunks, furniture, stage equipment, lumber, machinery,
boxes, barrels or other heavy or bulky articles of any sort whatsoever
without having first obtained a permit therefor pursuant to this chapter.
§ 154-4. Permit application; required information.
The permit mentioned in the foregoing section may be issued by the Board
of Trustees or by the Mayor upon written application therefor, which shall
specify the article or articles which it is desired to load, unload or move, the
place where and the time when such loading, unloading or moving is to take
place and the nature of the truck, dray or other vehicle, if any, which is to
transport the same.
§ 154-5. Determination on permit issuance.
The aforesaid permit shall only be issued upon its appearing to the
satisfaction of the Board of Trustees or the Mayor, as the case may be,
that such loading, unloading or moving can and will be conducted without
disturbing the peace and quiet of the Village or of the inhabitants thereof or
of any meeting or assembly therein.
§ 154-6. Compliance.
No owner, lessee, tenant or other person in possession of or occupying any
premises within the Village or manager or other head of any business, trade
or other occupation conducted therein shall knowingly allow or permit any
person, whether in his employ or otherwise, to do or perform any act or acts
in violation of the foregoing sections of this chapter.68
Chapter 157
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND CANVASSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109.
Hawking, peddling and advertising in
parks — See Ch. 150.
Sale of personal property — See Ch. 170.
Dealers in secondhand articles — See Ch. 178.
68.Editor's Note: Former § 93-7, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 154-3 NUISANCES § 154-6
146:263

ARTICLE I
Licensing; Limitations
[Amended 11-14-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
§ 157-1. License required for commercial solicitation; application;
restrictions.
A. License required; unlawful practices.
(1) Public property. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to offer,
hawk, vend, peddle or solicit orders for the purchase or sale of
goods, wares, merchandise or other commercial commodities or
services on public property in the Village without a license issued
with the consent of the Board of Trustees.
(2) Private property. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to
offer, hawk, vend, peddle or solicit orders for the purchase or sale
of goods, wares, merchandise or other commercial commodities or
to perform work, labor or services on private property, or by going
from door to door to perform any such activity on private property,
in the Village. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such activities may
be conducted on private property in the Village if such activity is
conducted wholly within the boundaries of such property with the
consent of the owner of such property, and such business is
conducted solely with the owner and occupants of the property and
their lawful guests, and is otherwise lawful.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to employ any trick or
device, or by any false or misleading statement or representation,
to obtain or attempt to obtain admission to the property of any
person or entity in the Village or to obtain or attempt to obtain the
consent or permission of the owner or occupant of any premises
within the Village to enter in or upon the same for the purpose of
soliciting subscriptions for any book, publication, paper, magazine
or periodical, or to solicit orders for, sell or offer for sale any item of
merchandise, or for the purpose of seeking employment or for the
purpose of soliciting orders for work, labor or services to be
performed within or without the Village, or to obtain any license or
permission required by this article.
B. Application procedure; fee; issuance of commercial solicitation license.
(1) An application for a license required by this section shall be in
writing, and shall contain the following information:
(a) Purpose for which the license is sought.
(b) Names and addresses of the persons, organization, society,
association, company or corporation seeking such permission.
§ 157-1 NUISANCES § 157-1
146:265
(c) Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments
are to be expended, paid or provided in connection with such
activity.
(d) The dates upon which the hawking, vending, peddling or
soliciting of orders for the purchase or sale of goods or wares,
merchandise or other commodities will be conducted, and the
locations where such activities are proposed to take place.
(e) Such other information as the officer or Board with authority to
approve the application may require.
(2) All applications must be accompanied by a processing fee as
determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time by
resolution.
(3) Within a reasonable time after receiving such application with all
required information, taking into account the Board meeting
schedule, the Board of Trustees shall grant or deny such
application within a reasonable period of time.
(4) The Board of Trustees may deny such application, or impose
conditions in the approval of an application, as may be consistent
with the public health, safety and general welfare, or to protect the
health or safety of the residents of the Village.
(5) Any license or approval granted pursuant to this section with
respect to private property shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) All hawking, vending, peddling or soliciting orders for the
purchase or sale of goods or wares, merchandise or other
commodities must be conducted between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 1/2 hour after sunset, except that the Board of
Trustees may, in appropriate cases, permit such activities at
other and different times.
(b) Such license shall be effective for a period to be established by
the Board of Trustees.
(6) Any consent or approval granted with respect to public property
shall be subject to such restrictions as may be imposed by the
Board of Trustees in granting such consent or approval.
C. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any commercial
solicitation or sale of any goods or merchandise which is permitted
pursuant to State law to be conducted on public or private property by
any veteran, disabled person or producer of farm products, and any
such activity shall be permitted upon issuance of a license for the same
by the Mayor. The application for such license, and the approval or
denial thereof by the Mayor, shall be conducted in the same manner as
provided herein for licenses to be issued by the Board of Trustees, and
§ 157-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 157-1
146:266
§ 157-2. License required for noncommercial solicitation;
application; restrictions.
with respect to any such licenses the Mayor shall have the powers and
duties otherwise provided herein for the Board of Trustees.
A. Public property. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to
proselytize or canvass or to distribute handbills, pamphlets or other
written material, or to solicit donations or contributions of money or
property or financial assistance of any kind, on any public property in
the Village without the consent of the Board of Trustees.
B. Private property. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to
proselytize or canvass, or distribute handbills, pamphlets or other
written material, or solicit donations or contributions of money or
property or financial assistance of any kind, on any private property in
the Village without a license previously issued by the Mayor pursuant to
this section or, with or without such license, to enter upon the premises
of any Village resident who has noted objection to such entry and whose
address has been provided to such person or entity, or its agents or
representatives, pursuant to § 157-4.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to employ any trick or
device, or by any false or misleading statement or representation, to
obtain or attempt to obtain a license, or to obtain or attempt to obtain
admission to the property of any person or entity in the Village or to
obtain or attempt to obtain the consent or permission of the owner or
occupant of any premises within the Village to perform any act on such
property which would require a license or the consent of the owner or
occupant of such property pursuant to this section, or to obtain any
license or permission pursuant to this article.
D. Applications to the Board of Trustees for a consent pursuant to this
section shall be in writing, and shall contain such information as is
required for an application to the Mayor, and such other information as
the Board of Trustees may require. An application to the Mayor for a
license or consent as provided for in this section shall be in writing,
filed with the Village Administrator, and shall contain at a minimum the
following information:
(1) The purpose for which the license is sought.
(2) The full legal name and status of the entity, and the names and
addresses of the officers and directors of the entity, seeking such
license or consent.
(3) The dates and times for which permission is sought, and the
locations where the activity is proposed to be conducted.
(4) The tax exempt status, if any, of any entity so applying.
§ 157-1 NUISANCES § 157-2
146:267
(5) Whether any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments are to be
paid or expended in connection with such activity.
(6) Whether any persons under the age of 18 years will be engaged in
such activity and, if so, the names and addresses of such persons
and the written consent of the parent or legal guardian of each
such person.
(7) Whether such entity previously has been denied permission to
conduct the same or similar activity in any other jurisdiction and, if
so, a copy of such denial.
(8) An acknowledgment that the applicant is familiar with, and agrees
to conform to, the provisions of § 157-4 of this Code.
(9) Such other information as the Mayor may require.
E. All applications pursuant to this section must be accompanied by a
processing fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
F. Upon receiving such application with all required information, and the
payment of any processing fee, the licensing officer or board shall
promptly determine whether to grant or deny such application.
(1) With respect to an application to the Board of Trustees for such
activities public property, the Board of Trustees shall have
discretion whether to permit such activity, and to impose
reasonable conditions in the case of any approval.
(2) With respect to applications to the Mayor for such activities on
private property, if the Mayor determines that granting the
application will be inconsistent with the public health or safety, or
will create or exacerbate any dangerous condition, or will permit
an activity not consistent with a tax-exempt purpose, or that the
application is for an activity which is not entitled to the protection
of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or the
Constitution of the State of New York, the licensing officer or board
shall deny such application. Otherwise, the Mayor shall grant any
application from a bona fide applicant who has complied with the
above provisions. Any license granted by the Mayor shall include
and be subject to the following restrictions:
(a) All activity must be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 1/2 hour after sunset, unless the Mayor permits such
activity at other times.
(b) Any licensee shall not have more than four individuals engaged
in the licensed activity within the Village at any one time.
(c) The license shall be effective for a period not to exceed 10 days
from the date of issuance, unless the Mayor determines
otherwise for good cause shown. Nothing in this section shall
§ 157-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 157-2
146:268
§ 157-3. Suspension or revocation of license; appeals.
§ 157-4. Activity prohibited at listed properties.
The Village Clerk shall maintain a list of residents within the Village who
have expressed in writing a desire not to be visited by any person,
organization, society, association, company or corporation or its agents or
representatives for the purpose of proselytizing, canvassing or distributing
handbills, pamphlets or other written material or soliciting donations or
prohibit a person from obtaining successive licenses for the
same or similar activity.
G. All persons conducting any activity licensed under this section shall at
all times while doing so carry and prominently display an identification
card issued by the licensee, which identification card shall plainly show
the name of the person conducting the activity, a photograph of such
person, and the name and address of the licensee on whose behalf such
activity is being conducted. Such identification card shall be displayed
upon the request of any person to whom any licensed activity is
directed, and any person requesting such display shall be permitted to
copy or otherwise record such information.
H. No person conducting any activity pursuant to this section or any
license issued pursuant to this section shall enter upon the premises of
any owner or occupant who has expressed a desire in writing not to be
visited, canvassed, proselytized or solicited, or whose address has been
provided pursuant to § 157-4.
A. Any and all licenses, approvals or consents granted pursuant to this
article may be suspended by the Mayor for cause and without notice,
and may be revoked by the Board of Trustees after notice and an
opportunity to be heard, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
(2) Violation of any of the restrictions imposed on the issuance of such
license on the conduct of any activity so licensed, or any of the
provisions of this article.
(3) Activity which is deemed to be dangerous or otherwise inimicable
to the public safety and welfare.
B. Any person aggrieved by a determination by the Mayor to suspend a
license, approval or consent pursuant to this section may appeal to the
Board of Trustees in writing within five business days after notice of
such suspension. The Board of Trustees shall hear and determine such
appeal within 25 business days after the receipt of notice of such
appeal, and the person filing such appeal shall have the right to notice
of the date and time when such appeal will be heard and the right to be
heard with respect to such appeal.
§ 157-2 NUISANCES § 157-4
146:269
contributions of money or property or financial assistance of any kind.
Upon the issuance of any license hereunder, the Village Clerk shall provide
the licensee with a copy of the then-current list of such Village residents
who have expressed in writing a desire not to have any such person,
organization, society, association, company or corporation or its agents
or representatives enter upon their property or to have such activities
performed on their property. By applying for a license pursuant to this
section, each licensee shall be deemed to have agreed not to conduct any
licensed activity at any premises so enumerated in the list provided by the
Village.
§ 157-4.1. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or entity found to have violated any provision of this article
shall be guilty of an offense, and shall be subject to a fine in an amount to
be set by the court not less than $250 nor more than $750 for each such
violation. In the case of a violation of § 157-2H of this article, each visit to
each premises registered pursuant to this article shall constitute a separate
violation for each person making such visit. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
such fine shall be in an amount not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for
each violation found to have occurred within one year of a previous violation
by the same person or entity, and such fine shall be in an amount not less
than $750 for each violation found to have occurred within two years of a
previous violation by the same person or entity.
§ 157-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 157-4.1
146:270
ARTICLE II
Unwanted Deliveries or Deposits of Printed or Other Matter
§ 157-5. Unwanted deliveries or deposits on property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, or the agents or representatives
of any person or entity, to distribute, dispose of or deposit printed matter
or any other personal property on any private property in the Village if
the property is registered with the Village pursuant to this article. Such
registration shall be deemed to constitute a declaration that the owner or
owners of such property do not consent to entry upon such property for
such purpose, or to the distribution, disposition or deposit of such matter on
such property.
§ 157-6. Registration of properties at which deliveries or deposits
are not permitted.
The Village Clerk shall maintain a list of private properties in the Village
with respect to which the owner or owners of such property have filed a
written registration, in a form acceptable to the Village Clerk, declaring that
such owner or owners do not permit the distribution, deposit or disposition
of printed matter or other personal property upon such property. Such list
shall be a public record, and a copy thereof shall be available from the
Village Clerk, upon request, without fee.
A. This section shall not be applicable to delivery or distribution of any
printed or other matter by the United States Postal Service.
B. This section shall not be applicable to the delivery or distribution of
printed matter or other materials or property which have been ordered
by the owner or resident of the property, or to which the owner or any
resident of the property has subscribed, or a delivery, distribution or
deposit made with the consent of an owner or resident of the private
property or any person acting with the permission or consent of such
owner or resident.
A. Any registration filed with the Village Clerk pursuant to this article shall
expire on June 1 next succeeding the date of such registration;
provided, however, that such registration may be renewed or refiled at
any time, and any renewed or refiled registration shall remain in effect
until one year next succeeding such June 1 expiration date.
B. Any registration filed with the Village Clerk pursuant to this article may
be canceled at any time by the owner or owners of the registered
property, and any such cancellation shall be effective immediately upon
written notice to the Village Clerk to do so. Upon any such cancellation,
the registered property shall be removed from the registration list.
§ 157-5 NUISANCES § 157-7
146:271
§ 157-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or entity found to have violated any provision of this article shall
be guilty of an offense, and shall be subject to a fine in an amount, to be
set by the court, not less than $250 nor more than $350 for each item of
printed matter delivered or deposited in violation of this article; provided,
however, that such fine shall be in an amount not less than $350 nor more
than $500 for each violation found to have occurred within one year of a
previous violation by the same person or entity, and such fine shall be in an
amount not less than $500 for each violation found to have occurred within
two years of a previous violation by the same person or entity.
§ 157-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 157-7
146:272
Chapter 160
PERMITS AND APPROVALS
§ 157-7 NUISANCES § 157-7
146:273

ARTICLE I
Expiration Dates
[Adopted 1-20-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000 (Ch. 96, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 160-1. Duration of validity.
When any permit or approval issued by any official or board of the Village
pursuant to any provision of this Code, or any period of time provided in
any permit or approval for the performance of any act, expires on any date
which is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, the duration of the permit
or approval or period of time shall be deemed to be extended to expire at
12:00 midnight on the next succeeding business day, unless the permit or
approval expressly provides otherwise.
§ 160-1 NUISANCES § 160-1
146:275

ARTICLE II
Suspension of Permits, Licenses and Approvals
[Adopted 12-13-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010; amended in its entirety
12-8-2014 by L.L. No. 11-2014]
§ 160-2. Suspension of permits, licenses and approvals; suspension
of applications.
A. Upon receipt of notification from the Clerk of the Village Justice Court
of the failure of a person or entity to appear within 30 days after the
return date or new subsequent adjourned date of any summons or
appearance ticket issued pursuant to law and returnable in the Village
Justice Court charging such person or entity with a violation of any
provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or the Village Code, or any
other state or local law or regulation, or the failure of any person or
entity to pay any fine imposed by the Village Justice Court within 30
days of the date when such payment is due, the Village Clerk may
suspend any permit, license or approval issued by the Village to any
such person or entity, and the privileges of such person or entity
pursuant to any such permit, license or approval or pursuant to any
Village law or regulation, until notification from the Village Justice
Court Clerk to the Village Clerk that such person or entity has appeared
in response to such appearance ticket or summons or has paid such
fine.
B. Any suspension issued pursuant to this section shall take effect five
days from the date on which written notice thereof is sent by the Village
Clerk to the person or entity whose license, permit, approval or
privilege is suspended, and shall remain in effect until the Village Clerk
is notified by the Village Justice Court Clerk that the person or entity
has appeared or paid the fine as provided in this section.
C. Upon receipt of notification from the Clerk of the Village Justice Court
of the failure of a person or entity to appear within 30 days after the
return date or new subsequent adjourned date of any summons or
appearance ticket issued pursuant to law and returnable in the Village
Justice Court charging such person or entity with a violation of any
provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or the Village Code, or any
other state or local law or regulation, or the failure of any person or
entity to pay any fine imposed by the Village Justice Court within 30
days of the date when such payment is due, the Village Clerk shall
notify each Village board or agency which is considering an application
by such person or entity, and no such board or agency shall continue the
consideration of, nor approve, such application until the board of
agency has been notified by the Village Clerk that the person or entity
has appeared or paid the fine as provided in this section.
§ 160-2 NUISANCES § 160-2
146:277
Chapter 164
PROPERTY, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109, Fees.
§ 164-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes natural persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations and all other parties capable of being sued.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, land, highway,
waterway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, every class
of road, square, place and municipal parking field or any other property
under the ownership or control of a municipality and used to any degree by
the general public.[Amended 4-5-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976]
§ 164-2. Abandoning property in public places unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person, his agent or employee to leave or suffer
to permit to be left any vehicle, cart, shopping cart, wagon, box, barrel,
container, bale of merchandise or other movable object of any description
whatsoever, either owned by him or in his possession, custody or control, in
or upon any public place.
§ 164-3. Removal of abandoned property; disposition.
The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village shall remove or cause to
be removed any property described in § 164-2 hereof found in or upon any
public place and shall take or cause the same to be taken to premises or
property of the Village, where the same shall be held until redeemed or sold
as hereinafter provided.
§ 164-4. Notification of owner of property removal.
Whenever the Superintendent of Public Works shall take and hold any such
property containing or having thereon an identification of the ownership
or the right to possession thereof, a notice shall be sent to such person
by ordinary mail, advising the person that the property is held by the
Superintendent of Public Works and advising of the amount necessary to
redeem the same.
§ 160-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 164-5
164:278
§ 164-5. Redemption of property; fee.69
Such property may be redeemed by the owner thereof, at any time prior
to the sale, dismantling or disposal thereof, by tendering to the Clerk of
the Village, at the Village Office during regular business hours, the sum
set forth in Chapter 109, Fees. In addition, the person seeking to redeem
the property shall pay the cost of advertising the sale of said property if
any has been incurred by the Village. The Village Clerk shall require proof
satisfactory to the Clerk of the ownership or right to possession by the
person seeking the redemption or return of the property. Any return of
property by the Clerk to a person establishing his interest in the ownership
pursuant hereto shall be an absolute defense to the Village and to the Clerk
against any other person seeking or claiming to be entitled thereto.
§ 164-6. Auction of unredeemed property; notice.
When any such property remains in the custody of the Superintendent of
Public Works unclaimed and unredeemed for a period in excess of 15 days,
thereafter the same may be sold by the Village at public auction. A public
notice of at least five days shall be given that at a specified time and
place the said property will be sold at public auction. A general description
shall be sufficient. Such sale shall be conducted by the Clerk or by any
other person designated and authorized by the Board of Trustees, and the
proceeds thereof shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund. Such
property may be withdrawn at or prior to said sale and/or sold under such
terms and conditions as such person may designate.
§ 164-7. Disposition of unsold abandoned property.
In the event that said property shall remain unsold at public auction, the
Village Clerk or other person designated may reoffer said property for
sale at a subsequent public auction held pursuant to this chapter or may
dismantle or otherwise sell or dispose of the said article or property. Any
such sale or other disposition of such article or property pursuant to this
chapter shall be without liability on the part of the Village, the Village Clerk
or other persons designated by the Board of Trustees to the owner of such
property or other person lawfully entitled thereto or having an interest
therein.70
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
70.Editor's Note: Former § 99-8, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 164-5 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 164-7
164:279
Chapter 167
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and plumbing — See
Ch. 95.
Fire lanes on private property — See Ch. 123.
Nuisances — See Ch. 146.
Maintenance of sidewalks — See Ch. 191, Art.
III.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 164-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 164-7
164:280
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 167-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Village of Great Neck Estates."
§ 167-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and uniform standards
governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of housing, business
and other premises and to establish reasonable safeguards for the safety,
health and welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
§ 167-3. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to all premises as follows:
§ 167-4. Applicability of provisions.
A. Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings, buildings of
mixed occupancy or accessory structures are located.
B. Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple dwellings.
C. Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
D. Accessory structures, accessory to residential occupancies.
E. Business premises.
F. All other premises.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall supersede local laws, ordinances,
codes or regulations to the extent that such laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter,
provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent
the adoption and enforcement of a law, ordinance, code or regulation
which is more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those
provided in this chapter, and such more restrictive requirement or
higher standard shall govern during the period in which it is in effect.
B. Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health,
water supply or sewage disposal law or ordinance, or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, or other local law, ordinance, code or
regulation, the provision or requirement which is more restrictive or
which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
§ 167-1 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-5
164:281
§ 167-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure the use of which is incidental to
that of the principal building and which is located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental to
the principal use or occupancy of any premises. Such "accessory uses" may
include, among others, offices for the building management; dining rooms,
banquet rooms, public kitchens and bathrooms; recreation and play rooms;
laundries for the use of tenants and occupants and in connection with the
management operation of a residential building; maintenance and work
shops, storage rooms for linen, bedding, furniture, supplies and tenants'
equipment and effects; garages within a residential building or on the
premises thereof used for the storage of passenger-type motor vehicles; and
other uses not specified hereinabove.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling or two-family
dwelling.
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations
of this chapter or approved by an authority designated by law or this
chapter.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade which
has more than half its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the
average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
BATHROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which may also contain water closets, lavatories or
fixtures serving similar purposes. See "toilet room."
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls,
or within exterior or party walls, and a roof, affording shelter to person,
animals or property.
BUSINESS PREMISES — Property used wholly or in part for commercial
purposes, including but not limited to shopping centers, supermarkets,
retail stores, warehouses, banks, office buildings, gasoline service stations,
motor vehicle repair shops, other business uses and nonprofit enterprises
with or without a structure erected thereon.
BUSINESS UNIT — A structure erected on business premises, used for
commercial purposes.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing not more than one
dwelling unit occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
§ 167-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-5
164:282
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing not more than two
dwelling units occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with a separate entrance and with
provisions for living, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for
the use of one family only; does not include mobile homes, trailers or boats.
EXIT — A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure to
the exterior at street or grade, including doorways, passageways, hallways,
corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes and all other elements necessary
for egress or escape.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by
one or more persons related by blood or marriage.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide
or procedure in the field of construction or related thereto, recognized and
accepted as authoritative.
GRADE, FINISHED — The natural surface of the ground or surface of the
ground after completion of any change in contour, abutting building or
premises.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space occupied by one or more persons for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be
habitable space. See "nonhabitable space," "public space" and "exit."
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including a trailer, which is without a
currently valid license plate or plates and is in either a rusted, wrecked,
discarded, dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition.
MOBILE HOME — A movable living unit equipped with a chassis and
provided with any of the following mechanical systems and equipment:
plumbing, heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units.
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — See "multiple dwelling."
MUNICIPALITY — A county, town or village.
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath,
toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler
rooms, closets and other spaces for services and maintenance of the
building and those spaces used for vertical travel between stories. See
"habitable space," "public space" and "exit."
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, the drainage system and
the vent system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances, within the property lines of the premises.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes.
§ 167-5 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-5
164:283
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a building for public use, such as lobbies,
lounges, reception, ball, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms, banquet
and dining rooms and their kitchens, and swimming pools.
SEWAGE — Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution and which may include industrial wastes and liquids
containing chemicals.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
TOILET ROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more water closets,
which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing
fixtures. See "bathroom."
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from a space by natural
or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, louvers or stacks with or without wind-driven devices.
§ 167-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-5
164:284
ARTICLE II
Space Requirements for Buildings
§ 167-6. General requirements.
§ 167-7. Occupancy classification of buildings.
Buildings, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be classified in respect to
their occupancies as follows:
§ 167-8. Maximum occupancy.
In dwelling units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to the
number determined on the basis of the floor areas of habitable rooms, other
than kitchens, as follows:
§ 167-9. Prohibited uses.
A. Buildings occupied in whole or in part as defined in this chapter shall
comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth concerning
occupancy, size, light and ventilation in order to provide a safe and
healthful environment.
B. The term "accessory use" shall have a uniform meaning and shall apply
in the same manner and under the same conditions or restrictions to all
buildings and premises.
A. One- and two-family dwellings: buildings containing one or two
dwelling units with not more than one family in either one of such
dwelling units.
B. Multiple dwellings:
(1) Buildings containing three or more dwelling units.
(2) Apartment houses.
(3) Garden apartments.
C. Business units.
D. Accessory structures.
A. One occupant per room having a floor area of at least 90 but less than
140 square feet.
B. Two occupants per room having a floor area of at least 140 but less than
200 square feet.
C. Three occupants per room having a floor area of 200 or more square
feet.
A. The use for sleeping purposes of any kitchen, nonhabitable space or
public space is prohibited.
§ 167-6 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-9
164:285
§ 167-10. Habitable space.
B. The use in any dwelling of any cellar space as habitable space is
prohibited.
C. The use of mobile homes or trailers for habitable space is prohibited.
A. Size.
(1) Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet
six inches over 50% of the floor area; and the floor area where the
ceiling is less than five feet shall not be considered in computing
the floor area.
(2) A dwelling unit shall contain at least one habitable room having a
minimum of 150 square feet of floor area and a minimum horizontal
dimension of 10 feet.
(3) Kitchens shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of floor area, and
other habitable spaces shall contain not less than 50 square feet of
floor area and shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of seven
feet.
(4) Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooking
space or foyer, shall be deemed to be part of a habitable room. The
area of the opening in the dividing partition between the alcove and
the room shall be at least 80% of the wall area of such partition,
measured on the alcove side, but not less than 40 square feet. The
depth of such alcove shall not exceed half its width. The floor area
of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of the room in
determining light and ventilation requirements for the room. An
alcove with an area of 60 square feet or more, but less than the
required area of a habitable room, shall be separately lighted and
ventilated as required by habitable space.
B. Basements. Basements shall not be deemed habitable space where
required windows are located only on one wall and the depth of the
basement space exceeds four times its clear height.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one or
more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels or any
combination thereof that face directly on legal open spaces of at
least six inches above the adjoining finished grade or are above a
roof. The amount of light shall be equivalent to that transmitted
through clear glass equal in area to 10% of the floor area of the
habitable space.
(2) Habitable space shall be provided with artificial light.
(3) Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that
§ 167-9 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-10
164:286
§ 167-11. Public space.
§ 167-12. Nonhabitable space.
face legal open space above the adjoining finished grade or above
a roof, or through openable parts of skylights, providing total clear
ventilation area equal to not less than 5% of the total floor area of
each habitable space.
(4) Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation
in addition to natural ventilation.
D. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Dwelling units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the dwelling unit.
(2) Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separated from each
other and from other spaces outside the sleeping rooms to provide
privacy.
A. Height. Public space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six
inches measured from finished floor to finished ceiling.
B. Light and ventilation.
(1) Public spaces shall be provided with artificial light.
(2) In public spaces, stairways and passageways, artificial light shall
be electric lighting available at all times so as to afford safe
passage for occupants and users. Such lighting shall conform to the
following:
(a) A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the
distance between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that
no wall is more than 15 feet distant from a fixture.
(b) Incandescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/4 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps with a total of not less than 60 watts.
(c) Fluorescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/10 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps of a total of not less than 40 watts.
(d) Where under these formulas the calculated wattage does not
correspond to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall
be used.
(3) Public space shall be provided with either adequate natural
ventilation, conforming to the requirements for habitable space, or
with adequate mechanical ventilation.
§ 167-10 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-12
164:287
A. Height. Nonhabitable space, except crawl spaces and attics, in multiple
dwellings shall have a minimum height of seven feet measured from
floor to ceiling.
B. Toilet rooms and bathrooms.
(1) Toilet rooms and bathrooms in one- and two-family dwellings shall
have provisions for privacy.
(2) Toilet rooms and bathrooms for dwelling units in multiple dwellings
shall be located within the dwelling units and be accessible from
any sleeping room without passing through any other sleeping
room and shall have provisions for adequate privacy.
(3) Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings and business units
shall be in separate rooms for each sex where there are five or
more employees, shall be readily accessible to such employees and
shall not open directly into any public kitchen or other public space
used for the cooking or preparation of food.
(4) In one- and two-family dwellings, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
be provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
(5) In multiple dwellings and business units, floors of bathrooms, toilet
rooms and similar spaces shall be surfaced with ceramic tile, and
such tile shall extend at least four inches above the floor on all
walls. Such tile shall be maintained in a watertight condition so
that floors can be flushed or washed without leaking.
(6) In all dwellings and business units, shower enclosures and
bathtubs shall be maintained in a watertight condition.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
artificial light appropriate for the use of such rooms.
(2) Laundry rooms, furnace rooms and similar nonhabitable space
shall be provided with artificial light appropriate for the intended
use of such rooms.
(3) Stairs shall be provided with artificial light to allow safe ascent or
descent.
(4) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
ventilation in accordance with either of the following:
(a) Natural ventilation as required for habitable space, except that
such openable areas shall not be less than three square feet for
bathrooms or toilet rooms and not less than six square feet for
kitchenettes.
§ 167-12 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-12
164:288
§ 167-13. Access and vertical travel between stories.
§ 167-14. Exits.
(b) Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 30 cubic feet
per minute for bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than
120 cubic feet per minute for kitchenettes.
(5) Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central heat producing,
air conditioning and other equipment or which are designed or
used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles shall be ventilated
directly to the outer air, and air from these spaces shall not be
recirculated to other parts of the building.
(6) Ventilation shall be provided in unheated attics, spaces below flat
roofs and crawl spaces. Location and net areas of ventilation
openings shall be such as to minimize deterioration of structural
members from condensation or other causes, in conformity with
generally accepted standards.
A. Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in
conformity with generally accepted standards so as to serve the
occupants.
B. Firmly secured railings shall be provided on stairs, balconies, landings
and stairwells.
A. Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the
interior of the building to the exterior at street or grade level.
B. Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of emergency.
C. In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to a primary exit from the
building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one
or more exit openings for emergency use.
D. In multiple dwellings and business units approved exits shall be
provided.
§ 167-12 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-14
164:289

ARTICLE III
Requirements for Structural Maintenance
§ 167-15. General requirements.
§ 167-16. Foundation walls; exterior walls; roofing.
§ 167-17. Interior protection.
A. Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weights and the loads to which they may be
subject.
B. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil
without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement
of the building or of any structural part.
C. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all
structural members which may become unsound if left unprotected.
Causes of such deterioration include, among others, action of freezing
and thawing, dampness, corrosion, wetting and drying and termites and
other destructive insects.
D. Buildings built in soil which is water-bearing at any season of the year
shall be maintained so that ground- and surface water will not
penetrate into habitable spaces, basements and cellars.
A. Foundation walls shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound and
to prevent entrance of moisture, termites and vermin. Such protection
shall consist of shoring where necessary, subsoil drains at footings,
grouting of masonry cracks, waterproofing of walls and joists and other
suitable means.
B. Exterior walls and wall components shall be maintained so as to prevent
deterioration due to the elements and destructive insects. Such
maintenance shall consist of painting, installation or repair of walls,
copings and flashings, waterproof coatings, installation or repair of
termite shields, poison treatment of soil or other suitable means.
C. Roofing shall be maintained in watertight condition so as to prevent
leakage into the building. Such maintenance shall consist of repairs of
roofing, waterproof coatings or other suitable means.
A. Crawl spaces shall be maintained free of moisture, and the flow of air
from such spaces into walls above shall be effectively barred so as to
prevent deterioration of structural members. Such provisions shall
consist of maintenance of openings in foundation walls to provide
adequate circulation of air in the crawl space, covering the ground in
the crawl space with a moisture barrier, installation of drains outside
the structure if the crawl space is below surrounding grade, blocking
openings in stud walls to prevent flow of air and moisture into walls,
§ 167-15 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-17
164:291
frequent destruction of termite tubes from the soil to wood floor
members above, poison treatment of soil and other suitable means.
B. Structural members shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound.
Such protection shall consist of shoring, reinforcement or repair where
necessary, frequent destruction of termite tubes or other appropriate
means.
C. Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound
and to prevent leakage of gases into the structure. Such maintenance
shall consist of clearing flue stoppages, sealing open joints, repairing
masonry where necessary and other suitable means.
D. Ceilings and walls shall be maintained so that parts which become loose
or defective do not constitute a hazard to occupants. Such maintenance
shall consist of removing and replacing loose or defective sections.
E. Toilet room and bathroom floors shall be maintained so as to prevent
leakage of water through the floor, under normal conditions of use and
floor washing, and resultant deterioration or defects in structural
members and ceilings below. Maintenance shall consist of repairs which
effectively provide the moistureproof and waterproof qualities required
for the particular floor.
§ 167-17 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-17
164:292
ARTICLE IV
Fire Safety Requirements
§ 167-18. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
It shall be prohibited to:
A. Except as authorized by this subsection, accumulate or store on all
premises any fuel, highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints,
volatile oils, cleaning fluids and similar materials, or any combustible
refuse liable to spontaneous combustion, such as wastepaper, boxes,
rags or similar materials. [Amended 1-6-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
(1) Storage of such materials outdoors, above ground: The Code
Official may permit outdoor, aboveground storage of not more than
three containers of propane or liquid natural gas, each not
exceeding a capacity of 20 pounds or 5 gallons, and each such
container and the location thereof to be conforming to all
regulatory requirements. Each such storage container shall be
located in a side yard or rear yard, in a location complying with
requirements for setbacks of structures, and no such container may
be located in a front yard.
(2) Storage of such materials indoors, above ground: The Code Official
may permit storage of not more than 275 gallons of fuel oil for
heating, propane gas or liquid natural gas, provided that such
materials are contained in a fully enclosed structure approved by
the Code Official, with evergreen screening of the structure as
approved by the Code Official. Containers for storage of such fuel
oil or diesel fuel shall be in double-walled, leakproof, corrosionresistant
containers, with full containment, and otherwise as
approved by the Code Official. In addition, the Code Official may
permit storage of gasoline or diesel fuel in approved containers and
in location(s) approved by the Code Official, not exceeding a total of
15 gallons of such materials at any one property. No storage
permitted pursuant to this paragraph shall be within a principal
dwelling. Any such storage structure shall be located in a lawful
garage, or in side yard or rear yard at a location conforming to
applicable setback requirements, and shall not be located in a front
yard.
(3) Storage of such materials outdoors, below ground: The Code
Official may permit storage of fuel oil (including fuel oil for
heating), diesel fuel, propane or liquid natural gas, or gasoline,
provided that such storage and the quantity thereof conforms to all
applicable laws, rules and regulations. Storage of any such
materials shall be in containers conforming to all applicable laws,
rules and regulations, and approved by the Code Official. Any such
storage containers shall be located in a side yard or rear yard in
conformity with requirements for setback of structures and shall
not be located in a front yard.
§ 167-18 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-18
164:293
§ 167-19. Walls, ceilings and fire separations.
§ 167-20. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surface of walls and ceilings, and interior trim,
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or objectionable gases.
§ 167-21. Fireplaces.
(4) Storage of such materials indoors, below ground: The Code Official
may permit storage of fuel oil (including fuel oil for heating), diesel
fuel, propane or liquid natural gas, or gasoline, in approved
containers, provided that such storage and the quantity thereof
conforms to all applicable laws, rules and regulations. Containers
for storage of such fuel oil or diesel fuel shall be double-walled,
leakproof, corrosion-resistant containers, with full containment,
and otherwise as approved by the Code Official. Storage of any
other permitted materials shall be in containers approved by the
Code Official.
B. Accumulate or store equipment, goods or materials on fire escapes or
stairs, in stairways or passageways, at doors or windows or in any other
locations where in the event of fire such materials may obstruct egress
of occupants or interfere with fire-fighting operations.
C. Place or install air-conditioning units, dehumidifiers, fans or other
related equipment in windows or doorways leading to fire escapes.
D. Park or store motor vehicles under fire escapes.
A. Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings
which would permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed
space.
B. In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be
separated from residential space by adequate fire separations which
will retard the spread of fire.
C. Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated from
other spaces in the building by approved fire separations which will
retard the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors
originating within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of
the building.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used or intended to be used for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and
shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible material and
structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
§ 167-18 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-21
164:294
§ 167-22. Theaters: fire hazards and safety.71
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or
shatter at high temperatures.
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks
or embers from the fire.
A. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, where used in this
section the following terms shall be respectively deemed to mean:
MOTION PICTURE — A display, on a screen or other device, of pictures
or objects in motion or rapidly changing scenery, whether or not such
display shall be accompanied by a lecture, recitation or vocal or
instrumental music.
MOTION PICTURE THEATER — Any public hall or room in which
motion pictures are displayed, in which the seating capacity does not
exceed 600 persons and in which there is no stage or scenery.
OPEN-AIR MOTION PICTURE THEATER — Any public place or space in
the open air in which motion pictures are exhibited and in which there
is no stage or scenery.
THEATER — Any room which has a seating capacity exceeding 50
persons.
B. Designation of exits. The owner, lessee or other person having charge
or control of any theater, motion picture theater or open-air motion
picture theater shall cause each and every door and means of exit for
use in case of fire or panic to be marked conspicuously with the word
"exit," in legible-type letters not less than six inches high, painted on
the inside over each of such exits and shall cause to be placed inside
over each exit one red light or illuminated sign and shall cause the same
to be illuminated while the audience is present. The electric circuit to
which such exit lights or signs are connected shall be independent of
any other electric circuit within the building.
C. Obstruction of exits prohibited. All exit doors and doors leading to fire
escapes in all theaters, motion picture theaters and open-air motion
picture theaters must be so constructed as to open outwards and must
be unlocked when the same are open to the public. All passageways,
fire escapes and exits must be kept free and clear and shall be used for
no other purpose than for entrance to and exit from such theater.
D. Obstruction of aisles and passageways. No aisle, passageway or space
in the rear of the seats in any theater, motion picture theater or open-air
motion picture theater shall be obstructed by any campstool, chair,
71.Editor's Note: As to licensing of theaters admitting unaccompanied children, see Ch. 207,
Theaters.
§ 167-21 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-22
164:295
sofa, settee or other obstacle; nor, except as provided in Subsection E
herein, shall any person be permitted to stand or sit therein.
E. Standing room. Where there is a passageway more than six feet in
depth in the rear of the seats in any theater other than a motion picture
theater, it shall be lawful to permit persons to stand therein as follows:
(1) Standing in passageways. If the passageway is more than six feet
and less than 16 feet in depth, persons may stand therein, provided
that an unobstructed passageway of at least six feet in depth is left
open, and there are no more than four rows of persons standing. If
the passageway is more than 16 feet deep, any number of persons
or rows of persons may stand therein, provided that an
unobstructed passageway of at least 10 feet in depth is left open. In
theaters, other than motion picture theaters, having a passageway
in the rear of the seats six feet or less in depth but having in
addition an outer passageway in the rear thereof to which all aisle
heads have straight and direct access, two rows of persons may be
permitted to stand in such passageway in the rear of such seats,
but under no circumstances more than two such rows.
(2) Standing in balconies. In balconies or galleries only one row of
persons shall be permitted to stand; provided, however, that no
person shall be permitted to stand in front of any row or bank of
seats.
(3) Standing room to be indicated. The space to be occupied by said
standees shall be separated from the space to be left clear for
passage by tape, ribbon or other easily broken material supported
by light posts fixed in stationary sockets and not less than three nor
more than four feet from the floor and so constructed and placed as
to be no obstruction in case of panic or emergency.
(4) Standing room in aisles. In no event, nor under any circumstances,
shall any person be permitted to stand in or at the head of any aisle.
F. Booth for projection machines and film. Apparatus for projecting
motion pictures shall be contained in a fireproof booth or enclosure of a
construction approved by the Building Department of the Village. The
booth in which the picture machine is operated shall be provided with
an opening in its roof, or in the upper part of its side walls, leading to
the outdoor air, and with a vent flue which shall have a minimum crosssectional
area of 50 square inches and shall be fireproof. When the
booth is in use, there shall be a constant current of air passing outward
through said opening or vent flue at the rate of not less than 30 cubic
feet per minute. The requirements of this section shall apply to portable
booths and booths in open-air theaters as well as to booths in theaters
and motion picture theaters.
G. Smoking in booth for projecting machine prohibited. No one shall
smoke in the booth for the projecting machine of any theater, motion
§ 167-22 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-22
164:296
§ 167-23. Numbering of structures. [Added 3-12-2001 by L.L. No.
3-200172]
Every principal structure located within the Village of Great Neck Estates
shall have and display at least one street number assigned to such structure
by the Village Clerk of the Village of Great Neck Estates. Such numbers
must be prominently displayed on the front of each such structure or at such
other location as is permitted by this section. All nonresidential properties
shall display such number at the main entrance to the structure, and at any
other location required by this section.
picture theater or open-air motion picture theater at any time when the
same is open to the public or the booth contains any film or part thereof.
H. Care of films. Every booth in which a motion picture projecting machine
shall be operated shall contain an approved fireproof box for the
storage of all picture films not on the projecting machine, and films
shall not be stored in any other place on the premises. No films shall be
rewound or repaired except in the booth or in some other enclosure
approved as fireproof by the Building Department of the Village.
I. Fire-extinguishing appliances. Portable fire-extinguishing appliances
approved by the Building Department of the Village shall be provided in
every theater, motion picture theater and open-air motion picture
theater, of the following kind and number:
(1) Pressurized water extinguishers.
(2) Fire extinguishers approved by the Building Department of the
Village of which two shall be on the main floor and two in the
gallery, if there is one, and two in the operating booth.
(3) Four-pound flat-head axes, two of which shall be on the main floor
and two in the gallery, if there is one.
(4) One ten-pound portable CO2 or dry-powder fire extinguisher.
J. No person shall in violation of this chapter obstruct or cause to be
obstructed any aisle, passageway or space in the rear of the seats in any
theater, motion picture theater or open-air motion picture theater, nor
shall any person stand in and about the passageways, balconies and
aisles of any theater, motion picture theater or open-air motion picture
theater, except as provided in § 167-22E of this chapter.
K. No owner, lessee, manager or other person having charge or control of
any theater or motion picture theater, or any proprietor, usher, agent or
employee, shall knowingly allow or permit any person, whether in his
employ or otherwise, to do or permit any act or acts in violation of the
foregoing sections of this chapter.
72.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 90 days after its adoption
and filing with the Secretary of State, except that the provisions of § 167-23C shall be
effective immediately upon adoption and filing.
§ 167-22 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-23
164:297
§ 167-24. (Reserved)73
A. In any case where the location of the street number display required by
this section is not clearly visible from the adjoining street or is more
than 75 feet from the right-of-way of the adjoining street, such number
shall be displayed on a post, not to exceed five feet in height, and
installed in close proximity to the property access, and at a point no less
than five feet nor greater than 25 feet from the right-of-way. Property
numbers displayed on mailboxes are acceptable as compliance with this
section, provided that the numbers are of the minimum size and
visibility as required by this section and located as required by this
section. All required property numbers shall be visible from the street
and be located sufficiently distant from shrubs, fences, trees and other
obstructions so that the clear visibility of the number from the street
shall not be obscured.
B. All property numbers shall be Arabic in design only, with a minimum of
five inches in height and shall sharply contrast in color from the
structure or other surface upon which the number is mounted. Script
numbers shall not be permitted. All property numbers shall be
displayed with reflective surfaces which will permit or enhance the
visibility of such numbers in the absence of sufficient daylight.
C. In the case of any principal structure constructed, or altered, or
expanded, on or after the adoption of this section, no temporary or final
certificate of occupancy will be issued for such structure until the Code
Official has verified that such property number has been properly
installed. Furthermore, no inspection for new construction will be
provided unless the property number is installed and displayed in a
prominent location on the site prior to inspection. The Code Official may
accept temporary numbers prior to inspection where, in the opinion of
the Code Official, it is appropriate to do so because the installation of a
permanent number is not feasible due to impending or incomplete
construction.
D. Any owner of property on which the required property number is not
displayed as required by this section shall be guilty of a violation of this
Code; provided, however, that a warning notice, rather than a summons
or appearance ticket, shall be issued for the first such violation at any
property.
E. The Code Official is hereby authorized to grant exemptions or
variations from the requirements of this section with respect to size and
location of property numbers where the Code Official determines that
public safety would not be impacted adversely, and where the Code
Official determines that the size and location of the property numbers
will adequately provide for visibility from the adjacent street. A written
record shall be maintained by the Village of all such exemptions and
variations.
§ 167-23 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-24
164:298
73.Editor's Note: Former § 167-24, Solid waste and construction containers, added 12-3-2003
by L.L. No. 4-2003, was repealed 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004. See now Art. VI-A.
§ 167-24 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-24
164:299

ARTICLE V
Equipment Requirements
§ 167-25. General requirements.
§ 167-26. Plumbing systems.74
§ 167-27. Water supply systems.
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire protection and radiation production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical
additions, installations or systems for the use of the building shall be
installed, located and maintained so that under normal conditions of
use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or
welfare, a danger because of structural defects or a source of ignition
or a radiation hazard and will not create excessive noise or otherwise
become a nuisance. Equipment and systems include, but are not limited
to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangars, pipe covering,
wiring, fittings and materials used as part of or in connection with, such
installations.
B. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected from freezing.
C. Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded against to protect against accidental contact.
A. Plumbing systems shall be maintained in a sanitary and serviceable
condition.
B. Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken structural
members or cause damage or deterioration to any part of the building
through fixture usage.
A. Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all times in
residential buildings. The domestic water supply system of the building
shall be connected to such approved source and shall not be subject to
contamination. When supplied from a public source, the potable water
supply system shall not be connected to private or unsafe water
supplies.
B. Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to provide
at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable
them to function satisfactorily and without undue noise under all
normal conditions of use.
C. Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that water
used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be reintroduced into
74.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 95, Building Construction and Plumbing.
§ 167-25 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-27
164:301
§ 167-28. Sewage drainage systems.75
§ 167-29. Stormwater drainage. [Amended 8-10-2015 by L.L. No.
6-2015]
the domestic water supply system or distributed through such
equipment to plumbing fixtures.
D. Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive temperatures.
A. Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system, and
such systems shall be connected to a public sewer or to an adequate
and approved system of sewage disposal.
B. Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
C. Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system shall be
equipped with a water seal trap.
D. Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the pipes
may be readily cleaned.
E. The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be maintained
so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes in order that
siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss of trap seal
under ordinary conditions of use.
F. Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and maintained so
as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost closures, the return of
foul air to the building or the creation of a nuisance to adjacent
premises.
G. Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials shall be
equipped with air breaks adequate to prevent contamination of such
contents from any possible backup of sewage through the direct or
indirect drainage piping.
A. Roofs and paved areas, including yards, terraces and courts, shall be
drained. Storm drainage shall be conveyed to an adequate and
approved system of stormwater disposal where available. Storm drains
shall be discharged in such manner that water will not flow onto
sidewalks.
75.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 184, Sewers.
§ 167-27 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-29
164:302
B. Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
C. Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of noncombustible
material, except that wood leaders and gutters may be used for
buildings not more than three stories high.
D. Required retention facilities (effective only for new construction or
additions or alterations on or after September 1, 2015).
(1) On any premises where construction involves the creation of more
than 500 square feet of new impervious surfaces or, in the
determination of the Building Official, will generate significant
additional runoff, the owner of the premises shall provide on-site
water retention facilities which conform to the following minimum
criteria:
(a) For all new impervious surfaces, on-site water retention
facilities for the full volume of 100% of a five-inch rainfall;
(b) For all other surfaces, on-site water retention facilities for the
full volume of at least 30% of a five-inch rainfall. The Building
Official may require additional retention where warranted by
soil conditions, the type of surface coverage, groundwater
conditions, and site slopes.
(2) Where, in the opinion of the Building Official, a property includes
extreme slopes, grade raises, or other unusual conditions, the
Building Official may require greater on-site water retention
facilities in order to protect adjacent properties, public roads and/
or waterways and other wetlands.
(3) When considering any land use application, the Board of Trustees
(including when acting as the Planning Board), the Board of
Appeals, and the Architectural Review Board may require greater
on-site water retention facilities in order to protect adjacent
properties, public roads and/or waterways and other wetlands.
(4) All water retention facilities shall be customary drywells and/or
such other facilities as may be approved by the Building Official,
located in good hydraulic contact with high-rate soils to assure
proper leaching.
(5) All water retention facilities shall be located not less than two feet
above the highest reasonably foreseeable potential groundwater
level beneath the facilities.
(6) Adequate soil borings shall be provided to the Village to assure
compliance with Subsections D(4) and (5) above.
(7) All water retention facilities shall be subject to the approval of the
Building Department.
§ 167-29 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-30
164:303
§ 167-30. Plumbing facilities.76
§ 167-31. Plumbing fixtures.
§ 167-32. Swimming pools: water supply, drains, filtering and
installation.77
A. Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing systems
designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to furnish cold
water to every water closet and urinal and hot and cold water to every
sink, lavatory, bathtub and shower required therein. In two-family
dwellings and multiple dwellings hot water shall be furnished at a
temperature range of 130º F. to 140º F. from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00
midnight.
B. There shall be provided, within each dwelling unit, plumbing fixtures
consisting of at least:
(1) One kitchen sink.
(2) One water closet.
(3) One bathtub or shower.
(4) One lavatory.
C. Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on all premises.
A. Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth nonabsorbent material and
shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
B. Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible for
their intended use.
C. Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible, lighted
and ventilated.
A. Water supply used for filling or for cleaning of the pool shall be clean.
Water supply shall be protected against potential pollution from all
sources, including cross-connection and backflow.
B. Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and adequately
drained. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding the swimming
pool and arranged so that water from such areas will drain without
entering the pool.
C. Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where required, shall be
adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of water during each period
the pool is in use. Equipment containing gases or disinfectants capable
76.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 95, Building Construction and Plumbing.
77.Editor's Note: For additional regulations, see Ch. 230, Zoning, § 230-30.
§ 167-30 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-32
164:304
§ 167-33. Water supply tanks.
§ 167-34. Fuel gas systems and equipment.
of giving off irritating, toxic or flammable fumes shall be located in
ventilated rooms.
D. The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt, sand
or other foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
A. Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
watertight, verminproof, rodent-proof, resistant to corrosion and
capable of withstanding the working pressures under normal operation.
B. Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
C. Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed for
such other use.
D. Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in proper working condition.
E. Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to furnish
water in sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
A. General requirements.
(1) Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
(2) Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning
appliances connected thereto.
(3) Soldering of gas piping is not permitted.
B. Shutoff valves.
(1) Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply, and such means shall be maintained in
good operating condition and shall be clearly marked with a sign
reading "Gas Shutoff."
(2) An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in the
piping in close proximity to and ahead of every gas appliance
installed after the effective date of this chapter.
C. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains. Gas services, gas
meters and gas pressure regulators shall be located so that they are
protected from damage. In multiple dwellings and business units, gas
meters shall be located in a fire-resistant room, vented directly to the
outside by a permanently installed louvered ventilator and free from a
§ 167-32 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-34
164:305
§ 167-35. Heat and heating equipment.
source of ignition. There shall be no storage of materials or equipment
in the gas meter room. In no case shall such equipment be located in a
boiler room.
D. High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure
in excess of one pound per square inch gage shall be provided with a
device to reduce such pressure to not more than 1/2 pound per square
inch gage prior to entering the meter, except where such service
supplies equipment using gas at high pressures.
A. General requirements.
(1) Residential buildings intended for occupancy between the 15th day
of October and the first day of May of the following year shall be
provided with heating equipment designed to maintain a
temperature of not less than 70º F. at a distance of three feet from
exterior walls and at a level of five feet above the floor in habitable
spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms. The capability of
the heating equipment to maintain such indoor temperatures shall
be based on the average or the recorded annual minimum outside
temperatures for the locality.
(2) In two-family dwellings and multiple dwellings, adequate heat shall
be provided to maintain the indoor temperatures in habitable
spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms at 70º F. when the
outside temperature falls below 55º F.
B. Smoke control. Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment and
incinerators shall be installed and maintained so that the emission or
discharge into the atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other
products of combustion will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to
the health, comfort, safety or property of any person.
C. Warm-air heating. Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for
heating shall conform to the requirements of such equipment used for
ventilating purposes.
D. Prohibited locations for heat-producing equipment. Fuel-burning water
heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms or toilet
rooms.
E. Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. Fuel supply connection to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
F. Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing equipment is
installed on or adjacent to combustible materials, the location,
insulation, clearance and the control of the equipment shall be such
that the temperature on the surface will not exceed a safe temperature.
In multiple dwellings and business units, boilers shall be located in fire-
§ 167-34 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-35
164:306
resistant rooms with a self-closing three-hour fire-rated door and
vented to the exterior with permanently installed ventilating device
continuously open.
G. Air supply.
(1) Direct-fired heat-producing equipment and the enclosure in which
it is located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment
and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation
of heat.
(2) Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
(1) Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
(2) The use of fuel-burning space heaters in residential dwellings is
prohibited.
(3) Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney or
flue when the discharge of products of combustion into the space
where the equipment is installed would be a hazard.
I. Safety devices.
(1) Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or
temperatures shall be provided with means to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(2) Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
(a) When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the
fuel supply shall be cut off.
(b) When a predetermined temperature or pressure is exceeded,
the input of additional heat shall be prevented or reduced to a
safe rate.
(c) When the water level in a steam boiler drops below a
predetermined level, the fuel supply shall be cut off.
J. Heating of garages. Fuel-burning equipment for garages servicing
multiple dwellings shall be located in heater rooms.
K. Boiler rooms shall be maintained in a clean and orderly condition. Such
rooms shall not be used for storage of materials other than those used
for the operation of the heating system.
§ 167-35 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-36
164:307
§ 167-36. Chimneys and flues; spark arresters.
§ 167-37. Incinerators.
A. General requirements.
(1) Chimneys, flues and their supports shall be installed and
maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
noncombustible and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling.
(2) Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air.
(3) Masonry chimneys shall have noncombustible foundations.
(4) Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue gas
without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling at the
temperature to which they will be subjected.
(5) Openings for smoke pipe connections shall be provided with means
for easy connection without restriction of flue.
(6) No flue shall have smoke pipe connections in more than one story
of a building.
(7) Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces shall not be connected to
the same flue.
B. Fire safety. Chimneys and flues shall be installed and maintained so that
under conditions of use the temperature of any combustible material
adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in contact therewith does not
exceed a safe temperature.
C. Spark arresters. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a
chimney or flue which may emit sparks shall be provided with a spark
arrester of noncombustible, construction. Spark arresters shall have
sufficient total clear area to permit unrestricted passage of flue gases.
The horizontal plates or screens of said arrester must be at least 24
inches above the top of the flue or chimney. Openings in spark arresters
shall be of such size as to prevent passage of embers and to minimize
clogging by soot.
A. General requirements.
(1) Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
(2) Incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning auxiliary
fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion of refuse
and products of combustion.
(3) A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a spark arrester
meeting the specifications set forth in § 167-36C herein.
§ 167-36 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-37
164:308
§ 167-38. Electrical wiring and equipment; lighting and signs.78
(4) Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable noncombustible
chimney, smokestack or flue.
(5) Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
B. Service openings.
(1) Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
(2) Service openings shall be smoketight.
(3) Durable signs with plainly legible letters prohibiting disposal of
highly flammable substances in incinerators shall be provided near
service openings.
A. General requirements.
(1) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity
with generally accepted standards and maintained so as not to be a
potential source of ignition of combustible material or a potential
source of electrical hazard. All electrical wiring shall be encased in
a metal sheath.
(2) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(3) Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations
or where exposed to explosive or flammable gases or to excessive
temperatures shall be of a type approved for the purpose and
location.
(4) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
excessive current by properly rated overcurrent devices.
(5) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the
danger of high voltages from lightning or other causes.
(6) Electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produces arcs or
sparks shall be enclosed unless separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
(7) Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
B. Artificial lighting.
78.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 102, Electric Installations.
§ 167-37 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-38
164:309
(1) Residential buildings and occupancies and business units shall be
installed throughout to provide adequate illumination for the
intended use of each space. Electric wiring systems shall be
connected to an adequate source of supply.
(2) There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in
each dwelling unit near the point of entrance to such unit.
C. Exit and directional signs.
(1) Exits in multiple dwellings and business units shall be provided
with exit and directional signs visible from the approach to the
exits.
(2) Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
(3) Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the
word EXIT for exit signs and the words NO EXIT with a suitable
pointer or arrow indicating the direction of exit for directional
signs. Letters for signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible
and at least six inches high, except that for internally illuminated
signs the height of such letters shall be at least 4 1/2 inches.
(4) Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or
internally by electric lights and shall be kept illuminated at all
times when the building is occupied and shall be wired to bypass all
fuse boxes and main shutoff switches.
D. Emergency lighting systems.
(1) The stage section of every portion of every place of public assembly
devoted to the use or accommodation of the public or of persons
admitted to or assembled therein, including all passageways
leading to the street, exits, stairways, fire escapes, balconies, open
courts or corridors, shall be equipped with suitable emergency
electric lights capable of furnishing good and sufficient light during
every performance and until those present have left the premises
and shall be so equipped as to become illuminated automatically in
case of the failure for any reason of the principal lighting system.
(2) Such emergency electric lights and the means by which the system
is operated and supplied with power shall be of a character, design
and arrangement approved by the Board of Trustees and shall at all
times be maintained in good order, repair and working condition.
(3) Said emergency electric lights and system shall be tested at least
once each week and immediately before each performance and
shall be tested at any time upon demand of the Mayor or any
Trustee, official or policeman of the Village.
§ 167-38 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-38
164:310
§ 167-39. Cooking and refrigeration equipment.
§ 167-40. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation.
(4) Every place of assembly now existing shall, within 30 days after the
adoption of this chapter, be equipped with the emergency electric
lights and emergency power system required by this chapter.
(5) It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, occupant, manager or
person in charge of every place of public assembly to carry out the
provisions of this chapter.
(6) "Place of assembly" as used in this chapter shall include:
(a) Theaters.
(b) Motion picture houses.
(c) Assembly halls maintained or leased for pecuniary gain where
50 or more persons may assemble for amusement or
recreation, except halls owned or occupied by churches or
religious organizations.
A. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
B. Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
C. Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently fastened and
connected in place. Gas supply connection to such equipment shall be
made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
D. Solid fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately vented.
A. Refrigerants.
(1) Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in any
building.
(2) Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall
not be used for air conditioning purposes.
B. Ventilating systems.
(1) Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the
rapid spread of heat, flame or smoke through the systems will be
prevented and so that under conditions of use the temperature of
any combustible material adjacent thereto or in contact therewith
will not exceed a safe temperature.
(2) Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall not
be used as plenum chambers.
§ 167-38 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-40
164:311
(3) Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
(4) Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of noncombustible
material.
(5) Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a
fire or smoke hazard.
(6) Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction
shall be separated from such construction by a clearance of at
least 1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating material at least 1/
4 inch thick.
(7) Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall
be quality-controlled.
(8) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space whose contents may
emit odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to other
occupied spaces within the building or to another dwelling unit.
C. Air intake and exhaust openings.
(1) Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance and so as to
prevent the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes or foreign matter being
drawn into the system.
(2) Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake
openings shall provide air from an uncontaminated source.
(3) Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that
also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed
intake openings from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the
fuel burning equipment is not adversely affected.
(4) Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will not
create a nuisance.
D. Ventilation requirements.
(1) Enclosures or space where heat, gases, vapor or odors may
accumulate and become a source of potential hazard or nuisance
shall be provided with adequate means of ventilation to remove
such excess.
(2) Public spaces shall be provided with means for obtaining air supply
for the maximum number of persons for which such spaces are
designed.
E. Safety controls.
§ 167-40 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-40
164:312
§ 167-41. Fuel oil; storage tanks and piping.
§ 167-42. Fire protection systems.
(1) Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the operation
of all central fan equipment. Such controls shall be conspicuously
identified and in readily accessible locations outside the fan room.
(2) Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly space
or more than one fire area or more than one story of a building shall
be provided with controls arranged so that under an abnormal rise
in the temperature of the air in the system the fans causing normal
circulation shall stop and require manual restart.
(3) Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be provided
with an emergency switch conveniently located and with a durable
sign giving instructions for shutting down the system in case of fire.
F. Location of operating equipment. All condensers, compressors, fans,
air-handlers and allied equipment for all air-conditioning systems,
except self-contained window units, shall be located on the roof or in
another location approved by the Building Department.
A. General requirements. Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed
by means of fixed liquid-tight equipment.
B. Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
(2) Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to
the premises served or the surrounding property.
(3) No fuel oil solvents, additives or thinners shall be stored in the
boiler room.
C. Piping.
(1) Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote control to stop the flow of oil during fire or
other emergency.
(2) Filling, emptying and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at
a safe distance from building openings.
(3) No piping having any plastic components shall be used in the boiler
room.
A. Fire alarm systems. Required fire alarm systems shall be maintained in
proper operating condition at all times.
B. Sprinkler equipment.
§ 167-40 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-42
164:313
§ 167-43. Access to multiple dwellings. [Added 11-3-1969 by Ord.
No. 120]
(1) Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause
minimum interference to effective discharge of water.
(2) Valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in the
open position.
(3) Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
C. Standpipe systems.
(1) Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
(2) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
(3) Hose shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry and free of
deterioration.
D. Portable extinguishers.
(1) Each oil burner for a boiler, furnace or central hot-water heater
shall be provided with an approved Class B hand fire extinguisher.
(2) Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their
designated locations and in a condition which will permit efficient
operation without delay.
(3) Each incinerator room and service opening shall be provided with
an approved Class A hand fire extinguisher.
A. Legislative findings. It is hereby found and declared that occupation of
the upper floors of multiple dwellings, danger to aged, infirm and other
residents of such upper floors from fire and other casualties and
insufficient access to such upper floors by fire-fighting, rescue and
emergency equipment in this Village are a menace to the health, safety
and welfare of its citizens and that the elimination of the obstructions to
access to such upper floors by fire-fighting, rescue and emergency
equipment and the provision of facilities and improvements necessary
to give reasonable access are essential to the public welfare and
interest.
B. Applicability. This section shall apply to all multiple dwellings, as
defined in § 4 (33) of the Multiple Residences Law of the State of New
York, located in the Village of Great Neck Estates and being three
stories or more in height.
C. Access for fire-fighting, rescue and emergency equipment.
(1) For every such multiple dwelling of three stories or more in height,
the owner shall provide the facilities necessary to give reasonable
§ 167-42 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-43
164:314
access to all apartments by fire-fighting, rescue and emergency
equipment and personnel from the nearest public road.
(2) The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector of the Village of Great Neck Estates.
(3) The Building Inspector may require the removal or relocation of
obstructions to such access, including the pruning, removal or
relocation of trees, hedges, plants, flowers or other vegetation,
removal or relocation of fences, public utility installations,
ornaments, statuary, benches, playgrounds, waste removal
facilities or other improvements.
(4) The Building Inspector may require the installation of curb cuts,
driveways, roadways, turnarounds, culs-de-sac and such other
facilities as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
section.79
D. Rules and regulations.
(1) The Building Inspector may promulgate rules and regulations to:
(a) Effectuate the general purposes of this chapter.
(b) Provide reasonable uniform standards, ratings and
requirements consonant with accepted standards of
engineering, fire prevention and safety practices.
(c) Formulate such standards and requirements, so far as may be
practicable, in terms of performance objectives, so as to make
adequate performance for the use intended the test of
acceptability.
(d) Permit, to the fullest extent possible, use of modern technical
methods, devices and improvements which tend to reduce
costs of construction, installation and maintenance without
substantially affecting reasonable requirements for the health,
safety and security of the occupants or users of dwellings.
(2) The Building Inspector shall invite the cooperation and advice of
Fire Departments and organizations in connection with the
promulgation of rules and regulations hereunder.
(3) The Building Inspector shall have the power to enter, examine and
inspect any dwelling to which this section is applicable for the
purpose of carrying out his duties and responsibilities under this
section.
E. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
79.Editor's Note: As to designation of fire lanes on private property, see Ch. 123, Fire Lanes.
§ 167-43 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-43
164:315
(1) Any person who, having been served by the Building Inspector with
a notice or order to comply with this chapter, and who fails to
comply with the terms and conditions of such notice or order within
the time specified therein, shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided for violations
of this Code. [Amended 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
(2) The term "person" as used in this section shall include the owner,
mortgagee or vendee in possession, the assignee of rents, or the
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm
or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a multiple
dwelling.
F. Service of notices and orders. Every notice or order issued by the
Building Inspector hereunder shall be served at least 30 days before the
time for compliance therewith. It shall be sufficient service of a notice
or order if it is posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises
affected and a copy thereof mailed on the same day it is posted to the
person to whom it is directed by certified mail or registered mail to his
last known address or place of residence.
G. Appeals.
(1) Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any notice
or order issued by the Building Inspector hereunder may appeal
such notice or order to the Board of Trustees of the Village of Great
Neck Estates.
(2) Such appeal shall be taken within seven days after service of the
notice or order appealed from, by filing with the Building Inspector
and with the Board of Trustees a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to
the Board of Trustees all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
(3) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Building Inspector certifies to the Board
of Trustees, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him, that by reason of fact stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order, which may be granted by the Board of Trustees or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the Building Inspector and on
due cause shown.
(4) The Board of Trustees shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing of
the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The Board of Trustees
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the notice or
order appealed from and shall make such order, requirement,
§ 167-43 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-43
164:316
§ 167-44. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators.
decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in
the premises and to that end shall have all the powers of the
Building Inspector hereunder. Where there are practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter
of this section or such notice or order of the Building Inspector,
the Board of Trustees shall have the power in passing upon appeals
to vary or modify the application of any of the regulations or
provisions of such section or such notice or order so that the spirit
of this section shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured
and substantial justice done.
H. Interpretation of provisions. The provisions of this section are hereby
declared to be in furtherance of and not inconsistent with the provisions
of the Multiple Residence Law of the State of New York.
A. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained so as to be
free from physical and fire hazards.
B. Elevator and power-operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall
be indicated.
C. Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
E. Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall not
be used for storage of materials unnecessary for the maintenance of the
elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not be kept in such
rooms.
F. No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative, except where necessary during
tests, inspections or maintenance.
G. If the use of said elevators or dumbwaiters is discontinued, the same
shall be firestopped at each floor level, and all service doors thereto
shall be permanently sealed with a fire retarding material having at
least a one-hour rating.
H. The owner or owners of all real property whereon an elevator is located
shall, at least once in each calendar year, at the expense of such owner
or owners, cause each such elevator to be inspected by a qualified
elevator inspector, satisfactory to the Board of Trustees of the Village,
and file a record of each such inspection with the Village Clerk. [Added
7-6-1977 by L.L. No. 8-1977; amended 8-7-1978 by L.L. No.
3-1978]
§ 167-43 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-44
164:317
I. Each elevator in the Village shall contain a mirror placed in the rear of
the elevator so as to make the interior thereof visible to a person
outside the elevator prior to entering the elevator. [Added 7-6-1977
by L.L. No. 8-1977]
§ 167-44 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-44
164:318
ARTICLE VI
General Property Maintenance Requirements
§ 167-45. General requirements. [Amended 1-18-1973 by Ord. No.
128]
All premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and the regulations duly established by the Board of Trustees, as
amended from time to time, on file with the Clerk of the Village, so as to
assure the desirable character of the property.
§ 167-46. Maintenance of open areas. [Amended 6-24-1996 by L.L.
No. 6-1996; 8-12-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
Every owner, tenant, lessee and occupant of a premises shall maintain
the open areas of such premises in proper condition. This obligation shall
include the following acts:
§ 167-47. Maintenance of buildings and structures. [Amended
6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996; 8-12-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
Every owner, tenant, lessee and occupant of a premises shall maintain the
buildings and structures on such premises in good condition. This obligation
shall include the following acts:
A. Drainage of surface and subsurface water to protect buildings and
structures and to prevent the development of stagnant ponds. Gutters,
culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers, approved
combined storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory drainage
systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary by the Building
Department of the Village, and such systems shall be maintained in
good working order.
B. Maintenance of fences and other minor constructions in a safe and
substantial condition. Fences and other minor constructions shall be
securely grounded and maintained free from holes, missing or broken
pieces or materials and peeling paint. In the event that such conditions
exist, such fence or minor construction shall be removed, replaced or
repaired.
C. Maintenance of public steps, walks, driveways, sidewalks, parking
spaces and similar paved areas fronting or abutting such premises free
from all obstructions and in a safe condition for public travel at all
times. [Amended 4-13-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
D. Maintenance of all yards and courts clean and free of physical hazards,
infestation of rodents or insects and junked vehicles.
E. Cutting and trimming of grass and grass plots so that the average
height of the grass on the lot shall not exceed six inches. Heavy
undergrowth and accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health or safety shall be removed.
§ 167-45 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-47
164:319
§ 167-48. Infestation and screening. [Amended 6-24-1996 by L.L.
No. 6-1996; 8-12-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
Every owner, tenant, lessee and occupant of a premises shall maintain such
premises in the following manner:
A. Periodically treating the exterior surfaces of buildings and structures
that are not inherently resistant to deterioration with a protective
coating of paint or other suitable preservative, and maintaining the
exterior of the building or structure free from rot, cracks, and peeling
or chipping paint.
B. Maintaining the floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of all
buildings in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. Maintaining accessory structures in such manner that such structures
are free of conditions detrimental to health and safety.
D. Maintenance of all exterior walls, roofs, doors, windows, chimneys and
all openings around such doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of a
building so as to keep water from penetrating or entering the building
or to prevent undue heat loss from occupied areas. Materials which
have been damaged or show evidence of dry rot, paint peeling or
chipping or other deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and
refinished in a workmanlike manner. In the event of undue heat loss,
appropriate corrective measures shall be undertaken. Exterior walls,
roofs and other parts of a building structure shall be maintained free
from improperly secured and loose and unsecured objects and
materials, which objects and materials shall be either be properly
secured, removed, repaired or replaced.
E. Maintenance of vacant buildings and the yards adjoining such vacant
buildings to ensure that the building and its adjoining yards remain safe
and secure and do not present a hazard to adjoining property or to the
public. The Building Department may require the performance of
corrective steps and measures as may be required from time to time to
ensure such safety.
F. Maintenance of buildings and structures in such condition so that they
shall not become an unoccupied hazard.
A. All grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with generally
accepted practices.
B. Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or
other suitable materials.
§ 167-47 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-48
164:320
§ 167-48.1. Prohibition against invasive plant species. [Added
4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
§ 167-49. Garbage, refuse and litter.
C. Adequate screening shall be provided and maintained in each dwelling
unit and all public spaces to assure such areas of freedom from flies and
insects.
D. Adequate fencing shall be maintained and provided around all
swimming pools.
A. The plant species specified in this section are hereby determined to be
invasive, and dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare of
persons and property in the Village of Great Neck Estates. From and
after the time any plant species is placed on such list, no person or
entity shall plant, or cause or permit the planting of, any such plant
species in the Village of Great Neck Estates.
B. In the event any such prohibited invasive species is located on any
property in the Village at the time such species is identified as a
prohibited species, or is planted on any property in violation of this
section, the owners and occupants of the property on which such plant
is so located or planted shall be responsible to confine the plant to the
property of such owner or occupant, take any and all reasonable action
necessary to prevent such plant from invading any other property in the
Village, and be liable for the reasonable expenses incurred by the
owner of any property in the Village invaded by such plantings for
removal of such plantings and prevention of further invasion. Such
liability shall be in addition to any liability, civil or otherwise, for
violation of the provisions of this section.
C. The following plant species are prohibited in the Village of Great Neck
Estates pursuant to this section:
(1) Golden bamboo, also known as "Phyllostachys aurea";
(2) Japanese bamboo, also known as "Phyllostachys bambusoides";
(3) Common bamboo, also known as "Bambusa vulgaris";
(4) Arrow bamboo, also known as "Pseudosasa japonica";
(5) Any other species commonly considered to be classified as
"bamboo."
A. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
B. In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate
garbage or refuse in public halls, stairways and incinerator enclosures.
§ 167-48 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-49
164:321
C. No garbage, offal, household waste, restaurant waste, business or
commercial waste or refuse of any kind or character, including but not
limited to newspapers, cans, bottles, boxes, cartons, wrappings,
wastepaper or offensive material, shall be deposited, stored or held in
such a place or in such a way as to create a nuisance detrimental to
health; nor shall any such garbage, offal, household waste, restaurant
waste, business or commercial waste or refuse of any kind or character,
including but not limited to newspapers, cans, bottles, boxes, cartons,
wrappings, wastepaper or offensive material, be deposited, stored or
held outside the principal building or structure except pursuant to
regulations duly established by the Board of Trustees. No person, firm
or corporation shall deposit, store or hold any garbage, offal, household
waste, restaurant waste, business or commercial waste or refuse of any
kind or character, including but not limited to newspapers, cans,
bottles, boxes, cartons, wrappings, wastepaper or any offensive
material, contrary to the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
1-18-1973 by Ord. No. 128]
D. Such garbage cans and such containers shall be of metal, or of other
material of equal durability if approved by the Board of Trustees, and
shall be watertight and shall be equipped with close-fitting tops of
similar material completely enclosing the same, which shall be securely
closed and fastened at all times.
E. In such business district as is now or hereafter defined and designated
in Chapter 230, Zoning, of the Village, such garbage cans and
containers shall be clearly marked with the name of the owner, store or
establishment for the use of which they were provided, and such
garbage cans and containers shall at all times be sufficient in number
and capacity to contain the maximum amount of garbage, offal, waste,
refuse, cans, bottles, boxes, wrappings, wastepaper and offensive
material originating in or in connection with the building, store or
establishment for which they were provided.
F. In such business district, if at any time the service regularly rendered
for the removal of such garbage and rubbish is not sufficiently frequent
to permit the removal of garbage and rubbish without accumulating to
an extent greater than the capacity of the garbage cans, containers or
bins provided for the purpose, it shall be the duty of the owner, tenant
or occupant of the building, store or establishment to provide additional
or supplementary garbage or rubbish removal service which will be
adequate for such purpose.
G. The following regulations shall apply to the care of sidewalks and other
areas in or adjacent to the business district as now or hereafter defined
by Chapter 230, Zoning, of the Village.
(1) It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant, occupant and person in
charge of every store, parking space, building and establishment in
the Village to keep the sidewalks, curbs, gutters, parking areas and
§ 167-49 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-49
164:322
§ 167-50. Resident superintendent.
In every multiple dwelling containing 15 or more dwelling units there
shall be living on the premises, and regularly present there, a competent
superintendent or manager who shall be responsible for the conduct,
operation and maintenance of such dwelling, except that where two such
dwellings under the same ownership are connected or adjoining, one such
superintendent or manager shall be sufficient for both dwellings. During
any temporary absence of such superintendent or manager there shall
be present on said premises at all times a competent English-speaking
adult who is charged with the responsibility of dealing with any emergency
situation that may arise.
§ 167-51. Licensing of public garages and automobile service and
filling stations.80
approaches thereto adjoining said premises free from garbage,
rubbish and litter at all times.
(2) The owner, tenant, occupant and person in charge of every store,
parking area, building and other establishment shall sweep such
sidewalk or cause the same to be swept and shall remove any
garbage, rubbish and litter and sweepings which may be found
upon such sidewalks, curbs, gutters, parking areas and approaches
and the areas adjacent thereto as often as may be necessary for
such purpose.
(3) All sweepings shall be placed in the containers specified in this
chapter and shall be stored, held and disposed of as therein
provided.
(4) In no event shall any sweepings be swept into the street or the
gutters thereof or into a parking space or the approaches thereto
or upon the property of another or upon the sidewalk adjoining the
building, store or establishment of another person.
(5) The foregoing regulations shall apply regardless of the source or
origin of such garbage, rubbish and litter.
H. The Board of Trustees, from time to time, by resolution, may adopt or
amend rules and regulations for the disposal of garbage, refuse,
rubbish and recyclable materials from properties within the Village,
including the location and types of containers for such purposes. Any
violation of such rule or regulation shall be punishable as a violation of
this section. [Added 2-11-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
A. No person or corporation shall operate or maintain within the Village of
Great Neck Estates any public garage, automobile service station or
80.Editor's Note: For additional regulations, see Ch. 230, Zoning, § 230-23.
§ 167-49 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-51
164:323
§ 167-52. Cesspools, wells, ditches and excavations.81
gasoline filling station without a license previously issued to him by the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates.
B. Every application for a license under this chapter shall be in writing,
shall state with particularity the true name of the person or persons
owning and operating such business, the place where it is to be
operated, the quantity of gasoline or other flammables which are
intended to be stored, the location of the tanks or other receptacles in
which it is to be stored and the provisions which are to be made for the
prevention of fire or explosion.
C. Every such application shall also be accompanied by the written
consent of 60% in number of the owners and mortgagees of all property
situated within 300 feet from such garage, service station or filling
station.
D. Every such license shall be in writing and shall be signed by the Mayor
or Acting Mayor and shall be effective for a period specified therein not
exceeding three years from the date thereof. No such license shall be
issued until the licensee named therein shall have paid a license fee as
set forth in Chapter 109, Fees. No license issued hereunder shall be
transferable. Any licenses issued hereunder may be revoked by the
Board of Trustees for due cause shown.
A. No person or corporation shall hereafter within the Village of Great
Neck Estates dig, construct or excavate any cesspool, well, ditch or
similar excavation more than five feet in depth without first obtaining
and thereafter holding unrevoked a permit therefor as hereinafter
provided.82
B. Applications for a permit under this chapter shall be in writing and shall
be filed with the Village Clerk, who is authorized to issue the permit
required by this chapter. Such applications shall state with particularity
the nature and location of the proposed work, the property upon which
the work is to be performed, the name of the owner or occupant of such
property, the name and address of the contractor or other person who is
to perform the work and the manner in which the walls or sides are to
be braced, shored and supported. In case the cesspool, well, ditch or
excavation is to be dug, constructed or excavated in connection with
other work for which a building permit is required under the provisions
of Chapter 230, Zoning, of the Village of Great Neck Estates, and the
application for such permit under Chapter 230, Zoning, contains the
information provided by this chapter, no permit is required under this
chapter in addition to the permit which may be issued under Chapter
81.Editor's Note: Original Section 8, Billboards and Other Advertising Media, of this article,
which immediately preceded this section was repealed 10-5-1976 by L.L. No. 5-1976. See
Art. IV of Ch. 230, Zoning.
82.Editor's Note: As to current fees for permits, see Ch. 109, Fees.
§ 167-51 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-52
164:324
230, Zoning, but no such permit will be issued unless the provisions of
this chapter are complied with in addition to the provisions of Chapter
230, Zoning.
C. No permit shall be issued hereunder unless the application shall have
first been approved by the Village Engineer and unless the Village
Engineer shall be satisfied that the work is to be carried on without
danger of injury to persons or property. The Village Clerk and the
Village Engineer may attach to the granting of the permit such
conditions as they or either of them may determine, and each and every
of such terms and conditions shall be complied with. In case of a
violation of any such terms and conditions, or in case the work shall be
done in a manner different from that stated in the application, the
Village Engineer and the Village Clerk or either of them may forthwith
and without notice revoke such permit, and in addition the person
violating the same shall be subject to the penalties herein provided.
D. No person shall, within the Village of Great Neck Estates, dig, construct
or excavate any cesspool, well, ditch or similar excavation more than
five feet in depth or permit any such cesspool, well, ditch or excavation
to be dug, constructed or excavated, unless the walls or sides thereof
shall, at all times during the progress of the work and permanently after
the completion thereof, be securely braced, shored and supported with
boards, timbers, walls or other supports approved by the Village
Engineer.
E. In the event that the Village Engineer shall deem that the walls or sides
of any such cesspool, well, ditch or excavation within the Village of
Great Neck Estates are insufficiently braced, shored or supported, or
that a dangerous condition exists in or about or because of such
cesspool, well, ditch or excavation, he may order all work in progress to
be discontinued and prohibit all persons from entering such cesspool,
well, ditch or excavation and may order any walls, boards, timbers or
other supports to be removed and replaced by such as he may deem
sufficient and may take other steps as he may deem necessary or
advisable to remove the said danger and remedy the said conditions.
F. Every owner, tenant or occupant and every architect, engineer,
contractor, subcontractor, foreman or workman who shall dig, construct
or excavate in whole or in part any cesspool, well, ditch or excavation in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, and every owner, tenant or
occupant and every superintendent, manager, agent or employee of the
owner, tenant or occupant of any land or premises upon which any
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall exist, and every owner,
tenant or occupant and every superintendent, manager, agent or
employee of the owner, tenant or occupant of any such land or premises
and every owner, architect, engineer, contractor, subcontractor,
foreman or workman who shall fail or refuse to obey or carry out any
order or direction of the Village Engineer issued pursuant to this
chapter, shall be liable for and forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding
§ 167-52 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-52
164:325
§ 167-53. Dumping restricted.
§ 167-54. Removal of topsoil.
$100 for each offense, and each day or part of day upon which any such
violation shall exist or be committed shall constitute a separate offense.
G. The Board of Appeals of the Village of Great Neck Estates shall have
jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals from any action of the
Village Clerk or of the Village Engineer under this chapter.
A. No person shall dump or place upon the lands of another, without the
previous consent of the owner of such lands, any garbage, refuse,
ashes, waste, cans, bottles, boxes, papers, leaves, grass clippings,
weeds, garden refuse, rubbish, branches, limbs, junked or abandoned
vehicles or any other discarded materials of any kind whatsoever.
B. No person shall permit any lot or plot or part thereof to be used for the
storage, dumping or abandonment of any combustible materials, junk,
metal, bricks, stone, concrete, concrete blocks, pavement, paving,
plaster, lumber or any other kind of building material, automobiles,
automobile bodies, automobile chassis or parts or portions thereof,
tanks, barrels, containers, machines, machinery, engines, utensils or
appliances, any of which or any parts of which are entirely or in part
made of metal, or any other abandoned article.
A. Except as provided in Subsection I hereof, no person shall, in any one
calendar year, within the Village of Great Neck Estates, strip or remove
sod or topsoil from an area of more than 500 square feet, or strip or
remove from an area aggregating more than 500 square feet partly the
sod and partly the topsoil thereof, without previously applying for,
obtaining and holding unrevoked a permit therefor and paying the fee
as hereinafter provided.
B. Each application shall be in writing and shall be addressed to the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates and shall be filed with
the Village Clerk at the Village Office and shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the land from which the sod
or topsoil is to be stripped or removed.
(3) A description of the land from which the sod or topsoil is to be
stripped or removed.
(4) A statement of the area from which the sod or topsoil is to be
stripped or removed.
(5) Such other facts as the Village Clerk or Board of Trustees may
require at the time of filing such application or thereafter.
§ 167-52 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-54
164:326
C. Each application shall be accompanied by the amount of the license fee
hereinafter provided and a bond to be approved by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates with a responsible surety
company as surety, or a cash deposit in lieu thereof, as hereinafter
provided.
D. Except as provided in Subsections I and J hereof, no permit shall be
issued:
(1) For the removal of any more than 5,000 square feet of sod or topsoil
from any one acre of land.
(2) For the removal of more than two acres of sod or topsoil from any
one tract of land in the same ownership in any one year.
(3) For the stripping or removal of sod or topsoil within 10 feet of any
property line.
(4) Permitting the stripping or removal of sod or topsoil between
October 1 of one year and April 1 in the following year.
(5) For the stripping or removal from the areas herein named of partly
the sod and partly the topsoil thereof.
(6) Which shall be valid for more than 60 days after its date.
(7) Until full compliance with this chapter is had under any existing
permit for any part of the same tract of land.
E. Except as provided in Subsections I and J hereof, no stripping or
removal of sod or topsoil shall be made unless:
(1) The conditions of Subsection A of this section have been complied
with.
(2) All of the provisions of Subsection D of this section have been
complied with.
(3) Any special conditions and requirements imposed by the Board of
Trustees upon which such permit is issued have been complied
with.
(4) Upon completion of the work, any part of the premises below grade
from which the sod or topsoil has been stripped or removed shall be
graded to the level of the abutting highway or the original grade if
the same was below the level of the highway.
(5) Upon completion of the work, dust-down, or its equivalent, shall be
spread to prevent dust from flying.
(6) Upon completion of the work or the expiration of the permit,
whichever is earlier, there shall be left upon the surface of the land
from which the sod or topsoil has been removed not less than six
inches of topsoil.
§ 167-54 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-54
164:327
(7) All areas from which sod or topsoil has been removed shall, during
the period between August 20 and October 1, be prepared into a
loose level seed bed, limed, fertilized and seeded in the following
steps:
(a) Apply ground limestone at the rate of one ton per acre.
(b) Apply 5-10-5 fertilizer at the rate of 600 pounds per acre.
(c) Disc area to work limestone and fertilizer into soil to a depth of
at least three inches.
(d) Smooth area with smoothing harrow.
(e) Sow the following seed mixture at the rate of 100 pounds per
acre:
Type of Seed Number of Pounds
Timothy 30
Kentucky bluegrass 25
Redtop 10
Perennial ryegrass 30
Alsike clover 4
Wild white clover 1
Total 100
(f) Brush in seed lightly.
(g) Roll firm with ground roller.
F. The surety bond hereinbefore provided shall be in an amount to be fixed
by the Board of Trustees but not less than the sum of $1,000 and shall
be conditioned for the faithful performance of the conditions contained
in this chapter, the observance of all municipal ordinances of the Village
of Great Neck Estates and to indemnify the Village of Great Neck
Estates for any damage to Village property. In the event of a default,
such bond shall be forfeited to the Village. Said bond shall remain in full
force and effect until a certificate of completion has been issued by the
Building Inspector, certifying to the fact that all the provisions of this
chapter and the conditions of the permit have been fully complied with.
G. In lieu of such a surety bond, a cash deposit of equal amount may be
made with the Village Treasurer, to be held by him upon the same terms
and conditions as the aforesaid surety bond and to be applied by him for
the same purposes in case of default.
H. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 109, Fees.83
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 167-54 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-54
164:328
§ 167-55. Maintenance of proper drainage.85 [Added 6-12-2000 by
L.L. No. 3-2000]
No person or entity shall alter, construct or change the condition of any
building, structure, property or premises, or cause the same to be altered,
I. In case the stripping or removal of sod or topsoil is incidental to the
construction or alteration or landscaping of a building or other
structure for which a building permit is required under Chapter 230,
Zoning, of the Village or under the Building Code thereof84 as now or
hereafter in force, and the application for such building permit contains
the information required in Subsection B, no permit fee or security shall
be required under this chapter, but the building permit issued under
Chapter 230, Zoning, or the Building Code shall be deemed to include a
permit for such incidental stripping or removal of sod or topsoil under
this chapter. In such case, the provisions of Subsections D and E shall
not apply to the area affected by the construction or alteration of such
building or the landscaping and improvements incidental thereto, but
otherwise shall be in full force and effect. To such extent the building
permit shall be deemed issued subject to the terms and conditions of
Subsections D and E, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued
unless all of such items and conditions have been complied with.
J. Waiver of requirements.
(1) The Board of Trustees may, at its discretion, waive the license fee
and security otherwise required by this chapter, if said Board of
Trustees is satisfied that any permit is solely and exclusively for one
of the following purposes:
(a) Permitting the owner to remove sod or topsoil from one part of
his land to another part of the same premises.
(b) That such removal is necessary for an accessory use.
(c) That such removal is made for the purpose of farming.
(d) That such removal is made for the purpose of improving such
property.
(2) In the cases mentioned in Subsection J(1)(b), (c) and (d) of this
section, the Board of Trustees may also waive such of the
requirements of Subsections D and E hereof as it may deem
necessary in order to permit such purposes to be carried out and, in
lieu thereof, may impose such special conditions and requirements
as it may consider necessary or proper in order to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Building Construction and Plumbing.
85.Editor's Note: Former § 101-53, Restaurants: licensing and regulations, as amended, was
repealed 9-9-1996 by L.L. No. 10-1996. This local law also provided that the provisions of
§ 101-53 would remain in effect until 3-31-1997 for all licenses issued prior to the
effective date of L.L. No. 10-1996.
§ 167-54 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-55
164:329
constructed or changed, or perform any work on any property or premises,
in such manner as to cause any water, soil, debris or materials of any kind
to be cast or run off, or to drain from, any property or premises onto the
property or premises of another, except in a manner permitted, controlled,
authorized or approved by the Village Building Official, or in a manner
otherwise authorized by law.
§ 167-56. Open-air burning of leaves and rubbish.86
A. For the purpose of reducing air pollution and its deleterious effect on
the health and comfort of the inhabitants of the Village, the regulations
hereinafter set forth are hereby established.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall, on any public or private property
within the Village of Great Neck Estates, build, kindle, add fuel to,
maintain or permit a bonfire or fire of any character whatsoever or burn
or dispose of by burning any leaves, grass, cuttings, clippings,
branches, limbs, trunks or stumps of trees, rubbish, refuse, garbage,
waste or waste materials of any character, including oil, grease, rags,
upholstery or other parts of automobiles, without previously applying
for and holding unrevoked a permit for the purpose.
C. Applications for such permits shall be in writing and shall be signed by
the person responsible for the burning and, if the burning is to take
place on the property of another person, shall also be signed by the
owner of the property on which the burning is to take place. They shall
state full particulars of the proposed operation. The Mayor or Deputy
Mayor may, in his discretion, grant a permit for the proposed operation,
upon such terms and conditions as the Mayor or Deputy Mayor may
determine. Such terms and conditions shall be designed, as far as
possible, to avoid conflict with the purposes of Subsection A of this
section and may, among other things, designate the times, places, wind
and weather conditions under which the permit may be exercised. He
may also require that a surety bond be posted to assure performance
with the terms and conditions of the permit. Such permit may be
revoked at any time by the Mayor or Deputy Mayor or by the Board of
Trustees.
D. The holder of such permit and any person exercising any such permit
shall comply with all of the terms and conditions of the permit and, in
case of any failure to do so, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
E. This chapter does not apply to the heating and cooking facilities of a
building or to an open fireplace within a building or to an outdoor
barbecue used for cooking or to the permanently installed interior
incinerators of an apartment house or multiple residence.
86.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 79, Air Pollution.
§ 167-55 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-56
164:330
§ 167-57. Smoke emission regulations.
§ 167-58. Dogs, cats and other pets.87
§ 167-59. Unpleasant odors.
No person, owner or occupant in the Village of Great Neck Estates shall be
permitted to create, cause or allow the existence or emission of noxious or
offensive odors or fumes from any source whatever.
§ 167-60. Contaminant spills. [Added 11-14-1988 by L.L. No.
3-1988]
No person shall cause or permit gasoline, fuel oil or other contaminants to
be poured or spilled on any public property, or on any street or sidewalk, in
the Village of Great Neck Estates.
F. The owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in possession of or
in control of the premises on or within which any violation of this
chapter occurs or exists shall also be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
A. Emission of dense smoke prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to permit the emission of any dense smoke from any
source whatever.
B. Escape of soot, cinder, noxious acids, fumes and gases prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the
escape of any quantity of soot, cinder, noxious acids, fumes and gases in
such place or manner as to be detrimental to any person or to the public
or to endanger the health, comfort or safety of any such person or of the
public or in such a manner as to cause or have a tendency to cause
injury or damage to property or business.
A. The owners or occupants of the premises on which a dog, cat or other
pet is kept shall maintain such premises in a clean and sanitary
condition, and the owner or person keeping or harboring such dog, cat
or such other pet shall keep and confine the same so that it shall not be
noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dirt, manure,
droppings or noise.
B. No person shall be permitted to harbor or keep more than two adult
dogs and/or two adult cats upon any premises in the Village of Great
Neck Estates. For the purpose of this section, any dog or cat over the
age of six months shall be considered an adult.
87.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 86, Animals.
§ 167-56 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-60
164:331

ARTICLE VIA
Dumpsters and Other Receptacles for Debris Collection
[Added 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
§ 167-60.1. Permits required.
§ 167-60.2. Permit application; validity of permit; identification
numbers; warning devices.
A. No container, dumpster, receptacle or other object for the collection of
rubbish or debris (hereinafter referred to in this article as “container”)
having a capacity in excess of five cubic yards shall be located or
maintained outdoors on any private property in the Village without a
permit for the same first having been issued. Such permits shall be
issued by the Code Official, upon written application therefor, and each
such permit shall be valid for a period of 14 days. Such permits may be
renewed by the Code Official for not more than three additional periods
of 14 days each, upon written application. Further renewals of such
permits may be issued by the Board of Trustees upon written
application, and subject to reasonable conditions. All such applications
shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in an amount determined by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
B. No container shall be placed upon any public property in the Village,
including any street or sidewalk, without a permit for the same first
having been issued by the Code Official, except that containers placed
in such locations by the Village shall not require a permit. All
applications for such permits shall include payment of a fee in an
amount determined by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a container having a capacity in excess
of five cubic yards may be maintained outdoors on any private property
in the Village when necessary in conjunction with construction activity
being performed pursuant to a valid building permit, and provided that
a permit has been issued for such container. Such permits shall be
issued by the Code Official upon written application therefor, and shall
be valid for a period of 60 days. Such permits may be renewed by the
Code Official for not more than two additional periods of 60 days each,
upon written application. Further renewals of such permits may be
issued by the Board of Trustees upon written application, and subject to
reasonable conditions. All such applications shall be accompanied by
payment of a fee in an amount determined by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
A. Any person desiring a permit under this article shall make written
application therefor to the Code Official, specifying the exact proposed
location of such dumpster, container or other receptacle, the size and
capacity thereof, the name of the owner of the abutting property, the
length of time that said use is required and any other information as
may be required by the Code Official.
§ 167-60.1 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-60.2
164:333
§ 167-60.3. Standards for permit issuance.
Prior to and during the location or installation of any dumpster, receptacle
or container hereunder, the applicant must demonstrate compliance with
the applicable provisions of the Village Code and must comply with the
following standards:
§ 167-60.4. Refusal or revocation of permit; emergency removal.
B. Any permit issued pursuant to this article for location of a container on
public property shall be valid only for 48 hours, unless the duration of
the permit is otherwise specified in writing on the permit by the Code
Official. In no event shall any such permit be valid for more than 30
days.
C. All such dumpsters, containers or receptacles permitted pursuant to
this article shall bear an identification number assigned by the Village,
and the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible
therefor shall be prominently displayed thereon.
D. All such dumpsters, containers or receptacles which remain in place
during any of the hours between sunset of one day and sunrise of the
next day shall be equipped with suitable reflectors and barricaded with
flashing lights or other warning or protective devices as may be
required by the Code Official in order to avoid a hazard to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic. Any such reflectors shall be capable of reflecting
motor vehicle headlights at a distance of at least 500 feet.
A. The applicant must produce a certificate of liability insurance, naming
the Village as an additional insured, in an amount to be determined by
the Code Official, but not less than single limits of $500,000.
B. A separate permit must be requested and obtained for each dumpster,
receptacle or container proposed to be located on a street, sidewalk or
public property.
C. No dumpster, receptacle or container may exceed 30 cubic yards of
capacity. [Amended 1-19-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006]
D. Any dumpster, receptacle or container which contains animal or
vegetable refuse shall be kept covered at all times with a metal cover or
other suitable covering approved by the Code Official.
E. No dumpster, receptacle or container may be placed within 25 feet of
any intersection or in any location not approved by the Code Official.
A. The Code Official may, in his discretion, refuse to issue a permit if he
deems the same to constitute a danger to public safety or an
unwarranted interference with the efficient movement of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
§ 167-60.2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-60.4
164:334
§ 167-60.5. Appeals.
Any appeal from the refusal of the Code Official to issue a permit hereunder
or the revocation of a permit hereunder or from the imposition of any
condition hereunder shall be made in writing to the Board of Trustees
within 30 days of the determination by the Code Official. The pendency of
any such appeal shall not affect the efficacy of the determination appealed
from.
§ 167-60.6. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to containers or receptacles
used for normal residential garbage collections nor to bundled newspapers
which have been placed by the curb for pickup.
§ 167-60.7. Dangerous conditions; notice; remediation; penalties.
[Added 8-9-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
B. The Code Official may revoke a permit for the same reasons as he may
refuse issuance of a permit or for violation of the provisions of this
article, and if the dumpster, receptacle or other container is not
removed within 24 hours after notification of such revocation, the same
may be removed by the Village and stored at the owner's expense.
C. If the Code Official shall determine at any time that an emergency
situation exists with respect to a dumpster, receptacle or other
container, he may cause the same to be removed and stored at the
expense of the owner.
A. No person being the owner or occupant of property shall cause, suffer
or permit any tree, any structure, other object, or any condition to be
maintained on such property in such manner as to cause a hazard or
danger of injury to persons or property, or to cause a hazard or danger
to utility or communications lines, poles, pipes, or other equipment.
B. In any case where the Code Official determines that a violation of
Subsection A hereof exists on any property in the Village, the Code
Official may issue a remediation notice to the owner and/or occupant of
the property on which such condition exists, directing such owner and/
or occupant to take remedial action of a type and within the time
specified in such notice.
C. The Code Official may also provide a copy of such notice to the owner
and/or occupant of any property adjoining the property on which the
dangerous condition is claimed to exist, for the purposes of informing
such owner and/or occupant that the dangerous condition exists on
adjoining property.
D. Any owner or occupant of property who receives notice to remediate a
dangerous condition as provided in Subsection B hereof, and who fails
to remediate the dangerous condition within the time period and as
§ 167-60.4 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-60.7
164:335
directed in such notice, or at such other time or in such other manner
as may be approved by the Code Official, shall be guilty of an offense.
Upon conviction of any such offense, such person shall be subject to
penalties as provided in this Code.
§ 167-60.7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-60.7
164:336
ARTICLE VII
Administration and Compliance
§ 167-61. Administrative agency: establishment, composition and
qualifications.
§ 167-62. Powers and duties of administrative agency.
A. The Building Department of the Village is hereby designated as the
agency to administer and secure compliance with the applicable
standards of this chapter. Such agency is hereinafter referred to as the
"agency."
B. The agency shall be under the direction and charge of the Building
Inspector, who shall have as his representatives such assistants and
inspectors as may be necessary to carry out effectively the powers and
duties of the agency.
C. All personnel of the agency shall be qualified and appointed as
prescribed by the Board of Trustees and shall be furnished with
appropriate official badges or identification cards.
D. All personnel of the agency shall be free from personal liability for acts
done in good faith in the performance of their official duties.88
A. The agency shall be charged with the duty of administrating the
applicable standards of this chapter and securing compliance therewith
and shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations necessary for
securing such compliance and for its own organization and internal
management, provided that such rules and regulations shall not be in
conflict with the applicable standards of this chapter.
B. The agency shall be authorized to conduct surveys of buildings in any
area of the Village to determine the conditions of premises, extent of
deterioration, lack of facilities, inadequate maintenance, unsafe and
unsanitary conditions, extent of overcrowding, land use and other
relevant factors.
C. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector89to:
(1) Cause inspections to be made of premises within the scope of
applicable standards as necessary.
(2) Cause an investigation of all complaints of alleged violations or
other unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
(3) Order, in writing, the remedying of all conditions found to exist in
or on any premises in violation of provisions of this chapter or of
rules and regulations adopted by the agency, to state in the
88.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 53, Officers and Employees, Art. I.
89.Editor's Note: As to other duties of the Building Inspector, see Ch. 95, Building
Construction and Plumbing.
§ 167-61 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-62
164:337
§ 167-63. Inspections; right of entry.
§ 167-64. Records of complaints, inspection and violations.
The agency shall keep records of all complaints received, inspections made
and violations found regarding premises regulated by this chapter. Records
shall be kept and shall be available for public inspection.90
§ 167-65. Service of violation orders.
A violation order may be served on the owner or operating agent personally,
or by delivering to and leaving a copy thereof with a person on the premises
of reasonable age and mailing a copy thereof to the person named in
violation order a reasonable time limit for compliance therewith
and, where necessary, to order the vacating of premises found unfit
for human habitation.
D. Where violations of the housing and rehabilitation standards exist and
pose an immediate hazard or danger to the health, safety or welfare of
building occupants or of the public, the Building Inspector may issue an
order citing the violation and directing such action by such other
Village agency as is necessary to remove or abate the immediate hazard
or danger.
E. Where a violation of Article VI of this chapter exists and poses an
immediate hazard or danger to the health, safety or welfare of the
public, the Building Inspector may, upon determining that such hazard
or danger exists, require the owner or occupant of such property to
remove such violation or violations and, upon default thereof, may
cause such violation or violations to be corrected. The total cost of such
correction may be assessed upon the real property whereon such
violation or violations are found and shall constitute a lien and charge
upon said real property until paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged
and shall be collected by the Village Treasurer in the manner provided
by law for the collection of delinquent taxes. Service of a notice to
remove a violation or violations may be made in the same manner as
provided in this chapter for service of violation orders. The provisions of
this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalties provided by
this chapter. [Added 6-2-1975 by L.L. No. 3-1975]
A. Inspectors shall be authorized and have the right, in the performance of
their duties, to enter any premises at such times and under such
circumstances as may be authorized by law to protect the public
interest. [Amended 10-9-2012 by L.L. No. 10-2012]
B. Owners, agents, operators and occupants shall be responsible for
providing access to all parts of the premises within their control to
authorized agency personnel acting in the performance of their duties.
90.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 62, Records, Art. II, Public Access.
§ 167-62 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-65
164:338
the order at his last known place of residence, or by posting a copy in a
conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy thereof addressed to
the owner or operating agent at his last known place of residence.
§ 167-66. Penalties for offenses.
A. Every person who shall fail to comply with any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
penalties herein provided for.
B. Every person who shall fail to comply with a violation order issued by
the agency within the time stated in said order shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties herein
provided for.91
91.Editor's Note: Former Subsections C and D, specifying penalty provisions, which
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See
now § 1-1.
§ 167-65 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-66
164:339

ARTICLE VIII
Compliance
§ 167-67. Owners' responsibilities.
§ 167-68. Occupants' responsibilities.
Occupants of all units shall be responsible for compliance with the
standards and requirements of this chapter in regard to the following:
A. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with all of the
standards and requirements set forth in this chapter, applicable to their
premises and shall remain responsible therefor regardless of the fact
that this chapter may also place certain responsibilities on operating
agents and occupants and regardless of any agreements between
owners and operating agents or occupants as to which party shall
assume such responsibility.
B. Owners of multiple dwellings shall be responsible for proper
maintenance, condition and operation of service facilities and for the
filing of all reports and statements required by this chapter.
C. Owners of multiple dwellings shall, on or before the first day of July of
each year, file a written statement with the Building Department of the
Village containing the address of each multiple dwelling within the
Village owned by them, the number of units contained therein, the
number of square feet of floor space in each unit, the name of the lessee
of each unit, the name and address of the owner thereof and, if there is
an operating agent for said multiple dwelling other than the owner, the
name and address of said agent. In addition, said statement shall
contain a telephone number at which the owner, operating agent or
other responsible representative of this owner may be reached in the
event of an emergency.
A. Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which he occupies or
controls to the maximum permitted by the standards of this chapter.
B. Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
C. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities in
that part of the premises which he occupies or controls, in a clean and
sanitary condition and providing reasonable care in the operation and
use thereof.
D. Keeping exits from his unit clear and unencumbered.
E. Disposal of garbage and refuse into facilities provided by the owner in a
clean and sanitary manner.
§ 167-67 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-68
164:341
F. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within his dwelling or
business unit if his unit is the only one infested in the premises.
§ 167-68 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-68
164:342
ARTICLE IX
Snow and Ice Removal
[Added 4-13-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
§ 167-69. Intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates hereby finds that
owners, occupants and persons (including corporations or other entities) in
charge of certain properties in the Village should be subject to requirements
with respect to snow and ice removal to protect the public health, safety
and general welfare. This article is enacted in furtherance of that purpose.
Whenever any provision of this article places a duty or obligation, or
provides for a penalty to be imposed upon, any person, the term "person"
shall mean and include a corporation or other entity.
§ 167-70. Time limit for removal; buildings and land other than
single-family dwellings.
A. Owners, occupants or persons in charge of buildings other than singlefamily
dwellings, and/or land other than land improved for not more
than one single-family dwelling, are hereby required to keep the
sidewalks, steps, walks, driveways, parking areas and similar paved
areas in front of, adjoining or in any way contiguous to their building or
land free from obstruction by snow and ice.
B. When the cessation of a snowstorm or ice storm occurs between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on any day, each owner, adult
occupant and adult person in charge of any buildings other than singlefamily
dwellings, and/or land other than land used for not more than
one single-family dwelling, shall commence and diligently pursue
removal of such snow and ice within one hour after the cessation of any
snowstorm or ice storm, and shall complete the removal of any such
snow and ice from the entire sidewalks, steps, walks, driveways,
parking areas and similar paved areas on, in front of, adjoining or in any
way contiguous to such person's building or land within two hours
thereafter.
C. If cessation of a snowstorm or ice storm occurs prior to 9:00 a.m. on any
day, then each such owner, occupant or person in charge shall
commence such removal of such snow and ice no later than 10:00 a.m.
of that day, and shall complete removal within two hours thereafter.
D. If cessation of a snowstorm or ice storm occurs after 6:00 p.m. on any
day, then each such owner, occupant or person in charge shall
commence such removal of such snow and ice no later than 10:00 a.m.
of the following day, and shall complete removal within two hours
thereafter.
§ 167-69 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-71
164:343
§ 167-71. Removal of snow and ice; premises other than singlefamily
dwellings.
The obligation set forth in § 167-70 regarding the removal of snow and ice
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
A. Each person subject to this obligation shall clear and maintain a path on
the sidewalk free of snow and ice for a width of the entire sidewalk, or
four feet, whichever is less.
B. Each person subject to this obligation shall not only clear the sidewalk,
steps, walks, driveways, parking areas and similar paved areas of snow
and ice as provided in this article, but shall also keep and maintain such
locations free of ice and snow by clearing as frequently as necessary.
C. In the case of a lot which has frontage on more than one street, each
such person shall further be required to clear and maintain a four-footwide
path free of snow and ice between the sidewalk and the curb of
each such street at the intersection of such streets or any of them.
D. In the case of any property which adjoins a sidewalk adjacent to a
crosswalk, each such person shall further be required to clear and
maintain a four-foot-wide path free of snow and ice from the sidewalk to
the beginning of the crosswalk or the curb of the street.
E. Fire hydrants and water standpipe connections.
(1) Where a fire hydrant or water standpipe connection is located on or
is adjacent to any property in the Village, the owner, adult
occupants and each adult person in control of such property in the
Village shall be required:
(a) To remove snow and ice from around each such hydrant for a
distance of two feet in each direction;
(b) To remove snow and ice from a circular area (having a threefoot
diameter) surrounding the water standpipe connection;
(c) To remove snow and ice which obstruct the view of all signs on
the property showing the location and address of the water
standpipe connection; and
(d) To keep the hydrant, water standpipe connection and other
areas described in this Subsection E(1) free from snow and ice
during the winter.
(2) Removal of snow and ice as specified in Subsection E(1) above shall
be completed within four hours after the cessation of snowfall,
except that the period between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day shall not be included in computing compliance with
such requirement. If, for good cause, a hydrant or water standpipe
connection cannot be cleared as required within the requisite time
§ 167-71 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-71
164:344
§ 167-72. Single-family residential properties.
period, the person(s) responsible for such removal shall notify the
Village Public Works Department.
F. Upon the failure of any person responsible for such removal to comply
with the provisions of this article, then, in addition to any other fines or
penalties provided by law, the Village may provide for the removal
thereof at the expense of the noncomplying owner, occupant, and/or
person in control of the property.
G. In any case where the Village provides for removal of snow and ice upon
the failure of any person responsible for such removal to do so, each
person responsible for such removal shall be responsible, jointly and
severally, to reimburse the Village for the costs and expenses of any
such snow and ice removal, and shall pay such reimbursement to the
Village within 14 days of service of a written, reasonably itemized
demand from the Village Clerk to such person for such payment.
(1) Each person to whom such demand is sent may contest such claim
for removal costs and expenses set forth in the demand for payment
issued by the Village Clerk by making written objection made to the
Village Clerk within 10 days of service of the demand for payment
being issued.
(2) Where such written objection is timely made, the obligation of such
person to make such payment shall be suspended until after such
person has had a reasonable opportunity to appear before the
Board of Trustees to explain the reasons for the objection, and the
Board of Trustees has made a determination with respect to such
objection.
(3) In the event the determination of the Board of Trustees is that such
person shall be responsible for all or part of such payment, the
person shall make full payment of such required amount within 10
days after service of written notice of the determination by the
Board of Trustees.
(4) Upon the failure of any person to pay such costs of removal as
provided in this article, the Village Clerk shall certify to the Village
Treasurer the costs of any such snow removal work. Such costs and
expenses thereafter shall be assessed against and recovered from
any real property in the Village owned by such person, and the
expenses so assessed shall constitute a lien and charge on the real
property on which they are levied until paid or otherwise satisfied
or discharged and shall be collected in the same manner and at the
same time as other Village charges. The provisions of this section
with respect to costs shall be in addition to any penalty imposed for
violation of or noncompliance with any provision of this code.
§ 167-71 PROPERTY, ABANDONED § 167-72
164:345
§ 167-73. Snow and ice falling from buildings.
The owners, and adult persons, in charge of each building adjacent to a
public sidewalk shall prevent the falling of snow, ice and water from such
buildings upon said public sidewalks. This section shall apply to each such
building in the Village, whether or not the public sidewalk is in the Village,
and to each such building outside the Village where the adjacent public
sidewalk is in the Village.
§ 167-74. Deposit of snow and ice in streets prohibited; protection
of hydrants.
No person, corporation or entity shall deposit, throw, place or strew, nor
shall any person, corporation or entity cause to be deposited, thrown,
placed or strewn, any snow or ice upon any street, avenue or roadway,
or any public sidewalk or other public place or public property within
the Village of Great Neck Estates. No person, corporation or entity shall
deposit, throw, place or strew, nor cause to be deposited, placed or strewn,
any snow or ice or other material which blocks or otherwise hinders access
to a fire hydrant.
§ 167-75. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this article shall be
guilty of a violation, and shall be punished by a fine or other punishment as
provided in § 1-1 of this Code, except that the fine for each such violation
shall be not less than $100 and not more than $200. Any such penalty
shall be in addition to any civil penalty as provided herein. This provision
shall not limit or restrict the Village of Great Neck Estates from pursuing,
obtaining or enforcing any other remedy provided in § 1-1 of this Code, or
any other remedy which may be available in law or equity.
A. Owners, occupants or persons in charge of single-family dwellings and/
or land improved for single-family dwelling are hereby required to keep
the sidewalks, steps, walks, driveways, parking areas and similar paved
areas in front of, adjoining or in any way contiguous to their building or
land free from obstruction by snow and ice, and to keep access to any
fire hydrant on or adjacent to such building or land unobstructed, and
free and clear from snow and ice for a distance of at least two feet from
such hydrant.
B. Snow and ice shall be cleared from the public sidewalks on property
subject to this section within 24 hours after cessation of snowfall or
formation of ice.
C. Each person subject to this section shall clear and maintain a path on
the sidewalk free of snow and ice for the entire width of the sidewalk.
§ 167-72 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 167-75
164:346
Chapter 170
PROPERTY, PERSONAL, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109.
§ 170-1. Legislative purpose.
The Board of Trustees hereby determines that it is in the community
interest to regulate the conduct of sales of personal property upon
residential premises. It is the intention and purpose of this chapter to
impose such regulations to prohibit the intrusion of commercial activities
in residential areas and to regulate the conduct of such personal property
sales to protect the character of the community and minimize traffic, noise
and other disruptions or disturbances.
§ 170-2. Permit required.
No person shall hold or conduct or cause to be conducted, on any residential
premises within the Village of Great Neck Estates, any sale of personal
property (including but not limited to garage sales, basement sales, porch
sales, yard sales or tag sales) or resale of used household clothing or other
personal property owned by the seller or by another person residing at the
same premises as the seller, without first obtaining a permit therefor.
§ 170-3. Application and fee. [Amended 3-10-1997 by L.L. No.
3-1997]
Application for a permit shall be made to the Village Clerk at least seven
days prior to the scheduled date of sale, on a form to be supplied by the
Village Clerk, and each application shall be accompanied by payment of a
fee established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. No application may
include more than one sale date, and a separate application and fee shall be
required for each calendar day upon which a sale regulated by this chapter
is to be conducted.
§ 170-4. Limitation of sales.
No permit shall be issued for a sale or sales extending beyond a period of
two consecutive days, and not more than two permits shall be issued for any
residential premises in one calendar year. No sale shall begin prior to 10:00
a.m. or continue after 4:00 p.m. on any day.
§ 170-5. Issuance of permit.
No permit for a sale regulated by this chapter shall be issued except by
the Mayor, upon a proper and sufficient showing by the applicant and
§ 167-75 PROPERTY, PERSONAL, SALE OF § 170-5
170:347
a determination by the Mayor that proper safety and environmental
precautions have been or will be taken to protect the public and that proper
precautions have been taken to minimize traffic congestion.
§ 170-6. Right of inspection; closing of sale.
A police officer of the Village, or any other person designated by the Village,
shall have the authority and right of entry to any premises where a sale
regulated by this chapter is being conducted, for the purposes of inspection
for a permit, and such person may direct the immediate closing of such sale
upon a determination that the sale is being conducted in violation of this
chapter or that the public safety and welfare is being imperiled thereby.
§ 170-7. Display of permit.
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be prominently and
conspicuously displayed at the premises at all times during such sale and
shall be exhibited to any person upon request.92
Chapter 174
RESTAURANTS AND EATING PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109. Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 174-1. License required.
No person shall conduct, operate or maintain, or permit to be conducted,
operated or maintained, any restaurant or other eating place, lunch counter,
ice cream parlor, soft drink counter or other place within the Village of
Great Neck Estates where a substantial part of the use is the cooking or
preparation of food for retail sale for consumption on or off the premises
without a valid restaurant and eating place license, issued pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 174-2. Application for license.
A. An application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be made in writing, upon a form prepared and supplied by the Village
for that purpose. Such application shall be submitted in sufficient
number of copies as required by the Village Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the Board of Trustees
for such applications. No such application shall be considered complete
until such fee has been paid.
92.Editor's Note: Former § 97-8, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 170-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 174-2
174:348
§ 174-3. Consideration of application for license.
§ 174-4. Zoning; prerequisite to approval of application.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no application for a
restaurant and eating place license shall be granted unless the said use
is a lawful use of the premises at which such activity is proposed to be
conducted, pursuant to Chapter 230, Zoning, of this Code. No approval of a
license pursuant to this chapter shall be construed to permit the conduct of
any activity prohibited by the Village zoning regulations.
B. The said application shall include all information deemed pertinent and
relevant by the Board of Trustees, including but not limited to the name
and address of the applicant; the name and address of the stockholders
or principals of an entity applicant; the name and address of a person
upon whom service of process, papers or other legal notice may be
made as an agent of the applicant; the location of the premises where
the activity is proposed to be conducted; and the nature and type of
restaurant or eating place which is proposed to be operated.
A. Upon receipt of a completed application for a license pursuant to this
chapter, the Village Clerk shall cause an investigation to be done by
referring the said application to the Nassau County Department of
Health, for a report as to the sanitary condition of the proposed
establishment and its compliance with the Nassau County Public Health
Ordinance and other applicable laws, rules and regulations. A copy of
the report of the Nassau County Department of Health and a copy of the
application shall be transmitted to the Board of Trustees.
B. Within a reasonable time after its receipt of the completed application
and the report of the Nassau County Department of Health, the Board
of Trustees shall hold a public hearing on such application. Notice of
such hearing shall be published at least five business days prior to such
hearing. At least 10 business days prior to such hearing, the applicant
shall send notice of such hearing, by certified mail return receipt
requested, to the owner(s) of any premises lawfully used for residential
purposes and located within 100 feet of the premises which is the
subject of the application. Proof of such service shall be filed with the
Village Clerk at least three business days prior to the public hearing.
C. At the public hearing, the Board of Trustees shall hear all persons
interested in the application. Upon conclusion of the hearing, and upon
consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, and upon a
determination that the proposed license would be in the best interests
of the public and would not cause any undue adverse impact on the
public health, safety or general welfare, the Board of Trustees shall
grant the application, upon such terms and conditions as it may deem
appropriate, including restrictions on times or manner of operation of
the licensed establishment.
§ 174-2 RESTAURANTS AND EATING PLACES § 174-5
174:349
§ 174-5. Issuance of license.
Any license authorized by this chapter shall be issued by the Village Clerk
and signed by the Mayor. The Village Clerk shall keep a record of such
licenses, including the number and date of the license, the term and
purpose for which it was granted, the amount of the fee paid therefor and
the terms and conditions upon which such license was issued. Such terms
and conditions shall be displayed on the said license, but the omission of
any such terms and conditions from the license shall not invalidate any such
terms nor render the same unenforceable.
§ 174-6. Term and expiration of license.
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at 12:00 midnight
on March 31 next succeeding its issuance, except that any license issued
after January 1 and before March 31 in any year shall expire at midnight
on March 31 in the next succeeding year unless the Board of Trustees shall
provide otherwise in its approval of the said license.
§ 174-7. Effect of Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to duplicate or conflict with the
provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law. However, the fact that a
license has been or may be issued to any person pursuant to such statute
shall not relieve the owner or operator of any establishment subject to the
provisions of this chapter from applying for, obtaining, and maintaining in
effect the license required by this chapter.
§ 174-8. Requirements of license.
Every licensed establishment, and every licensee, shall comply with the
terms and conditions of the license at all times during the term thereof.
In addition to such terms and conditions, every such establishment and
licensee shall comply with the following terms and conditions, which shall
be deemed to be conditions of the said license:
A. All applicable provisions of the Nassau County Public Health
Ordinance.
B. Buildings, including floors, tables, counters and surroundings, must at
all times be kept scrupulously clean and in a sanitary condition.
C. No food or drink shall be sold or exposed for sale unless it is covered in
such a manner as to protect it from flies, dust and dirt.
D. All garbage and other waste, including empty bottles, shall be kept
covered and removed daily from within the premises. No wastepaper,
boxes, wrappings, empty bottles or other rubbish shall be permitted to
accumulate in buildings. All Village laws and regulations concerning
the storage of garbage and other wastes shall be complied with.
§ 174-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 174-8
174:350
§ 174-9. Suspension of license.
§ 174-10. Amendment of license.
Any license in good standing may be amended as to its terms and conditions
by the Board of Trustees, upon written application for such amendment,
and after a public hearing held in the same manner as provided for a new
license.
§ 174-11. Revocation of license.
In the event of any violation of the conditions of a license or of the provisions
of this chapter, and after giving the licensee a reasonable opportunity to be
heard, the Board of Trustees may revoke any license issued pursuant to this
chapter, in whole or in part. Such revocation shall take effect immediately,
unless the Board of Trustees provides otherwise.
§ 174-12. Renewal of license. [Amended 9-8-1997 by L.L. No.
11-1997]
E. The premises shall be operated in a sanitary, safe, peaceful and orderly
manner, such as to avoid any danger or unreasonable disturbance
affecting the safety, health and welfare of persons on or off the
premises.
F. Unless permitted by a condition of the license approved by the Board of
Trustees, or unless authorized pursuant to Chapter 230, Zoning, of this
Code, no music or other entertainment shall be permitted on a licensed
premises, whether provided by live entertainers or performers or
otherwise.
A. In the event of any violation of the conditions of a license, or of the
provisions of this chapter, and after giving the licensee a reasonable
opportunity to be heard, the Mayor may suspend any license issued
pursuant to this chapter, in whole or in part, for a period not to exceed
15 days.
B. In the event of any violation of the conditions of a license, or of the
provisions of this chapter, and after giving the licensee a reasonable
opportunity to be heard, the Board of Trustees may suspend any license
issued pursuant to this chapter, in whole or in part, for a period not to
exceed 60 days, inclusive of any period of time for which the Mayor has
suspended such license pursuant to this chapter.
C. During the period in which any license, or any part thereof, is
suspended, it shall be deemed that such license, or such part thereof, is
no longer in effect, and no activity authorized by such license, or part
thereof, may be conducted by any person.
A. Any license in good standing may be renewed by the Mayor, upon the
same terms and conditions, upon written application made at least 30
§ 174-8 RESTAURANTS AND EATING PLACES § 174-12
174:351
days and no more than 60 days before the expiration of such license. A
report as to all such licenses renewed by the Mayor shall be made in
public at the next meeting of the Board of Trustees.
(1) At the meeting of the Board of Trustees at which a report of
renewals granted by the Mayor is made, the Board of Trustees may
vote to reconsider any such license renewal. In such event, the
Board of Trustees shall determine at a meeting held at least 10
days thereafter, upon reasonable notice to the licensee, upon notice
by publication and upon such additional notice as the Board may
deem appropriate, whether to deny such renewal or whether to
approve the same upon the same or different terms and conditions.
In making its determination whether to approve or deny such
renewal, the Board of Trustees may take such action as it deems
appropriate to provide it with relevant information. The license
shall remain in effect as renewed by the Mayor until such time as
the Board of Trustees shall make its determination, and thereafter
the status of such license shall be as determined by the Board of
Trustees.
(2) The Mayor may defer action on a license renewal application made
pursuant to this subsection in order to obtain additional
information from the applicant, the Board of Trustees and/or the
public with respect to the renewal application. The Mayor may
schedule a public hearing with respect to such application for the
purposes of eliciting pertinent information, and may thereafter
make a determination on such application based on any available
information.
(3) The Mayor may approve a license renewal on the same terms and
conditions as were applicable previously to such license, or deny
such application.
(4) In lieu of acting on a license renewal application as provided in this
chapter, the Mayor may refer the same to the Board of Trustees. In
such event, the Board of Trustees shall consider and determine
such application as if it were being considered by the Board after
the Mayor's approval of such renewal.
B. Any license in good standing may be renewed by the Board of Trustees
upon written application made less than 30 days before the expiration
of such license. Except as provided in Subsection B(1) hereof, the Board
may grant such renewal only on the same terms and conditions as were
applicable to the prior license.
(1) The Board of Trustees may determine to renew a license pursuant
to Subsection B of this section, but upon new or different
conditions, if the Board has first given notice to the public, by
publication and by such other means as the Board may deem
appropriate, and to the licensee of the meeting at which the Board
will consider such action. The licensee shall be given an
§ 174-12 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 174-12
174:352
Chapter 178
SECONDHAND ARTICLES, DEALERS IN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109.
Peddling, soliciting and canvassing — See Ch.
157.
Sale of personal property — See Ch. 170.
§ 178-1. Definitions; exceptions to regulations.
opportunity to address the Board at such meeting, and the Board
may determine whether to hear additional persons with respect to
such application.
C. No renewal of a license shall be granted pursuant to this section unless
an investigation by the Village Clerk has been conducted in the same
manner as provided for a new license; such investigation demonstrates
that the licensed establishment complies with the requirements of the
Nassau County Department of Public Health; and the official or body
granting such renewal determines that the establishment is in
compliance with the terms and conditions of its existing or immediately
prior license.
D. A license renewal may be denied pursuant to this section if the
applicant does not meet the current requirements for a license; the
applicant is currently in violation of the conditions of the prior license
or any applicable law, rule or regulation; during the term of the prior
license the applicant has violated the conditions of the prior license or
any applicable law, rule or regulation; or the conditions applicable to
the prior license are no longer suitable or adequate to provide
necessary protections to the general public or the community. In the
event of denial of an application to renew a license, the applicant may
make application for a new license in accordance with the procedures
provided in this chapter.
E. Any determination by the Mayor or Board of Trustees to deny or
approve an application to renew a license pursuant to this section,
whether or not such renewal includes new or different conditions, shall
be reviewable by any person aggrieved thereby in a judicial proceeding
instituted no more than 30 days after the date of such determination.
A. Definitions. When used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean
or include:
DEALER IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES or SECONDHAND DEALER —
Any person who in any way, as principal, broker or agent:
§ 174-12 RESTAURANTS AND EATING PLACES § 178-1
174:353
POLICE — The nearest police agency or any member or agent thereof
having jurisdiction over the area in which the place of business of a
dealer in secondhand articles is located.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, iridium, ruthenium,
osmium or any alloys of any one or more of said metals.
VILLAGE — The Village of Great Neck Estates.
Deals in the commercial purchase or sale of secondhand articles
for any purpose and of whatever nature, including, but not limited
to, old gold or other precious metals, coins, stamps or currency,
firearms, rifles, shotguns, cameras, business machines, musical
instruments, outboard motors or electronic equipment.
(1)
Accepts or receives secondhand articles as returns of merchandise
or in exchange for or for credits on any other articles or
merchandise.
(2)
Deals in the commercial purchase or sale of collateral loan broker
tickets or other evidence of pledged articles.93
(3)
B. Exceptions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to
apply to:
(1) Automobiles, automobile parts, pianos, books, magazines, rugs,
tapestries, artists, burlaps, paintings, sculpture, drawings,
etchings and engravings.
(2) The first purchase or sale in the country of any imported
secondhand article.
(3) The acceptance or receipt of merchandise in a new condition as a
return or exchange or for credit or refund, if such merchandise was
originally purchased as new merchandise from the person
accepting or receiving the same, nor to any resale of such
merchandise as new merchandise or the first subsequent nonretail
or exchange of such merchandise as used merchandise.
(4) The acceptance or receipt of merchandise in a used condition as a
return, trade-in or exchange or for credit or refund if such
merchandise was originally purchased as new merchandise from
the person accepting or receiving the same, nor to the first
subsequent nonretail sale or exchange of such merchandise.
(5) The first sale, at retail, of merchandise which has been rebuilt by
the manufacturer or vendor originally manufacturing it or the
licensed agents thereof and sold as factory rebuilt merchandise.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 178-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 178-1
174:354
§ 178-2. License required; bond; issuance or denial of license;
revocation or suspension; review.
(6) A thrift shop, as defined to be so classified under the United States
Internal Revenue Code as entitled to an exemption as an
eleemosynary corporation or institution.
(7) Antiques, which shall mean secondhand articles over 75 years of
age, having a value of less than $250 and devoid of any means of
identification. "Identification" shall mean articles which are
serialized, monogrammed, initialed or distinctly marked.
(8) A charitable or religious organization, association or corporation
which has acquired secondhand articles through donation or
collection for the purpose of selling such articles or disposing of
them by gift.
(9) A garage sale conducted by a person not normally engaged in the
business of conducting such sales.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or
corporation to act as a secondhand dealer, as defined in § 178-1 of this
chapter, unless such secondhand dealer shall have complied with the
provisions of this chapter and obtained the required license from the
Mayor, for which license shall be paid to the Village a fee as set forth in
Chapter 109, Fees, which license shall expire on June 30 of each year.94
B. Every person, association, partnership or corporation licensed pursuant
to this chapter shall, at the time of receiving such license, file with the
Village Clerk, pursuant to Subsection A of this section, a bond to the
Village, to be executed by the licensee and two responsible sureties, in
the sum of $10,000. Such bond shall be approved by such Village Clerk
and by the Village Attorney and shall be conditioned for the faithful
performance of the licensee's duties and obligations pursuant to this
chapter.
C. Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall:
(1) Be kept conspicuously posted within the place of business of the
person to whom such license was issued.
(2) Indicate the name and place of business of the person to whom it
was issued.
D. A license under this chapter shall be denied to any person:
(1) Who has been convicted within five years prior to the application
for such license, excluding any period of incarceration served as a
sentence for such conviction, of any offense which under the laws
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 178-1 RESTAURANTS AND EATING PLACES § 178-2
174:355
of the State of New York would constitute any degree of a crime
involving larceny or criminal possession of stolen property.
(2) Who has been convicted of any other crime, except as otherwise
provided by Article 23-A of the Correction Law.
(3) Whose license under this chapter has been revoked at any time
during the year prior to the time of the application for the license.
(4) Whose license has been suspended under this chapter and the
period of such suspension has not expired at the time of this
application for the license.
(5) Who is less than 18 years of age.
E. A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or suspended
after notice by the Village Clerk when he has probable cause to believe
that the licensee has committed any of the following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the
application for the license.
(2) Any violation of this chapter.
(3) Any act that would constitute a ground for denial of a license, as
specified in Subsection D(1) and (2) of this section.
F. The holder of any license which has been suspended or revoked and any
applicant who shall have been denied a license under this chapter shall
have the right, unless waived by him in writing, to notice of such action
and to a hearing to review such action. Such notice and hearing shall be
provided as follows:
(1) Notice of the revocation, suspension or denial of a license shall be
given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for such
action, the right of the licensee or the applicant to a review hearing
to be conducted by the Board of Trustees of the Village and the
date, place and time of such hearing. Such notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, by the Village to the licensee or license applicant
at his last known address, not later than 10 nor more than 20 days
prior to the date of the review hearing.
(2) The Board of Trustees may designate two or more of its members to
conduct said hearing as a review board. Such review board may
administer oaths, take testimony, subpoena witnesses and compel
the production of books, papers, records and documents pertinent
to the hearing.
(3) The license applicant or licensee involved shall be entitled to be
represented by legal counsel and to present such competent and
material testimony or any other evidence in his own behalf as may
be relevant to the subject matter of the hearing.
§ 178-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 178-2
174:356
§ 178-3. Reports to police.
Every dealer in secondhand articles shall furnish to the police, at such
times, in such manner and at such intervals as shall be specified by such
police agency, all information requested by the police relative to all records
required to be kept under this chapter. Such information shall be supplied
on forms to be designated and supplied by the police.
§ 178-4. Restrictions.
(4) All witnesses shall be sworn and examined under oath. A
stenographic record of the hearing shall be taken and preserved.
(5) The review board, after such hearing, may affirm the denial,
revocation or suspension of the license or it may order the Village
Clerk to vacate such action and either issue, renew or restore the
license, as is appropriate. The review board's decision shall be in
writing and shall state the grounds therefor. Such decision shall be
reviewable by a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to engage in
selling activities at any place other than the place of business
designated in his license.
B. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to purchase
any secondhand goods or things from any person whom he knows to be
or has reason to believe is less than 18 years of age.
C. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in secondhand articles to sell, alter or
dispose of any secondhand articles, except articles purchased from
another duly licensed secondhand dealer, until the expiration of 15
business days after the acquisition by such dealer of such articles.
D. No person licensed as a secondhand dealer may engage in the business
of a collateral loan broker, unless also licensed as a collateral loan
broker pursuant to Article 5 of the General Business Law. No person
licensed as a collateral loan broker shall engage in the business of a
secondhand dealer unless also licensed as a secondhand dealer
pursuant to this chapter. All persons licensed as both secondhand
dealers and collateral loan brokers shall post a conspicuous notice, to
be clearly visible to all customers entering each place of business of
such licensee, stating that customers may freely choose to either pawn
or sell property to the licensee.95
E. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a secondhand dealer to
deal in the purchase or sale of any junk, old rope, old iron, brass,
copper, tin, lead, rubber, paper, rags, bagging, slush or empty bottles,
or employ or use a boat, cart or other vehicle for the purpose of
collecting any such things or materials, unless he is also licensed as a
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 178-2 RESTAURANTS AND EATING PLACES § 178-4
174:357
§ 178-5. Lost or stolen property.
§ 178-6. Record of purchases and sales.
junk dealer therefor as provided for in and pursuant to Article 6 of the
General Business Law.
A. If any article shall be advertised in any newspaper generally circulated
in the county as having been lost or stolen and if any goods or articles
answering such advertised description or any part thereof shall be in or
come into the possession of any dealer in secondhand articles, upon
receiving actual written or oral notice of the similarity of description of
such articles, such dealer shall immediately give information relating
thereto to the police. No disposition of such articles shall be effected
until authorization to do so shall be given to such dealer by the police. A
dealer in secondhand articles, when notified by the police that property
in his possession is stolen or alleged to be stolen, shall take immediate
steps to secure that property, and it shall be marked "police stop."
Thereafter, such property shall not be sold or removed from the
premises until notification is made to the dealer in writing by the police
allowing such removal or sale.
B. Every dealer in secondhand articles who shall have or receive any
articles alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen shall exhibit the
same, on demand, to the police or any authorized inspector of licenses,
to any police officer or to any person duly authorized in writing by the
police to examine such articles who shall exhibit such written authority
to the dealer.
A. Every dealer in secondhand articles shall keep a bound book, in a form
prescribed by the police, or consecutively numbered transactions in
which shall be legibly written in English at the time of every purchase
or sale to or from a person other than a dealer in secondhand articles, a
description of every secondhand article so purchased or sold, the
number or numbers of any monograms, inscriptions or other marks of
identification that may appear on such article, a description of the
articles or pieces comprising precious metals, coins, stamps or
currency, any monogram, inscription or marks of identification thereon,
the name and residence address of the person from whom such
purchase was made and the day and hour of the purchase.
B. Every dealer in secondhand articles who receives secondhand articles
on consignment shall keep a record, in the above-prescribed book,
describing the articles and the name and description of the person or
dealer from whom such items are received.
C. As between dealers, all transactions shall be recorded in the aboveprescribed
book, and legible records shall be kept describing the
articles, including a detailed description of all jewelry and costume
jewelry.
§ 178-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 178-6
174:358
§ 178-7. Identity of person from whom purchases are made.
§ 178-8. Penalties for offenses; additional remedies.
Chapter 181
D. Such books shall be kept on the business premises of the secondhand
dealership or at the place designated on the duly approved license at all
times during normal business hours. Such books and such business
premises or place designated on the duly approved license shall be
open to the inspection of the police or any inspector of licenses during
normal business hours.
A. It shall be the duty of every secondhand dealer to verify the identity of
every person from whom he purchases an article and to make and keep
a written record of the nature of the evidence submitted by such person
to prove his identity.
B. Only the following shall be deemed acceptable evidence of identity:
(1) Any official document, except a social security account number
card, issued by the United States government, any state, county,
municipality or subdivision thereof, any public agency or
department thereof or any public or private employer which
requires and bears the signature of the person to whom issued.
(2) Other identification documentation which, under the
circumstances of any particular purchase, would lead a reasonable
person to believe it to be accurate and reliable, when identification
under Subsection B(1) is not available.
C. It shall be the duty of every dealer in secondhand articles to require
that every person from whom an article is purchased sign his name in
the presence of the secondhand dealer and to compare the signature
with the signature on the identifying document, if any, and retain on his
premises the person's signature together with the number and
description of the identifying document, if any, and the number of the
transaction as required by § 178-6A of this chapter.
A. A failure to comply with this chapter shall constitute a violation under
the Penal Law of the State of New York. Each such violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense for each day such violation shall continue.96
B. In addition to the above-provided penalties and punishment, the Village
may also maintain an action or proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter or
to restrain by injunction an offense against this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, specifying penalty provisions, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 178-6 SECURITY GATES § 178-8
181:359
SECURITY GATES
§ 178-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 178-8
181:360
ARTICLE I
Business Districts
[Adopted 1-3-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983 (Ch. 105, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 181-1. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates hereby declares
and finds it to be in the public interest to provide for the regulation of the
installation and maintenance of security gates in business districts within
the Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 181-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SECURITY GATE — A barrier, screen or cover located in front of or behind
a door, window or other opening used for purposes of securing premises by
preventing access or blocking passage to the interior of the premises.
§ 181-3. Applicability; compliance.
§ 181-4. Restrictions.
§ 181-5. Permit applications; inspections; expiration.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply only to security gates located in
front of or behind doors, windows or other openings facing or fronting
on a public road or highway located within a business district.
B. All security gates which are in existence prior to the date of the
adoption of this article and which do not comply with the provisions of
this article shall be made to comply with the provisions of this article
within three years of the date of adoption of said article or shall be
removed.
A. No solid metal barrier, screen or cover shall be erected or maintained in
front of or behind doors, windows or other openings facing or fronting
on a public road or highway located within a business district.
B. All security gates shall be of such type as will not prevent the viewing of
the interior of the premises from outside the premises.
C. When a security gate is not in use, it shall be removed or stored in such
a manner as not to be visible from the exterior of the premises.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work on the erection or
alteration of or to erect, alter or maintain any security gate until a
permit has been duly issued upon application therefor.
§ 181-1 SECURITY GATES § 181-5
181:361
§ 181-6. Permit fee.97
The fee for a permit for the erection, alteration or maintenance of a security
gate shall be as set forth in Chapter 109, Fees. Said fee shall be submitted
at the time the application is presented to the Code Official.
§ 181-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-10-1997 by L.L. No.
3-1997]
The owner or occupant of any building or premises where a violation of this
article is committed or shall exist, or the owner of occupant of a part of any
building or premises where such violation is committed or shall exist, shall
be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided for violations of this Code.
§ 181-8. Enforcement officer.
The Code Official shall enforce the provisions of this article and issue any
permits provided for herein.
B. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a set of plans
indicating the proposed location and dimensions of said security gate
and a description of the type of said security gate.
C. No permit shall be issued until the Code Official has examined and
approved the proposed security gate, in writing, as complying with all
the provisions of this article.
D. Permits shall expire three months following the date of issuance if no
substantial work is begun and may be renewed upon written application
to the Code Official.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 181-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 181-8
181:362
Chapter 184
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109.
§ 184-1. Requirements for sanitary sewer connections.
All connections to the sanitary sewer of the Great Neck Sewer District or
the Belgrave Sewer District shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Before any work is commenced, an application for a connection permit
shall be filed with the Village Clerk which shall show in detail the work
to be performed, the size and location of pipes and any other particulars
that the Village Clerk or the Building Inspector may require. As part of
such application, there must be filed with the Village Clerk the written
approval and consent of the Great Neck Sewer District or the Belgrave
Sewer District, as the case may be, to the connection to the sewer. The
applicant shall also pay to the Village Clerk a fee in the amount
elsewhere provided for in the Village ordinances, such fee to be in
addition to any charge that may be made by the sewer district.98
B. Such work shall comply with all of the requirements of the sewer
district and such additional requirements as the Village Clerk or the
Building Inspector may determine. In case of inconsistency between
such requirements, the requirements of the sewer district shall control.
C. If the Building Inspector shall determine that all of such requirements
and all other requirements of this chapter have been complied with, the
Village Clerk may issue a permit authorizing the performance of the
work.
D. Unless otherwise directed by the sewer district, all work shall be
performed, and the connection shall be made, in the presence of a
representative of said sewer district.
E. Before a certificate of occupancy is issued in respect to such work, or
before a certificate of occupancy is issued for a building which provides
for a connection to the sanitary sewer of either the Great Neck Sewer
District or the Belgrave Sewer District, the applicant shall first obtain
and file with the Village Clerk a certificate of compliance from the said
sewer district.
98.Editor's Note: As to current fee provisions, see Ch. 109, Fees.
§ 181-8 SECURITY GATES § 184-2
181:363
§ 184-2. Requirements for use of sanitary sewer.
No connections to the sanitary sewer of the sewer district shall be used
except in conformity with the following requirements:
§ 184-3. Requirements for sewage disposal; individual sewage
disposal systems. [Added 8-12-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
A. All connections used by private owners or occupants shall be laid and
kept in repair at their own expense.
B. All of such connections and the use thereof shall comply with and be
subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the Great Neck Sewer
District or the Belgrave Sewer District, as the case may be, now in force
or hereafter from time to time adopted.
C. No pipe or drain or connection of any description, other than a sanitary
sewer line, shall be connected to the sewer system of the sewer district.
D. The said sewer system is designed and is intended for the collection,
transport, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage only, and the use
thereof for any other purpose is hereby forbidden.
E. No roof drain, surface water drain, cellar drain, sump pump or garage
drain, and no drain carrying or intended to carry wastes from any airconditioning
unit, commercial refrigeration system, swimming pool,
automobile washing stand or garbage disposal system or device, shall
be connected to any sanitary sewer line or to the sewer system, and no
liquid or solid matter, other than sanitary sewage, shall be dumped or
discharged into the said sewer system.
A. No building permit shall be issued for construction of a new building or
any alteration or addition to an existing building in the Village of Great
Neck Estates, where such building requires facilities for the disposition
of sanitary sewage disposal, unless said building shall have adequate
provisions for sanitary sewage disposal as provided in this section.
B. Adequate provisions for sanitary sewage disposal, as used in this
section, shall mean an approved connection to a municipal sanitary
wastewater collection and treatment system or an approved individual
sewage disposal system.
C. Individual sewage disposal system, as used in this section, shall mean a
sewage disposal system which is not connected to a municipal sanitary
wastewater collection and treatment system.
D. All individual sewage disposal systems constructed or reconstructed
after the effective date of this section shall provide a minimum
dimension of two feet above the groundwater table between the bottom
of the disposal facility and the highest point of the groundwater table at
each point where such system is located. This area may be of either
naturally occurring soils or excavated unsuitable soil which was
§ 184-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 184-3
181:364
§ 184-4. Right of inspection by authorized official. [Amended
10-9-2012 by L.L. No. 10-2012]
Any member of the Board of Commissioners of the Great Neck Sewer
District or of the Belgrave Sewer District, as the case may be, or the
authorized agents or inspectors of the sewer district involved, or the
Building Inspector of the Village of Great Neck Estates may at any time
when authorized by law enter a building or upon the premises where a
sewer connection exists and may examine all pipes, drains and conduits
connected with such sewer and may make such other examination,
inspection or tests as they or any of them may determine in order to
ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter and of the regulations of
the sewer district have been or are being complied with properly.
§ 184-5. Notice of violation; correction of violation.
If the Board of Sewer Commissioners of the sewer district, or its authorized
agents or inspectors, or the Village Building Inspector, shall determine that
a violation exists, they or the Village Clerk or any of them may serve,
by registered mail or otherwise, written notice of such violation upon the
owner, or the agent, servant or employee of the owner, or any occupant
of the building affected, and such owner, agents, servants or employees or
occupants shall forthwith remove or correct said violation at his or their
own cost and expense.
§ 184-6. Failure to correct violation; remedy.
In case of the failure to discontinue or correct or remove such violation
within 10 days after the mailing of said notice, the Board of Commissioners
of the sewer district, or the Village Building Inspector, or their respective
agents, servants or employees, may enter into the premises and disconnect
the sewer line or remove all violations without further notice, at the cost
and expense of the owner or occupant, and without recourse or liability
against the sewer district or the Village.
replaced with soils acceptable for filtration of waste from the disposal
system.
E. Any person who constructs, alters or adds to any building requiring
provision for sewage disposal and who does so without adequate
provisions for sanitary sewage disposal as required by this section shall
be guilty of a violation. Each violation of this section shall be subject to
the punishment provided in this Code for a violation. In addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the use or occupancy of any such
building may be enjoined by order or judgment of a court of appropriate
jurisdiction upon application by the Village, the Mayor or the Building
Inspector.
§ 184-3 SECURITY GATES § 184-7
181:365
§ 184-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-10-1997 by L.L. No.
3-1997]
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, or any order or regulation issued thereunder, or who violates the
rules and regulations of the Great Neck Water Pollution Control District or
the Belgrave Water Pollution Control District, shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided for violations
of this Code. The Board of commissioners of the Great Neck Water Pollution
Control District or the Belgrave Water Pollution Control District shall have
the right and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the
rules and regulations of such district by injunction or otherwise as provided
by law.
Chapter 187
SOCIAL HOSTS
§ 187-1. Purpose and intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates finds that
underage drinking is a significant societal problem that has general
widespread concern in the Village of Great Neck Estates. Although the New
York State legislature has acted to proscribe the unlawful giving, selling and
possessing of alcohol in relation to minors, it has not regulated situations in
which a person 18 years of age or older knowingly permits the consumption
of alcohol by a minor in his or her home. The consumption of alcohol by
underage persons, whether at a party or a smaller gathering, poses an
immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents
of Great Neck Estates, often leading to alcohol abuse by minors, physical
altercations, accidental injuries, neighborhood vandalism, excessive noise
disturbances requiring the intervention of local law enforcement and the
commission of violent crimes including sexual offenses and serious assaults.
This chapter is intended to deter the consumption of alcoholic beverages
by minors by holding those 18 years of age or older responsible when they
permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 187-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following words shall have the following meanings:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever means produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any liquor, wine, beer, spirits, cider or other
liquid or solid, patented or not, composed of, or containing, alcohol or
spirits, whether or not brewed, fermented or distilled, and capable of being
consumed by a person, except that confectionary containing alcohol as
provided by Subdivision 12 of § 200 of the New York State Agriculture and
§ 184-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 187-2
181:366
Markets Law shall not be regarded as an alcoholic beverage within the
meaning of this chapter.
KNOWINGLY — Aware of, or having reason to be aware of, the consumption
of alcohol by a minor.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 21.
RESIDENCE — Any home, apartment, condominium, co-operative unit or
other dwelling unit of any kind, including yards and open areas adjacent
thereto.
§ 187-3. Unlawful consumption of alcohol by minors prohibited at a
residence.
§ 187-4. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall constitute an offense. Each first offense, and
each subsequent offense, shall be punished as follows:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of age or older who owns,
rents or otherwise is in control of a private residence to knowingly
allow the consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any minor
on such premises or to fail to take reasonable corrective action upon
learning of the consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any
minor on such premises. Reasonable corrective action pursuant to this
subsection shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Making a prompt demand that such minor either forfeit and refrain
from further consumption of the alcoholic beverages or depart from
the premises; and
(2) If such minor does not comply with such request, either promptly
reporting such underage consumption of alcohol to the local law
enforcement agency or to any other person having a greater degree
of authority over the conduct of such minor.
B. The provisions of Subsection A this section shall not apply to:
(1) The consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by a minor
whose parent or guardian is present and has expressly permitted
such consumption; or
(2) The use and consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by a
minor for religious purposes.
A. First offense. Any person who violates this chapter shall be punished by
a fine not less $500 where such violation constitutes the person's first
offense in violation of this chapter within a period of 12 months.
B. Second offense. Any person who violates this chapter shall be punished
by a fine not less than $750 and not more than $1,000, where such
violation constitutes the person's second offense in violation of this
chapter within a period of 12 months.
§ 187-2 SECURITY GATES § 187-4
181:367
Chapter 188
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumpsters and other receptacles for debris
collection — See Ch. 191, Art. VI.
C. Third and subsequent offenses. Any person who violates this chapter
shall be punished by either a fine of at least $1,000 and not more than
$1,500, a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment, where such violation constitutes the person's third
or subsequent violation of this chapter within a period of 12 months.
§ 187-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 187-4
188:368
ARTICLE I
Waste Management
[Adopted 3-11-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991 (Ch. 109 of the 1981 Code)]
§ 188-1. Findings and purpose.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates hereby finds
and determines that it is appropriate, proper and necessary and in the
interests of the public health, safety and general welfare for the Village to
regulate the disposition of solid wastes which are collected in the Village
in accordance with authority granted to the Village by law, including Public
Authorities Law § 2049-u, Subdivision 1. The purpose of this article is to
implement and utilize that authority and to provide for the delivery of solid
waste generated or originated within the Village and collected within the
Village to a facility designated by the Village.
§ 188-2. Disposal of solid waste.
All solid waste generated or originated within the Village of Great Neck
Estates, except for such materials designated by the Board of Trustees of
the Village as being exempt from this article, shall be delivered to one or
more specified solid waste management facilities as may be designated by
the Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time.
§ 188-1 SOLID WASTE § 188-2
188:369

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 3-1992 (Ch. 103A of the 1981
Code)]
§ 188-3. Purpose.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 120-aa, the New York State
Legislature has directed that each municipality in the State of New York
adopt local legislation requiring that solid waste which has been left for
collection or which is delivered by the generator of such solid waste to a
solid waste management facility shall be separated into recyclable, reusable
or other components for which economic markets for alternate uses exist.
It is the intention of the Village of Great Neck Estates to conform to that
requirement by the enactment of this article.
§ 188-4. Separation required; collection.
A. The Board of Trustees, from time to time, by resolution, may establish
regulations specifying those recyclable or reusable materials, including
but not limited to glass, metal and plastic containers and newspapers or
other components, which materials shall not be commingled for pickup
with any other solid waste materials and which shall be separated from
other solid waste materials in accordance with such regulations, and
designating the place(s) and time(s) when such recyclable or reusable
materials may be placed for pickup, collection and recycling.
B. No person shall cause or permit any recyclable or reusable materials
designated in or pursuant to Subsection A hereof to be commingled
with any other solid waste materials for pickup, collection and
recycling.
C. No person shall cause or permit any such recyclable or reusable
material to be placed for pickup, collection and recycling, except in
containers approved by the Board of Trustees for that purpose.
D. No person shall cause or permit any such recyclable or reusable
material to be placed for pickup, collection and recycling and reuse,
except at such times and places as may be designated by the Board of
Trustees.
§ 188-3 SOLID WASTE § 188-4
188:371
Chapter 190
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development of filled-in land — See Ch. 113.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 107.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 126.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 129.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 190-1. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Great Neck Estates through the
regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by
federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling
the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with
requirements of the SPDES general permit for municipal separate storm
sewer systems. The objectives of this chapter are:
§ 190-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this chapter, the following terms
will have meanings set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good-housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES general permit for stormwater
discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 188-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 190-2
190:372
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity,
GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — New York State licensed professional engineer
or licensed architect.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 190-6 of this chapter.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM — A facility serving one or
more parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
§ 190-2 STORM SEWERS § 190-2
190:373
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.99
MS4 — The municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Great Neck Estates.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, industrial, municipal and agricultural
waste and ballast discharged into water, which may cause or might
reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in
contravention of the standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Great Neck Estates;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may have caused or has
the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of
an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition the
municipality must take all necessary actions to ensure future
discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters: the condition in the municipality's MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
B.
99.Editor's Note: See also the NYSDEC SPDES Permit No. GP-0-06-002.
§ 190-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 190-2
190:374
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, the
municipal engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Village to
enforce this chapter. The SMO may also be designated by the municipality
to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans, forward the
plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices.
303(D) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department as
required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are
estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality
standards and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a waterbody so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
VILLAGE — The Village of Great Neck Estates.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
this condition the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the
municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges has been approved by the EPA for
a waterbody or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the
discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations
prior to September 10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify
its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by the EPA for any waterbody or watershed
into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition the municipality
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the
TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must, within six months
of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
D.
§ 190-2 STORM SEWERS § 190-3
190:375
§ 190-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 190-4. Administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such powers granted
or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be
delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the municipality.
§ 190-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
§ 190-6. Discharge prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
as provided in § 190-6A(1). The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited, except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter, unless the Department or the
municipality has determined them to be substantial contributors of
pollutants: water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream
flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains, crawl space or basement sump
pumps, air-conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs,
water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
residential street wash water, water from fire-fighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan
for reducing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
§ 190-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 190-6
190:376
§ 190-7. Failing individual sewage treatment systems.
No person shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system in
areas tributary to the municipality's MS4. A failing individual sewage
treatment system is one which has one or more of the following conditions:
§ 190-8. Activities contaminating stormwater.
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this chapter.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under an
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the
Department, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipality's
MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
A. The backup of sewage into a structure.
B. Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground surface.
C. A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer system.
D. Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert.
E. Structural failure of any component of the individual sewage treatment
system that could lead to any of the other failure conditions as noted in
this section.
F. Contamination of off-site groundwater.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
§ 190-6 STORM SEWERS § 190-8
190:377
§ 190-9. Reduction of stormwater pollutants; use of best
management practices.
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit.
(2) Cause or contribute to the municipality being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 190-2, Definitions, of this chapter.
B. Such activities include failing individual sewage treatment systems as
defined in § 190-7, improper management of pet waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's
MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
C. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
A. Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit
discharges as defined in § 190-2 or activities contaminating stormwater
as defined in § 190-8, the municipality may require implementation of
best management practices (BMPs) to control those illicit discharges
and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at his own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into
the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge as defined in § 190-2 or an
activity contaminating stormwater as defined in § 190-8 may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the
source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section.
B. Individual sewage treatment systems; response to special conditions
requiring no increase of pollutants or requiring a reduction of
pollutants. Where individual sewage treatment systems are
contributing to the municipality's being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 190-2 of this chapter, the owner or operator of
such individual sewage treatment systems shall be required to:
§ 190-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 190-9
190:378
§ 190-10. Suspension of access to MS4; illicit discharges in
emergency situations.
(1) Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as
follows:
(a) Inspect the septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge
accumulation. Septic tanks must be pumped out whenever the
bottom of the scum layer is within three inches of the bottom of
the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or the top of the sludge is
within 10 inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary
tee.
(b) Avoid the use of septic tank additives.
(c) Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, and household chemicals; and
(d) Avoid the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers,
sanitary napkins, trash and other such items.
(e) Most tanks should be pumped out every two to three years.
However, pumping may be more or less frequent depending on
use. Inspection of the tank for cracks, leaks and blockages
should be done by the septage hauler at the time of pumping of
the tank contents.
(2) Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with 10 NYCRR Appendix 75A to the maximum
extent practicable.
(b) A design professional licensed to practice in New York State
shall prepare design plans for any type of absorption field that
involves:
[1] Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location
not previously approved for such.
[2] Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the
same location.
[3] Use of alternate system or innovative system design or
technology.
(c) A written certificate of compliance shall be submitted by the
design professional to the municipality at the completion of
construction of the repair or replacement system.
A. The SMO may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of
§ 190-9 STORM SEWERS § 190-10
190:379
§ 190-11. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the municipality prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 190-12. Access and monitoring of discharges.
persons, or to the MS4. The SMO shall notify the person of the reasons
for such suspension, within a reasonable time thereafter, in writing.
If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to
persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the municipality's MS4 in violation of this chapter may
have his MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing of
the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines, in writing,
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this chapter.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
chapter.
§ 190-10 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 190-12
190:380
§ 190-13. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the municipality in person or by
telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed to the municipality within three business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
(3) The municipality shall have the right to set up on any facility
subject to this chapter such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The municipality has the right to require the facilities subject to
this chapter to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
facility subject to this chapter is a violation of this chapter. A person
who is the operator of a facility subject to this chapter commits an
offense if the person denies the municipality reasonable access to
the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this chapter.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 190-12 STORM SEWERS § 190-14
190:381
§ 190-14. Enforcement.
§ 190-15. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the SMO to the Board of Trustees in writing within 15 days of its issuance.
The Board of Trustees shall hear the appeal within 45 days after the filing
A. Notice of violation. When the municipality's SMO finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
chapter, the SMO may order compliance by written notice of violation to
the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(5) Payment of a fine; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If
abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided in
this Code or otherwise provided by law, any person who violates the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a
fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a
second offense both of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less
than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this
chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors, and, for such purpose only, all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
§ 190-14 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 190-15
190:382
of the appeal and, within five days of making its decision, file its decision
in the office of the Village Clerk and mail a copy of its decision by certified
mail to the discharger.
§ 190-16. Corrective measures after appeal.
§ 190-17. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the SMO may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 190-18. Alternative remedies.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within five
business days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall request the owner's
permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all
measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court
order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
A. Any person or entity who has violated a provision of this chapter may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Municipal Attorney and concurrence of the
Municipal Code Enforcement Officer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this chapter.
(3) Environmental damage was minimal.
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy violation.
(5) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops.
§ 190-15 STORM SEWERS § 190-18
190:383
§ 190-19. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is
declared and deemed a nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 190-20. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
Chapter 191
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Development of filled-in land — See Ch. 113.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 123.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 167.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 217.
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(3) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 190-18 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 190-20
190:384
ARTICLE I
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 10-24-1922 by Ord. No. 4; amended in its entirety
5-13-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
§ 191-0. Legislative intent.
Village roads which have been recently repaved or newly constructed often
are opened by parties other than the Village, shortening the useful life of
such roads, damaging the integrity of such roads, and creating additional
expense on the part of the Village. Existing provisions of law are insufficient
or inadequate to prevent this problem. It is hereby found to be in the best
interest of the Village and its residents enact the regulations contained in
this article to prohibit issuance of road opening permits on roads which
have been newly constructed or which recently have been re-paved, subject
to certain exceptions as stated in this article.
§ 191-1. Permit required; applications.
A. Unless otherwise authorized by law, no person, firm or corporation,
including a water company, a gas company, a telephone company, an
electric light company or other public utility, shall open or dig up or cut
the pavement, curb, gutter or sidewalk of any Village street or highway
(hereinafter collectively referred to as "street" or "highway") for any
purpose, without previously having applied for and received a written
permit as required by this article.
B. Upon receipt of a properly completed application, in writing, filed with
the Superintendent of Public Works, stating the purpose, extent,
location and nature of a proposed excavation or other disturbance of a
street or highway in the Village, the date or dates when the proposed
excavation or disturbance will take place, and the estimated date of
completion at each such location. With respect to any contractors or
subcontractors who will be working at the site(s), the application shall
include the name and contact information, including emergency contact
information, for each such contractor or subcontractor. If the
contractor or subcontractor information is not known at the time of
permit application, such information shall be supplied at least two
business days before any such contractor or subcontractor begins work
at any site.
(1) The Superintendent of Public Works may grant or refuse a permit
application where the same is incomplete, where the proposed
excavation or disturbance is not in the public interest, or whether
the proposed application does not comply with the requirements of
this section. If a permit application is denied, the Superintendent of
Public Works promptly shall send the applicant written notice of
such denial, and state the reasons therefor.
§ 191-0 STORM SEWERS § 191-1
190:385
§ 191-2. Fee.
C. Except where such excavation or disturbance shall be directly
authorized by law, the Superintendent of Public Works shall require the
applicant to deposit with the Village a sum of money, or a bond in a sum
set by resolution of the Board of Trustees, or which shall otherwise be
deemed by such Superintendent of Public Works to be adequate to pay
all of the expenses to which the Village will be put to replace, repair or
replace the streets or highways in proper condition, any unexpended
balance of which shall be returned to the applicant within 90 days after
the proper completion of the excavation or disturbance to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works.
D. Each permit application also shall include an insurance policy, including
endorsements for any liability insurance, naming the Village, its
officers, agents, employees and volunteers as additional named
insureds, in the sum of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit.
E. Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the
Superintendent of Public Works at any time, for cause.
F. Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be null and void if work
is not commenced within 30 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the Superintendent of Public Works shall grant an extension of such
time for good cause shown.
G. Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall expire after a
reasonable period of time as determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works and specified in the permit upon issuance thereof, which
period of time may be extended by the Superintendent of Public Works
for good cause shown.
H. No road openings shall be made or commenced pursuant to a permit
issued in accordance with this article unless at least two and not more
than five business days' prior notice has been given by the applicant to
the Superintendent of Public Works, except in cases of emergency as
provided for in this article. No road openings shall be commenced on a
Saturday, Sunday or holiday, except in case of emergency.
I. Upon completion of backfilling and pavement (permanent or
temporary), the party performing the work shall notify the
Superintendent of Public Works so that the Village may inspect the
same. No work shall be deemed complete until inspected and approved
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
A. Except as provided in this article, or as otherwise required by law, such
permit shall be issued by the Superintendent of Public Works upon
payment to the Village of a permit fee as provided in Chapter 109, Fees,
for each location to which the permit relates and upon receiving the
bond or security hereinafter required. The fee and permit herein
§ 191-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 191-2
190:386
§ 191-3. Permit conditions.
§ 191-4. New or reconstructed streets: limitation on issuance of
permit.
No permit for excavation or disturbance of a newly constructed or
reconstructed street shall be issued for a period of five years from the
required shall be in addition to permits required for the construction of
any sidewalk, curb or driveway.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, permits shall be issued to
the Long Island Power Authority, the Water Authority of Great Neck
North, the County of Nassau, the Town of North Hempstead and any of
its special districts, other governmental entities, any public utility, or
persons or entities performing work under contract for or on behalf of
any of them, without payment of a fee as otherwise required by this
article.
A. All permits shall be deemed to include a condition that the permit
holder comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and
regulations in the performance of the work authorized by such permit.
B. In addition to any other conditions stated in this article, such permit
shall be subject to the conditions, which the party applying for or acting
under the permit shall be deemed to have consented to and be bound
by, that the party making the opening shall:
(1) Backfill or cause the opening to be backfilled
(2) Place thereon such temporary pavement as may be approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works;
(3) Care for and maintain such temporary pavement until such time
(not to exceed six months) as the Superintendent of Public Works
shall determine that proper settlement has taken place to allow the
laying of a permanent pavement;
(4) Restore the pavement in accordance with Village specifications;
(5) Indemnify and save harmless the Village, its officers, employees,
agents and volunteers from any or all loss or damage, or claims of
loss or damage, including reasonable attorneys' fees, which the
Village or any of them may sustain through the negligence of such
party or otherwise, arising out of the work;
(6) At all times when work is not actively being conducted on the site,
all equipment left at the work site shall be safely secured and
stored in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public
Works to protect the safety of the general public and persons
traveling on or using the public streets and sidewalks.
§ 191-2 STORM SEWERS § 191-4
190:387
completion date of construction or reconstruction of such street without the
permission of the Board of Trustees.
§ 191-5. Street restoration.
Unless otherwise determined by the Superintendent of Public Works for
good cause shown, any person or entity causing or performing excavation or
disturbance of a street or highway shall, upon completion of work, restore
the same as reasonably required by the Superintendent of Public Works,
from curb to curb, for a horizontal distance of at least four feet in each
direction from any portion of the disturbed or excavated area.
§ 191-6. Noncompliance; liability of applicant.
In case the applicant shall fail to restore such street to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent of Public Works, after notice and demand, or fails to
comply with the requirements of this article, the Village may cause such
work to be performed by or on behalf of the Village for the account of the
applicant, and the applicant shall be liable to the Village for the cost thereof.
The Village may charge such cost against the money deposited as required
by this article, returning the excess, if any, to the person depositing the
same. In the event any such work is performed by or on behalf of the
Village, the cost of such work shall include the reasonable value of the
labor, materials, supervision, engineering and overhead, and reasonable
attorneys' fees, actually incurred for such work.
§ 191-6.1. Emergencies.
In the event that any pipe, main, conduit or other utility installation in or
under any street or highway shall burst, break or otherwise be in such
condition as to seriously endanger persons or property, the owner of such
sewer, main, conduit or other installation shall immediately contact the
Village describing the location of the break, extent of repairs and any
emergency measures required to reroute traffic. Upon approval by the
Superintendent of Public Works such owner shall immediately remedy such
trouble and shall immediately take all such necessary steps to make said
location safe and secure. Such owner shall not, however, begin making any
permanent repairs to such street, alley or sidewalk until such owner shall
have secured a permit as provided above. Such permit shall be applied for
within 48 hours after such break or serious trouble shall have developed,
and the necessary permanent repairs to the street or highway shall be made
as directed by the Superintendent of Public Works and shall be completed
as soon as practicable after receipt of the permit.
§ 191-6.2. Notice to public service corporations.
No work shall be commenced under any permit granted pursuant to this
article unless or until such notice as shall be directed by the Superintendent
of Public Works shall have been given to public service corporations having
§ 191-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 191-6.2
190:388
lines, mains or other property in the streets for the protection of their
property.
§ 191-6.3. Protection of excavations.
§ 191-6.4. Protection of property.
A. Each person or entity holding a permit issued pursuant to this article,
or acting pursuant to any such permit, shall take appropriate measures
to assure that, during the performance of the excavation work, traffic
conditions as nearly normal as practicable shall be maintained at all
times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants
of the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the
Superintendent of Public Works may permit the closing of streets to all
traffic for a period of time prescribed by such Superintendent as in the
opinion of such Superintendent is necessary. Failure to provide barriers
and lights conforming to the requirements of the Superintendent of
Public Works shall be prima facie evidence of a failure to provide
suitable barriers and lights and may result in immediate revocation of
the permit.
B. Excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or
obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire hydrants.
Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be
kept free of piles of material or other obstructions.
C. The following measures, at a minimum, shall be taken to ensure the
safety and protection of the traveling public:
(1) All openings must be backfilled immediately and pavement
restored in accordance with Village road specifications;
(2) If it shall be necessary to leave an excavation unfinished overnight
or for an extended period, the permittee shall place at the site
suitable barricades with appropriate lighting. The barriers and
lighting devices shall conform to the reasonable specifications
directed by the Superintendent of Public Works, and those set forth
in the New York Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and
any amendments thereto, except that the permittee must place his
name and a phone number where he can be reached at all times.
The excavation shall be lit continuously from twilight to dawn. The
permittee shall also notify the Great Neck Estates Police
Department of the condition of the unfinished excavation and
furnish the Police Department with the name and contact
information for a responsible person who may act for such
permittee and who may be reached at all times. A minimum of four
flashers must be used at the construction site or along the right-ofway
as required by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 191-6.2 STORM SEWERS § 191-6.4
190:389
§ 191-6.5. Liability.
The permit holder shall hold the Village, its officers, agents, employees and
volunteers harmless, and indemnify each of them, from and against any and
all expenses, claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation
and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the Village
or any of its officers, agents, employees or volunteers may be made liable
by reason of any accident or injury to person or property through the
fault of the permit holder or any person or entity acting under authority
of the permit holder, either in not properly guarding the excavation or
for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and
further conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition,
as nearly as it can be to its original condition and to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent of Public Works, all openings and excavations made in
the streets and to maintain any street where an excavation is made in a
condition as good as before said work shall have been done, for the period
of 12 months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear
excepted. Any settling of the surface within said one-year period shall be
deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee.
A. All permits granted for street or highway excavations for any purpose
shall be conditioned upon the adequate protection, at the expense of
the applicant, to the property of the Village and others.
B. Village conditions for restoration of pavement shall include, at a
minimum, that all types of roads, with the exception of concrete, shall
be replaced with a subbase of three-fourths-inch asphalt binder mix,
compacted in two three-inch lifts, per Nassau County specifications, for
a total of six inches in depth, and surfaced with asphalt, Type 1A, not
less than two inches in depth. Concrete roads shall follow the Nassau
County specifications of 1:2:4 reinforced concrete.
C. Should prevailing weather conditions preclude permanent restoration
of the road surface, the permit holder shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the temporary surface until such permanent restoration
is complete.
§ 191-6.4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 191-6.5
190:390
ARTICLE II
Street Obstructions
[Adopted 8-9-1923 by Ord. No. 6 (Ch. 112, Art. II, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 191-7. Permit required; conditions. [Amended 4-12-2004 by L.L.
No. 1-2004]
No person shall leave or deposit any material of any kind, for building or
other purposes, in any street or public place in the Village of Great Neck
Estates or dig or cause to be dug any excavation, trench or other opening in
any street, sidewalk or public place in said Village for any purpose or dig or
remove or cause to be removed therefrom any stone, earth, sand or gravel,
trees or shrubbery or tear up or injure any pavement, crosswalk, drain,
sewer or any part thereof or erect, lay or cause to be erected or laid any
telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles or any drain, conduit or
other pipe under, in, upon or over any street or public place in said Village
or move or cause to be moved or assist in moving any building into, along or
across any such street or public place, without first having obtained written
permission from the Village Clerk for that purpose, conditioned upon the
doing of such work under the supervision of the Code Official, upon keeping
clear at all times a sufficient and safe passageway for pedestrians and
vehicular traffic and upon proper guarding of the same, both night and day,
so as to prevent accidents or danger.100
100. Editor's Note: Former § 112-9, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 191-7 STORM SEWERS § 191-7
190:391

ARTICLE III
Maintenance of Sidewalks
[Adopted 7-6-1936 by Ord. No. 21 (Ch. 112, Art. III, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 191-8. Responsibilities of owner or occupant.
Every owner and occupant of any lot or other property abutting on any
public street in the Village of Great Neck Estates is hereby required to keep
the sidewalks in front of such premises in a condition safe for public travel
and to repair and remedy all defects therein.
§ 191-9. Enforcing and supervising officer.
All of such work shall be performed to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer, who is hereby empowered to give such notices, orders and
directions as may be necessary or appropriate to keep such sidewalks in a
condition safe for public travel or for the repair and remedying of any defect
therein.101
§ 191-9.1. Liability. [Added 11-3-2004 by L.L. No. 6-2004]
In addition to any penalties otherwise provided by law for violations of
this Code, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be
responsible civilly to any person injured, or who sustains property damage,
by reason of such violation, and also shall be liable to the Village of Great
Neck Estates for, and shall hold the Village of Great Neck Estates harmless
from and indemnify the Village against, any and all expenses or liability
arising out of such violation.
§ 191-9.2. Waiver of repair requirement. [Added 11-3-2004 by L.L.
No. 6-2004]
Where an owner or occupant of adjoining property has repaired or replaced
a sidewalk, or portion thereof, as required by § 191-8 of this Code, on
or after five years prior to the effective date of this section, and within
five years thereafter the repaired or replaced portion of the sidewalk
subsequently is damaged by the root system of a tree or trees in the public
right-of-way, the owner or occupant of the adjoining property may make
written application to the Board of Trustees for waiver of the requirement
for repair of such sidewalk or portion thereof at the expense of the owner
or occupant. Such waiver may be granted by the Board only after making
a determination that the resulting damage to the sidewalk occurred after a
prior repair or replacement as provided herein, and has been caused by a
tree or trees in the public right-of-way. Neither this section, nor any waiver
granted pursuant to this section, shall supersede the provisions of § 191-9.1.
101. Editor's Note: Former § 112-12, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 191-8 STORM SEWERS § 191-9.2
190:393

ARTICLE IV
Damage to Streets and Public Property
[Adopted 10-5-1936 by Ord. No. 22 (Ch. 112, Art. IV, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 191-10. Open fires restricted.
No person shall build, kindle, add fuel to, maintain or permit a bonfire or
fire of any character whatsoever upon or adjacent to any pavement, curb,
sidewalk, tree, shrubbery or grass within or upon streets, parks or other
public property in the Village of Great Neck Estates.102
§ 191-11. Permit required prior to work on streets and public
property.
No person shall, without previously procuring and thereafter holding
unrevoked a permit therefor, as provided by the ordinances of the Village
of Great Neck Estates, cut, open, paint, deface, damage or destroy any
pavement, curb, sidewalk, tree, shrubbery or grass within or upon any
streets, parks or other public property in the Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 191-12. Posting of bills and advertisements.
No person shall post any bills, notices or advertising material of any
character whatsoever upon any trees, posts, poles, fences, buildings or
other structures within or upon any streets, parks or other public property
in the Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 191-13. Damage to public property.
No person shall in any manner whatsoever damage, deface, mutilate or
destroy any grass, trees, shrubbery, posts, poles, fences, buildings or other
structures within or upon any streets, parks or other public property in the
Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 191-14. Penalties for offenses.
A. Every person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500, imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or both, for each offense. [Amended 4-12-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004; 6-10-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
B. Every violation of this article or any part thereof is hereby declared
disorderly conduct, and the person violating the same is hereby
declared a disorderly person.
102. Editor's Note: For other regulations as to open fires, see Ch. 79, Air Pollution.
§ 191-10 STORM SEWERS § 191-14
190:395

ARTICLE V
Regulations Relating to Vehicles; Use of Sidewalks103
[Adopted 9-8-1953 by Ord. No. 76, Art. IX104 (Ch. 112, Art. V, of the
1981 Code)]
§ 191-15. Obstruction of view; notice of violation; noncompliance.
[Amended 10-7-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985; 12-7-1998 by L.L. No.
11-1998]
Every tree, vine, shrub, hedge or obstruction of any character whatsoever,
whether the same is situated in, upon or over a public street or highway or
sidewalk or in, upon or over any private property adjacent to such public
street or highway or sidewalk, which shall be determined by the Code
Official to obscure or obstruct or hide from view any official traffic sign
or signal or the view of any operator of any vehicle or which shall tend to
endanger the safety of persons using a public street or highway or sidewalk,
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and, to the extent required by
the Code Official, every such tree, vine, shrub, hedge or obstruction shall be
trimmed, cut or removed by the owner, tenant or occupant of the land upon
which the same is situated upon not less than five days' notice. Such notice
shall be deemed sufficiently given if sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the owner of the affected property (if known to the
Code Official) or to the person appearing on the most recent assessment roll
of the Village as the owner thereof. Any such owner, tenant or occupant who
shall, after such notice or demand, fail to comply therewith shall be liable
for the penalties provided for a violation of this article.
§ 191-16. Use of streets for display purposes.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to stop, stand,
or park such vehicle on any street for the primary purpose of displaying
advertising. It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any street any
vehicle displayed for sale.
§ 191-17. Crossing curbs restricted; exceptions; emergencies.
A. No motor vehicle or any part thereof shall cross any curb or sidewalk or
be driven along any sidewalk in the Village except where a driveway has
been provided for such purpose, provided that such prohibited
crossings may be permitted by the Chief of Police where deliveries are
to be made which cannot be made by an existing driveway and the curb
is protected against damage to his satisfaction or by the Mayor where
construction work is in progress and security to his satisfaction is
furnished for the restoration of the curb after the construction work has
been completed.
103. Editor's Note: The title of this article was revised 1-13-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020.
104. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 76 was a comprehensive Traffic Ordinance of the Village, the
remaining articles of which were superseded 10-6-1980 by L.L. No. 5-1980 (see Ch. 217,
Vehicles and Traffic).
§ 191-15 STORM SEWERS § 191-17
190:397
§ 191-17.1. Prohibition on use of sidewalks by bicycles and other
conveyances. [Added 1-13-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
B. This section shall not apply to the following while engaged in
emergency work in case of fire, accident or public disaster or
impending danger:
(1) Trucks, apparatus and other vehicles of the Fire Department.
(2) Police Department vehicles.
(3) Ambulances.
(4) Vehicles of physicians actually engaged in the conduct of their
profession.105
A. No person shall ride, drive, propel or operate any vehicle, motorcycle,
bicycle, scooter, or other conveyance powered by any means, on any
sidewalk, path, lane or other place reserved for the use of pedestrians
in the Village.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit:
(1) A child under the age of 12 years riding a bicycle, tricycle or other
like conveyance upon or over any sidewalk or other place reserved
for the use of pedestrians; or
(2) Any person riding, driving or otherwise propelling any vehicle,
motorcycle, bicycle, scooter or other powered conveyance across a
curb or sidewalk at a place set apart as a lawful driveway, entrance
to or exit from an abutting property by way of a lawful curb cut.
105. Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Dumpsters and Other Receptacles for Debris Collection,
which followed this section, adopted 3-5-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984 (Ch. 112, Art. VI, of the
1981 Code), was redesignated as Ch. 167, Art. VI-A, by L.L. No. 2-2004, adopted
4-12-2004.
§ 191-17 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 191-17.1
190:398
ARTICLE VI
Private Streets and Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 2-22-2007 by Ord. No. 2-2007]
§ 191-18. Regulations and prohibitions; penalties.
A. No private street, road or right-of-way which permits access to or from
any public street or road over any lot to or from any other lot may be
established, opened, altered or improved without the prior consent of
the Board of Trustees, and the approval by the Board of Trustees of a
site plan for any property on which any part of the said private street,
road or right-of-way is located or proposed to be located. No such
approval shall be granted except after a public hearing, held in the
same manner as provided in this Code for a variance application before
the Board of Appeals.
B. No property in the Village of Great Neck Estates shall be used for
access between any public street or road and any other property,
whether or not located in the Village, without the consent of the Board
of Trustees and the approval of a site plan as provided in this section.
C. Where the Board of Trustees determines that any private street, road or
right-of-way is or would be detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare, or that the character of the neighborhood in which it is located
or proposed to be located would be adversely affected, or that the
private street, road or right-of-way is unnecessary to provide
reasonable access to the property to which access is provided or
proposed to be provided, the Board of Trustees may refuse to permit
the establishment, opening, alteration or improvement of the private
street, road, or right-of-way.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any private street, road
or right-of-way lawfully in existence on January 15, 2007, provided that
any such private street, road or right-of-way is not on or after such date
improved, altered or extended. Any such improvement, alteration or
extension shall be subject to the provisions of this section which require
consent from the Board of Trustees and approval of a site plan.
E. Notwithstanding any other penalty provision provided by law, any
person or entity who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each of the first five days, not to
exceed $1,000 for each of the next 10 days, and not to exceed $2,500
for each day thereafter on which a violation of this section occurs and/
or for each day on which any private right-of-way, or improvement,
alteration, or extension to any private right-of-way, continues to exist
without an approval required by this section and/or each day such
violation of this section continues without remediation after notice from
the Village that remediation is required. In addition, the provisions of
Village Code § 1-1B shall be applicable to any violation of this section.
§ 191-18 STORM SEWERS § 191-19
190:399
§ 191-19. through § 191-23. (Reserved)
§ 191-19 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 191-19
190:400
ARTICLE VII
Notice of Defects
[Adopted 1-6-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986 (Ch. 112, Art. VII, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 191-24. Prior notice required.
No civil action shall be maintained against the Village for damages or
injuries to person or to property, including those arising from the operation
of any mechanical or transportation device or equipment, sustained by
reason of any highway, street, crosswalk, bridge, culvert, street marking,
sign or device or any other property owned, operated or maintained by
the Village being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed,
unless written notice of such defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous
or obstructed condition of such highway, street, crosswalk, bridge, culvert,
street marking, sign or device or any other property owned, operated or
maintained by the Village was actually given to the Village Clerk and there
was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the giving of such
notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained of.
No such action shall be maintained for damages or injuries to person or
property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice
upon any highway, street, bridge, culvert or any other property owned by
the Village, unless written notice thereof, specifying the particular place,
was actually given to the Village Clerk and there was failure or neglect
to cause such snow or ice to be removed or to make the place otherwise
reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 191-25. Record of notices.
The Village Clerk shall keep an index record, in a separate book, of all
written notices that the Village Clerk shall receive of the existence of a
defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition in or
upon any highway, street, crosswalk, bridge, culvert, street marking, sign or
device or any other property owned, operated or maintained by the Village
or of any accumulation of snow or ice thereon, which record shall state the
date of the receipt of the notice, the nature and location of the condition
stated to exist and the name and address of the person from whom the
notice is received. The record of such notice shall be preserved for a period
of five years from the date it is received, and upon receipt of any notice, the
Village Clerk shall notify the Mayor forthwith.
§ 191-26. Interpretation.
Nothing contained in this article shall be held to repeal or modify or waive
any existing requirement or statute of limitations that is applicable to these
causes of action, but on the contrary, the provisions hereof shall be held to
be additional requirements to the right to maintain any such action. Nothing
herein contained shall be held to modify any existing rule of law relative
to the question of contributory negligence or to impose upon the Village,
its officers and employees, any greater duty or obligation than is otherwise
§ 191-24 STORM SEWERS § 191-26
190:401
presently imposed on the Village with respect to the maintenance of any
highway, street, crosswalk, bridge, culvert, street marking, sign or device
or any other property owned, operated or maintained by the Village.
§ 191-26 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 191-26
190:402
Chapter 194
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Prerequisites to applications — See Ch. 8.
Building construction and plumbing — See
Ch. 95.
Electrical installations — See Ch. 102.
Development of filled-in land — See Ch. 113.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 126.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 129.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 191-26 STORM SEWERS § 191-26
190:403

ARTICLE I
Planning Board Powers
§ 194-1. Planning Board continued; powers and duties.
A. The Planning Board heretofore established shall be continued and shall
have all of the powers and duties provided by the Village Law and the
Nassau County Charter (Chapter 879 of the Laws of 1936, as amended)
and any other general or special statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations now or hereafter in force.
B. Section 7-718, Subdivisions 1, 3, 4, 5 and 8, of the Village Law of the
State of New York are hereby repealed in their application to the Village
of Great Neck Estates, effective July 1, 1993. [Added 6-17-1993 by
L.L. No. 4-1993]
C. The Mayor and Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates shall
constitute the Planning Board of the Village of Great Neck Estates.
[Added 6-17-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993]
§ 194-1 STORM SEWERS § 194-1
190:405

ARTICLE II
Master Plan
§ 194-2. Composition of Master Plan.
The Master Plan or Map, by whatsoever name known, heretofore adopted
by the Planning Board of the Village of Great Neck Estates and filed in the
office of the Clerk of Nassau County, and all maps, plans and subdivision
plats heretofore adopted by the Planning Board of the Village of Great Neck
Estates amending, modifying or supplementing the Master Plan or Map
so adopted, shall constitute the Master Plan of the Village of Great Neck
Estates.
§ 194-2 STORM SEWERS § 194-2
190:407

ARTICLE III
Maps, Plans and Plats
§ 194-3. Conformance with provisions.
No subdivision shall be made of land within the Village or within 300 feet
of the boundaries of the Village, and no map, plat or plan of any proposed
subdivision thereof shall be approved by the Planning Board, except in
conformity with all of the regulations and provisions of this chapter.
§ 194-4. Procedures for subdivisions. [Added 5-13-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
No subdivision shall be approved except in accordance with the procedures
provided in this chapter, and in accordance with Village Law, Article 7.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, waiver of the requirements for subdivision
may be granted by the Planning Board as provided in Real Property Law
§ 334-a.
§ 194-5. Plats showing new streets or highways: approval required.
No plat of a subdivision of land showing a new street or highway shall be
filed or recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Nassau County until
it has been approved by the Planning Board and such approval endorsed in
writing on the plat.
§ 194-6. Placement of public sewers, utilities and improvements on
Official Map.
No public sewer or other municipal street utility or improvement shall be
constructed in any street or highway until it has been duly placed on the
Official Map or Plan of the Village.
§ 194-7. Access to proposed buildings or structures required.
No permit for the erection of any building or structure shall be issued unless
a street or highway giving access to such proposed building or structure has
been duly placed on the Official Map or Master Plan of the Village.
§ 194-8. Transfer or sale of land requirements.
No owner and no agent of the owner of any lot or parcel of land located
within a subdivision shall transfer or sell or agree to sell or negotiate to
sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of a
subdivision before such plat has been approved by the Planning Board, as
provided in this chapter, and recorded or filed in the office of the County
Clerk of Nassau County; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes
or bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such
penalties or from the remedies provided by this chapter.
§ 194-3 STORM SEWERS § 194-8
190:409

ARTICLE IV
Form of Applications
§ 194-9. Application for approval: required information and
documents. [Amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996; 4-13-2015 by
L.L. No. 1-2015; 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 5-2019]
All applications for approval by the Planning Board shall be in writing
and shall be submitted to the Village Clerk, accompanied by at least nine
complete copies of such application. Except for an application for an
approval related to one single-family residence, each such application also
shall include, at a minimum, one electronic copy of all documents submitted
in support of the application in a format approved by the Building Official.
All such applications shall consist of at least the following documentation:
§ 194-10. Maps, plats or plans to be in form for recording.
All maps, plats or plans must be in form to be recorded in the office of the
Clerk of Nassau County.
§ 194-11. (Reserved)107
A. Request for the approval of the Planning Board, stating precisely what
action by the Board is desired.
B. Map, plat or plan in respect to which approval is requested.
C. Affidavit or certificate of ownership of the land affected, stating the
name of the owner of record thereof.
D. If the applicant is not the owner of record, proof must be presented
showing the authority of the applicant to make the application and to
make the affidavit or certificate hereinbefore required.
E. All maps, plats or plans shall conform to the provisions of this chapter
and to the general subdivision plat requirements106 adopted by
resolution of the Board of Trustees and amended by the Board from
time to time.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. A240, General Subdivision Plat Requirements.
107. Editor’s Note: Former § 194-11, Requirements for maps, plats and plans, was repealed
4-13-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015.
§ 194-9 STORM SEWERS § 194-11
190:411

ARTICLE V
Proposed Streets, Easements, Utilities and Sewers
§ 194-12. Minimum width of streets.
No proposed street shall be less than 40 feet in width, except in cases of
hardship, in which case, for special cause shown, the Planning Board may
by unanimous vote authorize a street of a width of less than 40 feet.
§ 194-13. Location of proposed streets.
Insofar as practicable, all proposed streets shall be located in direct
continuation of existing streets or in direct continuation of proposed streets
shown on the Master Plan of the Village.
§ 194-14. Provisions for dead-end streets.
In case of dead-end streets, provision shall be made at the terminus thereof
for the convenient turning of vehicles by way of a circle of not less than 60
feet in diameter, or a Y, or other adequate means.
§ 194-15. Street intersection requirements.
Insofar as practicable, all streets shall intersect at right angles. Where
streets intersect at other than right angles, provision shall be made for
rounding off the acute angles of such intersections. The radius on the
property line shall be not less than 10 feet.
§ 194-16. Easements.
The Planning Board may require easements, not exceeding six feet in width,
on each side of all rear lot lines and on side lot lines where necessary or, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, advisable for storm and sanitary sewers
and other utility lines. Easements of the same or greater width may be
required along the lines of or across lots where necessary for the extension
of the existing or planned storm and sanitary sewers and other utility lines.
§ 194-17. Proposed utilities and sewers.
Every plan shall show the location of proposed electric lighting and
telephone poles or conduits and the location and size of proposed water
mains, gas mains and incidental structures and shall indicate whether it is
proposed to connect to public sewers or to construct cesspools and septic
tanks or other means for the disposal of sewage.
§ 194-18. Street specifications.
The grades of all streets and the location of proposed drains, culverts, catch
basins or other means for the disposition of surface water shall be shown.
Street grades shall not be less than 1/10 of 1% at the gutter. Curbs shall be
provided on all streets. The distance between curbs shall be not less than
§ 194-12 STORM SEWERS § 194-18
190:413
20 feet. All streets shall be paved from curb to curb. All streets shall be fully
monumented, and such monuments shall be shown on the map.
§ 194-19. Location of sanitary sewers; conformity with public sewer
systems.
All maps, plats or plans shall show the location of any proposed sanitary
sewers, together with the size of pipe and incidental structures, all of which
shall conform to public sewer systems and with any comprehensive sewage
disposal plan for the Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 194-20. Type of pavement for streets and sidewalks.
All applications shall show the type of pavement proposed on each street
and the sidewalks, when such improvements are proposed to be
constructed.
§ 194-21. Curbs, pavements and drains to conform to Village
Engineer specifications.
Curbs, pavements, drains and other facilities shall conform to the
specifications of the Village Engineer.
§ 194-22. Access to existing highways or thoroughfares.
The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot, by means
of either a public street or way or permanent easement or proposed street,
with satisfactory access to an existing public highway or to a thoroughfare
as shown on the Official Map or Master Plan. There shall be no reserve
strips controlling access to streets, unless the control of such strips is
definitely placed in the Village under conditions approved by the Planning
Board.
§ 194-23. Additional requirements at discretion of Board.
The Board may in its discretion require that all streets and other public
places shown on such plats be graded and paved and that sidewalks,
streetlighting standards, curbs, gutters, street trees, water mains, sanitary
sewers and storm drains or combined sewers be installed and that parks
be provided of reasonable size for neighborhood playgrounds or other
recreational uses.
§ 194-18 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 194-23
190:414
ARTICLE VI
Bond Requirements
§ 194-24. Bond in lieu of completing improvements.
In lieu of the completion of any improvements and utilities prior to the final
approval of the map, plat or plan, the Planning Board may require a bond
with a surety company satisfactory to the Board as surety thereon, to secure
to the Village the actual construction and installation of such improvements
or utilities at a time and according to specifications approved by the Board.
§ 194-24 STORM SEWERS § 194-24
190:415

ARTICLE VII
Approval of Maps, Plats or Plans
§ 194-25. Time and procedures for approval; default approvals.
[Amended 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996; 5-12-2014 by L.L. No.
6-2014]
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
Village Law § 7-728 is hereby amended and superseded in its
application to the Village of Great Neck Estates. As it applies to the
Village of Great Neck Estates, Village Law § 7-728 shall read as follows:
§ 7-728. Subdivision review; approval of plats; development of filed
plats.
1. Purpose. For the purpose of providing for the future growth and
development of the Village and affording adequate facilities for the
housing, transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience, safety,
health and welfare of its population, the Village Planning Board
shall have authority to approve preliminary and final plats of
subdivisions showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets
or highways. This authority shall include approval of preliminary
and final plats of property wholly or partially outside the Village
where the Village Planning Board has jurisdiction with respect to
such subdivision approval and the authority to grant waivers of
subdivision requirements pursuant to Real Property Law § 334-a.
2. Authorization for review of previously filed plats. For the same
purposes and under the same conditions, the Planning Board may
approve the development of plats, entirely or partially
undeveloped, which were filed with the Nassau County Clerk prior
to the appointment of such Planning Board. The term
"undeveloped" shall mean those plats where 20% or more of the
lots within the plat are unimproved unless existing conditions,
such as poor drainage, have prevented their development.
3. Filing of certificate. The Village Clerk shall promptly file with
the Nassau County Clerk a certificate attesting that the Planning
Board has the power to approve plats or grant waivers as provided
in this section.
4. Definitions. When used in this article, the following terms shall
have the respective meanings set forth herein except where the
context shows otherwise:
(a) "Subdivision" means the division of any parcel of land into
a number of lots, blocks or sites as specified in a law, rule
or regulation, with or without streets or highways, for the
purpose of sale, transfer of ownership, or development. The
term "subdivision" shall include any alteration of lot lines or
dimensions of any lots or sites shown on a plat previously
approved and filed in the office of the county clerk or register
of the county in which such plat is located.
§ 194-25 STORM SEWERS § 194-25
190:417
(b) "Preliminary plat" means a drawing prepared in a manner
prescribed by the Village Code or rule of the Planning Board
showing the layout of a proposed subdivision, including, but
not restricted to, road and lot layout and approximate
dimensions, key plan, topography and drainage, all proposed
facilities, including preliminary plans and profiles, at suitable
scale and in such detail as such Code or rule may require.
(c) "Preliminary plat approval" means the approval of the layout
of a proposed subdivision as set forth in a preliminary plat but
subject to the approval of the plat in final form in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
(d) "Final plat" means a drawing prepared in a manner
prescribed by the Village Code or rule of the Planning Board
that shows a proposed subdivision, containing in such
additional detail as shall be provided by such Code or rule
all information required to be shown on a preliminary plat
and the modifications, if any, required by the Planning Board
at the time of approval of the preliminary plat if such
preliminary plat has been so approved.
(e) "Conditional approval of a final plat" means approval by the
Planning Board of a final plat subject to conditions set forth
by the Planning Board in a resolution conditionally approving
such plat. Such conditional approval does not qualify a final
plat for recording nor authorize issuance of any building
permits prior to the signing of the plat by a duly authorized
officer of the Planning Board and recording of the plat in the
office of the county clerk or register as herein provided.
(f) "Final plat approval" means the signing of a plat in final form
by a duly authorized officer of the Planning Board pursuant
to a Planning Board resolution granting final approval to the
plat or after conditions specified in a resolution granting
conditional approval of the plat, or in a resolution granting
final approval of the plat, are completed. Such final approval
qualifies the plat for recording in the office of the county
clerk or register in the county in which such plat is located.
5. Approval of preliminary plats.
(a) Submission of preliminary plats. Unless otherwise authorized
by the Planning Board, all plats shall be submitted to the
Planning Board in the form of a preliminary plat for
consideration. Such a preliminary plat shall be clearly
marked "preliminary plat" and shall conform to the definition
provided in this section.
(b) Coordination with the State Environmental Quality Review
Act.108 The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions
of the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA) (and
its implementing regulations).
§ 194-25 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 194-25
190:418
(c) Receipt of a complete preliminary plat. A preliminary plat
shall not be considered complete until a negative declaration
has been filed with respect to such plat by the Planning
Board or other agency acting as lead agency in a coordinated
review, or until a notice of completion of a final environmental
impact statement has been filed in accordance with SEQRA.
The time periods for hearing or review of a preliminary plat
shall begin upon filing of such negative declaration or such
notice of completion, except that when an agency other than
the Planning Board of the Village of Great Neck Estates is
the lead agency the time period for review of a preliminary
plat shall begin upon filing of a negative declaration or such
notice of completion, or certification by the Chair of the
Planning Board that the application is complete, whichever
last occurs.
(d) Planning Board as lead agency under SEQRA; public hearing;
notice; decision.
(i) Public hearing on preliminary plats. To the extent
feasible, the Planning Board public hearing on the
preliminary plat shall be coordinated with any hearings
the Planning Board may schedule pursuant to SEQRA,
as follows:
(1) If the Planning Board determines that the
preparation of an environmental impact statement
on the preliminary plat is not required, the public
hearing on such plat shall commence within 45 days
after the receipt of a complete preliminary plat
application; or
(2) If the Planning Board determines that an
environmental impact statement is required, and a
public hearing on the draft environmental impact
statement is held, the public hearing on the
preliminary plat shall commence within 60 days
after the issuance of a negative declaration or the
acceptance of the final environmental impact
statement in accordance with the provisions of
SEQRA.
108. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 194-25 STORM SEWERS § 194-25
190:419
(ii) Public hearing; notice, length. The hearing on the
preliminary plat shall be advertised at least once in the
Village official newspaper at least 14 days before the
commencement of such hearing. The Planning Board
may provide that the hearing be further advertised in
such manner as it deems most appropriate for full public
consideration of such preliminary plat. The hearing on
the preliminary plat shall be closed upon motion of the
Planning Board at such time as the Planning Board shall
determine that all interested persons have been heard
or given an opportunity to be heard.
(iii) Decision. The Planning Board shall approve, with or
without modification, or disapprove such preliminary
plat within 62 days after the closing of the public
hearing.
(iv) Grounds for decision. The grounds for a modification, if
any, or for disapproval shall be stated upon the records
of the Planning Board. When so approving a preliminary
plat, the Planning Board shall state, in writing, any
modifications it deems necessary for submission of the
plat in final form.
(e) Planning Board not as lead agency under SEQRA; public
hearing; notice; decision.
(i) Public hearing on preliminary plats. With the consent
and agreement of the lead agency, the Planning Board
may hold the public hearing on the preliminary plat
jointly with the lead agency's hearing on the draft
environmental impact statement. Absent such
agreement or consent, or if no public hearing is held on
the draft environmental impact statement, the Planning
Board shall commence the public hearing on the
preliminary plat within 45 days after receipt of a
complete preliminary plat.
(ii) Public hearing; notice. The hearing on the preliminary
plat shall be advertised at least once in the Village
official newspaper at least 14 days before the
commencement of such hearing. The Planning Board
may provide that the hearing be further advertised in
such manner as it deems most appropriate for full public
consideration of such preliminary plat. The hearing on
the preliminary plat shall be closed upon motion of the
Planning Board at such time as the Planning Board shall
determine that all interested persons have been heard
or given an opportunity to be heard.
§ 194-25 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 194-25
190:420
(iii) Decision. The Planning Board shall by resolution
approve with or without modifications, or disapprove,
the preliminary plat within 62 days after the close of the
public hearing.
(iv) Grounds for decision. The grounds for a modification, if
any, or the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon
the records of the Planning Board. When so approving
a preliminary plat, the Planning Board shall state in
writing any modifications it deems necessary for
submission of the plat in final form.
(f) Certification and filing of preliminary plat. Within 10 business
days after the adoption of a resolution granting approval of
such preliminary plat, with or without conditions, such plat
shall be certified by the Village Clerk as having been granted
preliminary approval and a copy of the plat and resolution
shall be filed in such Clerk's office. A copy of the resolution
shall be mailed to the owner, and also to any person who has
filed a request for such copy together with a postage prepaid
addressed mailing envelope.
(g) Filing of decision on preliminary plat. Within 10 business
days after the date of the adoption of the resolution stating
the decision of the Planning Board on the preliminary plat,
the Chair or other duly authorized member of the Planning
Board shall cause a copy of such resolution to be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk.
(h) Revocation or lapse of approval of preliminary plat. Within
six months after the adoption of a resolution approving a
preliminary plat, with or without conditions, the owner must
submit the plat in final form. If the final plat is not submitted
in such form within such six months, or within such longer
period of time as may be authorized by the Planning Board
upon written application, the approval of the preliminary plat
shall lapse and expire.
6. Approval of final plats.
(a) Submission of final plats. Final plats shall conform to the
definition provided by this section.
(b) Final plats which are in substantial agreement with approved
preliminary plats. When a final plat is submitted which the
Planning Board deems to be in substantial agreement with
a preliminary plat approved pursuant to this section, the
Planning Board shall by resolution conditionally approve,
with or without modification, disapprove, or grant final
approval and authorize the signing of such plat within 62
days of its receipt by the clerk of the Planning Board.
§ 194-25 STORM SEWERS § 194-25
190:421
(c) Final plats when no preliminary plat is required to be
submitted; receipt of complete final plat. When no
preliminary plat is required to be submitted, a final plat
shall not be considered complete until a negative declaration
has been filed or until a notice of completion of the final
environmental impact statement has been filed in accordance
with the provisions of SEQRA. The time periods for review of
such plat shall begin upon filing of such negative declaration
or such notice of completion, except that when an agency
other than the Planning Board is the lead agency for SEQRA
review, the time periods shall not begin until certification by
the Planning Board Chair that the application is complete.
(d) Final plats not in substantial agreement with approved
preliminary plats; or when no preliminary plat is required
to be submitted. When a final plat is submitted which the
Planning Board deems not to be in substantial agreement
with a preliminary plat approved pursuant to this section, or
when no preliminary plat is required to be submitted and a
final plat clearly marked "final plat" is submitted conforming
to the definition provided by this section the following shall
apply:
(i) Planning Board as lead agency; public hearing; notice;
decision.
(1) Public hearing on final plats. The time within which
the Planning Board shall commence a public
hearing on such final plat shall be coordinated with
any hearings the Planning Board may schedule
pursuant to SEQRA, as follows:
(a) If such board determines that the preparation
of an environmental impact statement is not
required, the public hearing on a final plat not
in substantial agreement with a preliminary
plat, or on a final plat when no preliminary plat
is required to be submitted, shall commence
within 62 days after the receipt of a complete
final plat by the clerk of the Planning Board; or
§ 194-25 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 194-25
190:422
(b) If such board determines that an environmental
impact statement is required, and a public
hearing on the draft environmental impact
statement is held, the public hearing on the
final plat and the draft environmental impact
statement shall be held jointly commencing
within 62 days after the filing of the notice of
completion of such draft environmental impact
statement. If no public hearing is held on the
draft environmental impact statement, the
public hearing on the final plat shall commence
within 62 days following receipt of the complete
final plat application.
(2) Public hearing; notice. The hearing on the final plat
shall be advertised at least once in the Village
official newspaper at least 14 days before the
commencement of such hearing. The Planning
Board may provide that the hearing be further
advertised in such manner as it deems most
appropriate for full public consideration of such
final plat. The hearing on the final plat shall be
closed upon motion of the Planning Board at such
time as the Planning Board shall determine that
all interested persons have been heard or given an
opportunity to be heard.
(3) Decision. The Planning Board shall make its
decision on the final plat within 62 days after the
conclusion of the public hearing.
(4) Grounds for decision. The grounds for a
modification, if any or the grounds for disapproval
shall be stated upon the records of the Planning
Board.
(ii) Planning Board not as lead agency; public hearing;
notice; decision.
(1) Public hearing. With the consent and agreement of
the lead agency, the Planning Board may hold the
public hearing on the final plat jointly with the lead
agency's hearing on the draft environmental impact
statement. Absent such agreement or consent, or if
no public hearing is held on the draft environmental
impact statement, the Planning Board shall
commence the public hearing on the final plat
within 45 days after receipt of a complete final plat.
§ 194-25 STORM SEWERS § 194-25
190:423
(2) Public hearing; notice. The hearing on the final plat
shall be advertised at least once in the Village
official newspaper at least 14 days before the
commencement of such hearing. The Planning
Board may provide that the hearing be further
advertised in such manner as it deems most
appropriate for full public consideration of such
final plat. The hearing on the final plat shall be
closed upon determination by the Planning Board
that all interested persons have been heard or given
an opportunity to be heard.
(3) Decision. The Planning Board shall by resolution
conditionally approve, with or without modification,
disapprove, or grant final approval and authorize
the signing of such final plat within 62 days after the
close of the public hearing on the final plat.
7. Approval and certification of final plats.
(a) Certification of plat. Within 10 business days after adoption
of the resolution granting conditional or final approval of the
final plat, such plat shall be certified by the Clerk of the
Planning Board as having been granted conditional or final
approval and a copy of such resolution and plat shall be filed
in such Clerk's office. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed
to the owner, and to such other persons who shall have
requested such copy and provided a postage-paid mailing
envelope. In the case of a conditionally approved plat, such
resolution shall include a statement of the requirements
which, when completed, will authorize the signing thereof.
Upon completion of such requirements, the plat shall be
signed by said duly authorized officer of the Planning Board
and a copy of such signed plat shall be filed with the Village
Clerk.
(b) Approval of plat in sections. In granting conditional or final
approval of a plat in final form, the Planning Board may
permit the plat to be subdivided and developed in two or
more sections and may in its resolution granting conditional
or final approval state that such requirements as it deems
necessary to insure the orderly development of the plat be
completed before said sections may be signed by the duly
authorized officer of the Planning Board. Conditional or final
approval of the sections of a final plat may be granted
concurrently with conditional or final approval of the entire
plat, subject to any requirements imposed by the Planning
Board.
§ 194-25 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 194-25
190:424
(c) Duration of conditional approval of final plat. Conditional
approval of the final plat shall lapse and expire within 180
days after the adoption of the resolution granting such
approval unless all requirements stated in such resolution
have been certified as completed. The Planning Board may
extend for periods of not more than 90 days each the time
in which a conditionally approved plat must be submitted for
signature if, in the Planning Board's opinion, such extension
is warranted by the particular circumstances.
8. Default approval of preliminary or final plat. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, no preliminary or final plan shall be deemed
approved upon default, or under any other circumstance other
than the affirmative vote of a majority of the Planning Board in
favor of a resolution to grant such approval.
9. Filing of decision on final plat. Within 10 business days after the
date of the adoption of the resolution stating the decision of the
board on the final plat, the Chair or other duly authorized member
of the Planning Board shall cause a copy of such resolution to be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
10. Notice to county planning body or agency or regional planning
council, or other state or local agency.
(a) When a county planning body or agency or a regional
planning council has been authorized to review subdivision
plats pursuant to § 239-n of the General Municipal Law, the
Village Clerk or other authorized officer of the Village shall
refer all applicable preliminary and final plats to such county
body or agency or regional planning council as provided in
that section.
(b) When any other state or local government agency is entitled
pursuant to state law to notice of an application for approval
of a subdivision plat, the Village Clerk or other authorized
officer of the Village shall provide such notice to each other
such agency.
11. Filing of final plat; expiration of approval.
(a) The owner shall file in the office of the county clerk or
register such approved final plat or a section of such plat
within 62 days after the date of final approval, or such later
date as may be authorized by determination of the Planning
Board upon written application. In the event such timely
filing does not occur, such approval shall lapse and expire.
(b) For the purposes of this section, the following shall
constitute final approval:
(i) The signature of the duly authorized officer of the
Planning Board certifying final approval by the Planning
Board of a plat as herein provided; or
§ 194-25 STORM SEWERS § 194-25
190:425
§ 194-26. Filing of plat required to prevent approval expiration.
[Amended 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
The approval by the Planning Board of a plat showing one or more new
streets or highways shall expire if such plat is not duly filed or recorded
by the owner in the office of the County Clerk of Nassau County within
the time period provided in the Village Code or other applicable law, and
if no such time period is so provided, within 90 days after final approval
by the Planning Board, unless the Planning Board, upon written application
from the property owner, determines that there has been no material or
significant change of circumstances and extends the time in which such plat
shall be filed or recorded.
§ 194-27. Recording and endorsement of approval or disapproval
and conditions imposed.
The approval or disapproval of a map, plat or plan and any other action
taken by the Planning Board, and any terms or conditions imposed upon
such approval or disapproval or action, shall be entered in the minutes of
the Board. The approval or disapproval shall be endorsed upon the face of
each copy of the map, plat or plan submitted, and where conditions are
imposed, such conditions shall either be endorsed upon the face of such
map, plat or plan or other reference placed upon the face thereof indicating
the existence of such conditions and the place where such conditions may
be found.
(ii) The approval by the Planning Board of the development
of a plat or plats already filed in the office of the county
clerk or register of the county in which such plat or
plats are located if such plats are entirely or partially
undeveloped.
In the event the owner shall file only a section of such approved plat in
the office of the county clerk or register, the entire approved plat shall
be filed within 30 days of the filing of such section with the Village
Clerk in each village in which any portion of the land described in the
plat is situated. Such section shall encompass at least 10% of the total
number of lots contained in the approved plat, and the approval of
the remaining sections of the approved plat shall expire unless said
sections are filed before the expiration of the exemption period to
which such plat is entitled under the provisions of Village Law § 7-708.
12. Subdivision abandonment. The owner of an approved subdivision
may abandon such subdivision pursuant to the provisions of § 560
of the Real Property Tax Law or any other applicable State law.
B. In no case shall the failure of the Planning Board to act upon any
application within any specified period of time constitute or be deemed
to constitute an approval of the said application. Any such approval may
be made only by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the
Planning Board.
§ 194-25 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 194-27
190:426
ARTICLE VIII
Proposed Buildings
§ 194-28. Buildings in existing streets.
No permit shall hereafter be issued for any building in the bed of any street
or highway shown or laid out on the Official Map or Master Plan of the
Village of Great Neck Estates; provided, however, that if the land within
such mapped street or highway is not yielding a fair return on its value to
the owner, the Board of Appeals shall have the power by a majority of its
members to grant a permit for a building or structure or part thereof in any
such mapped street or highway location which will as little as practicable
increase the cost of opening such street or highway or tend to cause the
least change of such Official Map or Master Plan, and the Planning Board
may impose reasonable requirements which shall inure to the benefit of the
Village. Before taking any action authorized by this section, the Board of
Appeals shall hold a public hearing at which parties in interest and others
shall have an opportunity to be heard.
§ 194-29. Building, area and lot size computation.
For the purpose of computing the building area, the size of the lot, the front
yards, rear yards and side yards, as prescribed in Chapter 230, Zoning, of
the Village, as amended, any proposed street shown on any Official Map or
Master Plan of the Village, or any amendment or modification thereof now
or hereafter duly adopted by the Planning Board or the Board of Trustees
of the Village, shall be considered as if such proposed street or streets had
been duly opened and improved and made available for public use in the
same manner as a public street.
§ 194-28 STORM SEWERS § 194-29
190:427

ARTICLE IX
Public Hearing
§ 194-30. Notice of public hearing; notice to affected property
owners. [Amended 8-6-1984 by L.L. No. 9-1984]
§ 194-31. Hearing of residents and parties in interest; recording of
information.
At the public hearing residents of the Village and parties in interest will
have an opportunity to be heard, and the names and addresses of all
persons recorded in connection with such application, together with the
substance of their views, shall be entered in the minutes of the Board.
§ 194-32. Deviation of map, plat or plan from regulations.
[Amended 4-13-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
No map, plat or plan which fails to comply with the requirements of the
Village Code or the rules, regulations and general subdivision plat
requirements109 as adopted by the Board of Trustees and amended by the
Board from time to time, shall be approved except upon a showing of
unnecessary hardship. Proof of unnecessary hardship shall be presented
by the applicant in support of any request for deviation from such
requirements, rules, regulations or general subdivision plat requirements,
and exceptions shall be granted only upon a determination that the
applicant otherwise would sustain unnecessary hardship and that the
proposed map, plat or plan is otherwise in conformity with the general
purposes of the Comprehensive Plan and zoning regulations110 of the
Village.
A. Upon the filing of a complete application hereunder and payment of any
required fees, the Village Clerk shall arrange for a time and place at
which the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing to consider the
application.
B. Notice of such public hearing shall be prepared by the Village Attorney
and shall be published and sent to owners of all property shown on the
application or located, in whole or in part, within 500 feet thereof, in the
same manner and upon the same time schedule, and proof of service
shall be filed, all as provided for a notice of public hearing before the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, provide for such additional
notice as it may deem appropriate and, for such purpose, may adjourn
or continue the public hearing.
109. Editor's Note: See Ch. A240, General Subdivision Plat Requirements.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 194-30 STORM SEWERS § 194-32
190:429
Chapter 198
TAXATION
§ 194-32 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 194-32
190:430
ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 10-2-1979 by L.L. No. 5-1979 (Ch. 117, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 198-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME —
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone
service, only receipts from local exchange service wholly consummated
within the Village.
A.
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph
service, only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the
Village.
B.
In the case of any utility other than defined above:
Receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or
otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect to
which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in
gross income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption
or use by the purchaser in the Village, including cash, credits
and property of any kind or nature, whether or not such sale is
made or such service is rendered for profit, without any deduction
therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost
of the materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or
discount paid or any other expense whatsoever.
(1)
(2) Profits from the sale of securities.
Profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership
or use of or interest in such property.
(3)
Profits from the sale of personal property, other than property of
a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of a
taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a return is
made.
(4)
Receipts from interest, dividends and royalties derived from
sources within the Village (other than such as are received from
a corporation, a majority of whose voting stock is owned by the
taxpaying utility) without any deduction therefrom for any
expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipts
thereof.
(5)
Profits from any transaction, except sales for resale and rentals,
within the Village whatsoever.
(6)
C.
§ 198-1 STORM SEWERS § 198-1
190:431
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service
in the Village, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature,
without deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the
cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount
paid or any other expense whatsoever.
PERSON — Includes persons, corporations, companies, associations, jointstock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rent, any person
acting in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their
assignees, lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever
or by any other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil
subdivisions of the state or municipality, public districts and corporations
and associations organized and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable or educational purposes no part of the net earnings of which
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
TREASURER — The Village Treasurer of the Village.
UTILITY —
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 198-2. Imposition of tax.
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Village Law of the State of New
York, from, on and after January 1, 1980, there is hereby imposed:
Every person subject to the supervision of the State Department of
Public Service, except:
Persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping
and parlor railroad cars.
(1)
Persons engaged in the business of operating railroads other than
street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads.
(2)
Omnibus corporations subject to supervision under Transportation
Law § 150 et seq.111
(3)
A.
Every person, whether or not such person is subject to the supervision
of the State Department of Public Service, who sells gas, electricity,
steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy delivered through
mains, pipes or wires or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water,
refrigeration, telephone or telegraphic service by means of mains, pipes
or wires, regardless of whether such activities are the main business of
such person or are only incidental thereto or whether use is made of
the public streets.
B.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 198-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 198-2
190:432
§ 198-3. Applicability.
This article and the tax imposed thereby shall:
§ 198-4. Disposition of revenues.
All revenues resulting from the imposition of the tax imposed by this article
shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
§ 198-5. Collection and enforcement; rules and regulations.
The Treasurer shall be the chief enforcement officer of this article and shall
make and be responsible for all collections hereunder. He shall also have
the power and authority to make any rules or regulations or directives, not
inconsistent with law, which, in his discretion, are reasonably necessary to
facilitate the administration of this article and the collection of the taxes
imposed hereby. Copies of all such rules and regulations and directives, as
may from time to time be promulgated, shall be sent by registered mail to all
utilities subject to this article which register as such with the Treasurer. All
such rules, regulations and directives shall be deemed a part of this article.
§ 198-6. Records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Treasurer may require, and such records
shall be preserved for a period of three years unless the Treasurer directs
otherwise.
A. A tax equal to 1% of the gross income of every utility doing business in
the Village which is subject to the supervision of the New York State
Department of Public Service and which has an annual gross income in
excess of $500, except motor carriers or brokers subject to such
supervision under Transportation Law § 240.112
B. A tax equal to 1% of the gross operating income of every other utility
doing business in the Village which has an annual gross operating
income in excess of $500.
A. Apply only within the territorial limits of the Village.
B. Not apply and the tax shall not be imposed on any transaction
originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the
Village, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily performed with
respect to such transactions within such limits.
C. Be in addition to any and all other taxes.
D. Apply to all subject income received on and after January 1, 1980.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 198-2 STORM SEWERS § 198-7
190:433
§ 198-7. Filing and contents of returns.
§ 198-8. Payment.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the Treasurer the tax imposed hereby for the period covered by such
return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of the filing of the
return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 198-9. Penalties for late returns and failure to file.
Any utility failing to file a return, or a corrected return, or to pay any tax
or any portion thereof within the time required by this article, shall be
subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for
each month of delay or fraction thereof, except the first month, after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the treasurer, if
satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of such
penalty.
§ 198-10. Tax as operating cost.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 198-11. Failure to file or incorrect returns.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Treasurer, he may require at any time a corrected or
supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified
by him; and, if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within 20 days
after the same is required by notice from him or if no return is made
A. Time of filing. Every utility subject to a tax hereunder shall file, on or
before December 25 and June 25, a return for the six calendar months
preceding each return date, including any period for which the tax
imposed hereby or any amendment hereof is effective. Any utility,
whether subject to tax under this article or not, may be required by the
Treasurer to file an annual return.
B. Filing and contents. Returns shall be filed with the Treasurer on a form
to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall show thereon the
gross income or gross operating income, as the case may be, for the
period covered by the return and such other information, data or matter
as the Treasurer may require to be included therein. Every return shall
have annexed thereto a certification, by the head of the utility making
the same or of the owner or of a copartner thereof or of a principal
corporate officer, to the effect that the statements contained therein are
true.
§ 198-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 198-11
190:434
for any period, the Treasurer shall determine the amount due from such
information as he is able to obtain and, if necessary, may estimate the tax
on the basis of external indices or otherwise. He shall give notification of
such determination to the utility liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the utility against which
it is assessed shall, within one year after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to him for a hearing, or unless the Treasurer, of his
own motion, shall reduce the same. After such hearing he shall give notice
of his decision to the utility liable for such tax.
§ 198-12. Review of final determination.
Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder shall
be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any other reason
whatsoever by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules if the proceeding is commenced within 90 days after the giving
of notice of such final determination; provided, however, that any such
proceeding under said Article 78 shall not be instituted unless the amount
of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and penalties thereon
as may be provided for by local law, ordinance or resolution, shall be first
deposited, and an undertaking filed, in such amount and with such sureties
as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that if such
proceeding is dismissed or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs
and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 198-13. Notices.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the utility for which it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such utility at the address given by it in
the last return filed by it under this article or, if no return has been filed,
then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the utility to
which addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this section by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 198-14. Refunds.
If, within one year from the giving of notice of any determination or
assessment of any tax or penalty, the person liable for the tax shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Treasurer or the court shall
determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously
or illegally collected, the Treasurer shall refund the amount so determined.
For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so made
on the initiative of the Treasurer. However, no refund shall be made of
a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the Treasurer as
hereinbefore provided unless the Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinabove
provided, or of his own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty or
it shall have been established in a proceeding in the manner provided in
§ 198-11 STORM SEWERS § 198-14
190:435
the Civil Practice Law and Rules that such determination was erroneous or
illegal. An application for a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall
be deemed an application for the revision of any tax or penalty complained
of, and the Treasurer may receive additional evidence with respect thereto.
After making his determination, the Treasurer shall give notice thereof to
the person interested, who shall be entitled to commence a proceeding
to review such determination, in accordance with the provisions of the
following section hereof.
§ 198-15. Review of proceedings for refunds.
Where any tax imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously, illegally
or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund thereof shall
have been duly made to the Treasurer and he shall have made a
determination denying such refund, such determination shall be reviewable
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules;
provided, however, that such proceeding is instituted within 90 days after
the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due
was not previously made and that an undertaking is filed with the Treasurer
in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court
shall approve, to the effect that if such proceeding is dismissed or the tax
confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in
the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 198-16. Limitation of additional tax.
Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with the intent to
evade the tax, no assessment or additional tax shall be made with respect
to taxes imposed under this article after the expiration of more than three
years from the date of filing of a return, provided that, where no return has
been filed as required hereby, the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 198-17. Powers of Treasurer.
In addition to any other powers herein given the Treasurer, and in order to
further ensure payment of the tax imposed hereby, he shall have the power
to:
§ 198-18. Enforcement.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Treasurer, bring
A. Prescribe the form of all reports and returns required to be made
hereunder.
B. Take testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter
hereby entrusted to him.
C. Subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production
of books, papers, records and documents.
§ 198-14 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 198-18
190:436
an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any judgment
obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Treasurer. Each such tax
and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to pay the
same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and penalty
imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 198-18 STORM SEWERS § 198-18
190:437

ARTICLE II
Business Investment Tax Exemption
[Adopted 9-7-1976 by L.L. No. 4-1976 (Ch. 117, Art. II, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 198-19. Percentage of exemption reduced.
As provided in Subdivision 7 of § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law, the
exemption table set forth in Subdivision 2(a) of that section shall be and is
amended to read as follows:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 through 10 0
§ 198-19 STORM SEWERS § 198-19
190:439

ARTICLE III
Veterans' Exemptions
[Adopted 9-24-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984 (Ch. 117, Art. III, of the
1981 Code)]
§ 198-20. Disallowance of certain exemptions.
No exemptions shall be granted pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 458-a
for the purposes of taxes levied for the Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 198-20.1. Recomputation of eligible funds exemptions to veterans
after revaluations and updates effective for the 2013/2014 final
assessment roll. [Added 1-14-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
After the Village has completed its revaluation and update of the 2013/2014
final assessment roll, the eligible funds exemptions granted to veterans or
other persons pursuant to § 458 of the New York Real Property Tax Law
shall be recomputed based on the change of level in assessment as of the
taxable status date for the 2013/2014 final assessment roll.
§ 198-20 STORM SEWERS § 198-20.1
190:441

ARTICLE IV
Handicapped Exemption
[Adopted 9-3-1986 by L.L. No. 8-1986 (Ch. 117, Art. IV, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 198-21. Allowance of certain exemptions.
For tax rolls for fiscal years commencing on and after June 1, 1987, the
Village of Great Neck Estates will grant the exemption provided in Real
Property Tax Law § 459.
§ 198-21 STORM SEWERS § 198-21
190:443

ARTICLE V
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 4-12-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993 (Ch. 117, Art. V, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 198-22. Exemption granted.
A. Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years
of age or over, or real property owned by husband and wife, one of
whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be exempt from taxation by the
Village of Great Neck Estates pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 467
to the extent provided in this section.
B. Exemption table. [Amended 2-14-1995]
(1) The percentage of the assessed value of any property which shall
be exempt from taxation pursuant to this section shall be based
upon income as provided in Real Property Tax Law § 467 and upon
the following table: [Amended 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
Income Percent of Exemption
Less than $21,500 50%
$21,500.01 to $22,500.00 45%
$22,500.01 to $23,500.00 40%
$23,500.01 to $24,500.00 35%
$24,500.01 to $25,400.00 30%
$25,400.01 to $26,300.00 25%
$26,300.01 to $27,200.00 20%
$27,200.01 to $28,100.00 15%
28,100.01 to $29,000.00 10%
$29,000.01 or more 0%
(2) The maximum income limitations in the foregoing table and the
maximum percentage of exemption in the foregoing table may be
amended or revised by the Board of Trustees from time to time, by
resolution, without a public hearing, provided that no such
amendment or revision shall authorize an income limitation or a
percentage of exemption greater than the maximum permitted by
Real Property Tax Law § 467 and further provided that no such
resolution shall be applicable to any assessment roll unless the
resolution is adopted at least 60 days prior to the last day to
complete said assessment roll.
C. No person otherwise qualifying for a real property tax exemption
pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 467 shall be denied the exemption
if such person becomes 65 years of age after the appropriate taxable
status date and before December 31 of the same year.
§ 198-22 STORM SEWERS § 198-22
190:445
D. Any person who has been granted an exemption pursuant to this
subject on five consecutive assessment rolls shall not be subject to the
requirements of Real Property Tax Law § 467, Subdivision 6(a),
provided that such person shall file the sworn affidavit required by Real
Property Law § 467, Subdivision 6(b).
§ 198-22 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 198-22
190:446
ARTICLE VI
Property Tax Liens
[Adopted 5-13-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996113 (Ch. 117, Art. VI, of the
1981 Code)]
§ 198-23. Preexisting liens held by Village.
§ 198-24. Preexisting liens held by other parties.
For purposes of the enforcement of taxes which shall have become liens
prior to June 1, 1996, and which are held by a party other than the Village,
the provisions of Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law shall
continue in effect, as fully and to the same extent as if such laws had not
been repealed or superseded.
§ 198-25. Effective date; enforcement.
This article shall take effect on June 1, 1996. Taxes becoming liens on and
after that date shall be enforced pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Article 11 of the Real Property Tax Law.
A. For purposes of the enforcement of taxes which shall have become liens
prior to June 1, 1996, and which are held by the Village, the provisions
of Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law shall continue in
effect, for a transition period of four years commencing with the
effective date of this article.
B. During such transition period, if a parcel is subject both to a lien or
liens arising prior to June 1, 1996, and to a lien or liens arising
thereafter, the procedures applicable to the enforcement of delinquent
taxes shall depend upon the lien or liens upon which the enforcement
proceeding is based; provided that if an installment agreement is
executed pursuant to § 1184 of the Real Property Tax Law, the
agreement shall apply to all outstanding liens held by the Village, no
matter when arising.
C. After the conclusion of such transition period, if the enforcement of
such prior lien or liens shall not have been concluded, as evidenced by
the issuance of a tax deed, the amount due shall be relevied and
enforced in accordance with the provisions of Article 11 of the Real
Property Tax Law.
113. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Article VI, Property Taxes, adopted
8-8-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 198-23 STORM SEWERS § 198-25
190:447
Chapter 201
TAXICABS
§ 201-1. License required for owners and operators.
Chapter 204
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND FRANCHISES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109.
Streets, sidewalks and public property — See
Ch. 191.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
A. No person or entity shall permit a vehicle owned by such person or
entity to be operated as a taxicab, limousine, private livery car or
private livery van upon the streets, highways, avenues or public place
within the Village of Great Neck Estates without having first obtained
and having then in force an owner's license from the Town of North
Hempstead. The fact that a vehicle is being operated as a taxicab,
limousine, private livery car or private livery van shall be presumptive
evidence that it is being operated by permission of the owner.
B. No person shall operate a taxicab, limousine, private livery car or
private livery van upon the streets, highways, avenues or public place
within the Village of Great Neck Estates without first having obtained
and having then in force a Town of North Hempstead driver's license
from the Town of North Hempstead. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
person holding a license issued by the Nassau County Taxi and
Limousine Commission may operate such vehicle as permitted by such
license. [Amended 12-8-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
C. No person shall operate a taxicab, limousine, private livery car or
private livery van upon the streets, highways, avenues or public place
within the Village of Great Neck Estates unless such taxicab, limousine,
private livery car or private livery van is duly licensed by the Town of
North Hempstead. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a vehicle licensed by
the Nassau County Taxi and Limousine Commission may be operated as
permitted by such license. [Amended 12-8-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
D. For the purposes of this section, the terms "taxicab," "limousine,"
"private livery car" and "private livery van" shall have the meaning
ascribed to such terms by the laws and ordinances of the Town of North
Hempstead regulating such vehicles and uses thereof.
§ 198-25 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 201-1
204:448
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 204-1. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
§ 204-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings,
unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate
otherwise:
A. Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services.
B. Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunications providers and services.
C. Promote competition in telecommunications.
D. Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers
and services.
E. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive
telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the
businesses, institutions and residents of the Village.
F. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the Village
for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis.
G. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public
trust by the Village.
H. Assure that the Village's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by
the persons seeking such access and causing such costs.
I. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Village and the
residents of the Village for permitting private use of the public ways.
J. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the Village comply with the laws, rules and regulations
of the Village.
K. Assure that the Village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
L. Enable the Village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly
evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and
technological development.
§ 204-1 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-2
204:449
AFFILIATE — A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is
owned or controlled by or is under common ownership or control with
another person.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C.
§ 532 et seq., as now and hereafter amended, and the Telecommunications
Act of 1996.
CABLE OPERATOR — A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to
provide cable service within the Village, as that term is defined in the Cable
Act.
CABLE SERVICE — Has the same meaning provided by the Cable Act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES — The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the
Village. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village may, where permitted by
law, delegate to another person or entity, including an entity established by
the Village in cooperation with one or more other municipalities, some or all
of the authority vested in the Village as to one or more subjects which are
encompassed by this chapter.
EXCESS CAPACITY — The volume or capacity in any existing or future
duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public
way that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications
facilities.
FCC or FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION — The federal
administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and
oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national
level.
OTHER WAYS — The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other
rights-of-way within the Village but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the Village.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES — Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies
and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PSC or PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION — The New York State Public
Service Commission or any lawful successor state administrative agency
authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services
and providers in the State of New York.
PUBLIC STREET — Any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way
for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the Village
which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway
purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY — Includes all public streets and utility easements, as those
terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the Village, but only
to the extent of the Village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a
§ 204-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-2
204:450
license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
STATE — The State of New York.
SURPLUS SPACE — That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which
has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the
orders and regulations of the New York Public Service Commission, to allow
its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER — Includes every person that directly
or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plants, equipment or
property within the Village used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — The plant, equipment and
property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts,
pedestals, antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be
used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications
services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Includes every person who
provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities
without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The providing or offering for rent,
sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of
voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or
among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite
or similar facilities, with or without the benefit of any closed transmission
medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — See "telecommunications facilities."
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES — Utility and telecommunications facilities
located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE — The total distance between the top of a utility pole and
the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance as specified in the orders, rules and regulations of the
New York Public Service Commission.
UTILITY EASEMENT — Any easement owned by the Village and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES — The plant, equipment and property, including but
not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plants
and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within
the public ways of the Village and used or to be used for the purpose of
providing utility or telecommunications services.
VILLAGE — The Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 204-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-2
204:451
VILLAGE PROPERTY — Includes all real property owned by the Village,
other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined
herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the Village, which
is not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this
chapter.
§ 204-3. Registration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and
providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing
of telecommunications services originating or terminating in the Village
shall register with the Village pursuant to Article II of this chapter. This
requirement for registration shall not apply with respect to any activities
which, by reason of applicable federal or state law, are not subject to
regulation by the Village or are not subject to the jurisdiction of the Village.
§ 204-4. Telecommunications license.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no telecommunications carrier shall
construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the
Village for the purpose of providing telecommunications service solely to
persons and areas outside the Village without first obtaining a license from
the Village pursuant to Article III of this chapter. This section shall not be
applicable to such activities of any telecommunications carrier for which,
by reason of applicable federal or state law, no license is required from the
Village.
§ 204-5. Telecommunications franchise.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who
desire to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of
the Village, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or
areas in the Village, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such
public ways from the Village pursuant to Article IV of this chapter. This
section shall not be applicable to the activities of any telecommunications
carrier for which, by reason of applicable federal or state law, no franchise
is required from the Village.
§ 204-6. Cable television franchise.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who
desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications
facilities in any public way of the Village for the purpose of providing cable
television service to persons in the Village shall first obtain a cable franchise
from the Village as provided in Article V of this chapter.
§ 204-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-7
204:452
§ 204-7. Application to existing franchises.
This chapter shall not be applicable to any telecommunications service for
which a franchise or license from the Village is in effect at the effective date
of this law, until:
§ 204-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each offense. A separate and
distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 204-9. Other remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any other remedies
that the Village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this
chapter.
A. The expiration of said franchise agreement; or
B. An amendment to an unexpired franchise agreement, unless both
parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later than
the present expiration date.
§ 204-7 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-9
204:453

ARTICLE II
Registration of Telecommunications Carriers and Providers
§ 204-10. Registration required.
Each telecommunications carrier and provider which offers or provides any
telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the
Village or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities
within the Village, shall register with the Village on forms to be provided by
the Village Clerk, which shall include the following:
§ 204-11. Registration fee.
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or
provider shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 204-12. Purpose of registration.
The purpose of registration under this Article II is to:
A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
C. A description of the registrant's existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the Village.
D. A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant
intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to
persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the Village.
E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to
public way licensing or franchising under this chapter.
F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to
be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege
subject to any municipal telecommunications tax, utility receipts tax or
other occupation tax imposed by the Village.
G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any certificate of authority required by the New York State
Public Service Commission to provide telecommunications services or
facilities within the Village.
H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any construction permit, operating license or other
approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to
provide telecommunications services or facilities within the Village.
I. Such other information as the Village Clerk may reasonably require.
§ 204-10 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-12
204:455
A. Provide the Village with accurate and current information concerning
the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the Village or who own or operate
telecommunications facilities within the Village.
B. Assist the Village in enforcement of this chapter.
C. Assist the Village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal
taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the
Village.
D. Assist the Village in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal
laws.
§ 204-12 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-12
204:456
ARTICLE III
Telecommunications License
§ 204-13. License required.
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the Village for the
sole purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas
outside the Village.
§ 204-14. License application.
An application for a telecommunications license shall include the following
information:
A. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by the licensee over its telecommunications
facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
(1) The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
(2) The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunications, cable, water, sewer drainage and other
facilities in the public way along the proposed route.
(3) The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
(4) The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or
permanently remove or relocate.
E. If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that
surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail
to identify:
(1) The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
§ 204-13 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-14
204:457
§ 204-15. Determination by Village.
Within a reasonable time after receiving a complete application for a
telecommunications license, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards, and, if the application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for denial:
(2) The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
(1) The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
(2) The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
I. A preliminary traffic control plan.
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
M. Payment of all fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article VI
of this chapter.
N. Such other and further information as may be required by the Village.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal capacity of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
§ 204-14 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-15
204:458
§ 204-16. Agreement.
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and
the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular
terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways
of the Village will be exercised.
§ 204-17. Nonexclusive grant.
No license granted hereunder shall confer any exclusive right, privilege,
license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the Village for
delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.
§ 204-18. Rights granted.
No license granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or
interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the
grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.
§ 204-19. Construction permits required.
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in Article VII of this chapter;
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Village and
a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a license agreement, provided that such alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.
§ 204-20. Compensation to Village.
Each telecommunications license shall be subject to the Village's right,
which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee;
provided that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Village and a
licensee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.
G. The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is
granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
J. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest.
§ 204-15 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-21
204:459
§ 204-21. Amendment of grant.
An amendment to an existing telecommunications license shall be required
before any telecommunications carrier may extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which are not
included in a license previously granted under this chapter.
§ 204-22. Renewal applications.
An application for renewal of a telecommunications license shall be filed not
more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current
license and shall include the following information:
§ 204-23. Renewal determinations.
Within a reasonable time after receiving a complete application for renewal
of a telecommunications license, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole
or in part, applying the following standards, and, if the renewal application
is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for
nonrenewal:
§ 204-24. Obligation to cure as condition of renewal.
No telecommunications license shall be renewed until any existing
violations or defaults in the licensee's performance of the license
agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured or a plan
detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved
by the Village.
A. The information required pursuant to § 204-14.
B. Any additional information required pursuant to the existing license
agreement between the Village and the grantee.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal capacity of the applicant.
C. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
D. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
the license agreement.
E. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest.
§ 204-21 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-24
204:460
ARTICLE IV
Telecommunications Franchise
§ 204-25. Telecommunications franchise required.
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the Village
and to provide telecommunications services to any person or area in the
Village.
§ 204-26. Franchise application.
Any person who desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this
Article IV shall file an application with the Village which shall include the
following information:
A. The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or
proposed facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
(1) The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
(2) The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunications, cable, water, sewer drainage and other
facilities in the public way along the proposed route.
(3) The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
(4) The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or
permanently remove or relocate.
E. If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that
surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail
to identify:
§ 204-25 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-26
204:461
(1) The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
(2) The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
(1) The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
(2) The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
I. A preliminary traffic control plan.
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
M. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone
service or other video programming service, and sufficient information
to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
N. An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the Village that the applicant intends to
use or lease.
O. A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or
make available to the Village and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.
P. A description of the applicant's access and line extension policies.
Q. The area or areas of the Village that the applicant desires to serve and a
schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
R. Payment of all fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article VI
of this chapter.
S. Such other and further information as may be requested by the Village.
§ 204-26 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-27
204:462
§ 204-27. Determination by Village.
Within a reasonable period of time after receiving a complete application
for a telecommunications franchise, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in
part, applying the following standards, and, if the application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for denial:
§ 204-28. Agreement.
No telecommunications franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the
applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth
the particular terms and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and
use public ways of the Village will be exercised.
§ 204-29. Nonexclusive grant.
No telecommunications franchise shall confer any exclusive right, privilege,
license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the Village for
delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal capacity of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
G. The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise
requested is granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
J. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest.
§ 204-27 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-30
204:463
§ 204-30. Rights granted.
No telecommunications franchise shall convey any right, title or interest in
the public ways. Any such franchise shall be deemed a franchise only to use
and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the
grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title.
§ 204-31. Construction permits required.
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in Article VII of this chapter;
provided, however, that nothing shall prohibit the Village and a franchisee
from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a franchise agreement, provided that such alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.
§ 204-32. Compensation to Village.
Each telecommunications franchise shall be subject to the Village's right,
which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the franchisee;
provided that nothing shall prohibit the Village and a franchisee from
agreeing to the compensation to be paid, and further provided that the
Village shall not fix an amount of compensation which is contrary to the
provision of any such franchise agreement.
§ 204-33. Nondiscrimination.
A telecommunications franchisee shall make all of its telecommunications
services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall
request such service without discrimination as to the terms, conditions,
rates or charges for the grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing
in this chapter shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable
classification among differently situated customers.
§ 204-34. Service to Village.
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the
Village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.
§ 204-35. Amendment of grant.
An amendment to a franchise shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which are not
included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.
§ 204-30 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-36
204:464
§ 204-36. Renewal applications.
Unless otherwise provided by law, an application for renewal of a
telecommunications franchise shall be filed not more than 240 days nor less
than 150 days before expiration of the current franchise and shall include
the following information:
§ 204-37. Renewal determinations.
Within a reasonable time after receiving a complete application for renewal
of a telecommunications franchise, the corporate authorities shall issue
a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in
whole or in part, applying the following standards, and, if the renewal
application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons
for nonrenewal:
§ 204-38. Obligation to cure as condition of renewal.
No telecommunications franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing
violations or defaults in the grantee's performance of the franchise
agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured or a plan
detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved
by the Village.
A. The information required pursuant to § 204-26 of this chapter.
B. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between
the Village and the grantee.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal capacity of the applicant.
C. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
D. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
the franchise agreement.
E. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest.
§ 204-36 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-38
204:465

ARTICLE V
Cable Franchise
§ 204-39. Adherence to additional regulations; conflicts with other
provisions.
§ 204-40. Description of system.
The minimum capacity for a cable system shall be 450 MHz with at least
77 downstream channels. Each cable franchise agreement shall require
the franchisee to provide the Village with a written description of the
cable system within the Village, including technical characteristics, channel
capacity, channel carriage and a strand map. The franchisee shall provide
the Village with an updated description upon request by the Village or
whenever substantial changes in the system are made.
§ 204-41. Channel allocation.
The franchisee shall, to the maximum extent possible, assign, as dial or
stations locations for local broadcast television stations carried on the
system, numbers, accessible by either a cable-ready television or a
converter, which correspond to their respective FCC-assigned television
station call numbers.
§ 204-42. Access channels.
A. In addition to the provisions outlined in Article IV regarding franchise
application, grant and authority, the approval of a cable franchise is
also subject to the provisions and requirements outlined in this Article
V.
B. Cable franchisees are subject to this chapter, the Cable Act and such
other federal and state statutes, rules and regulations as may be
applicable.
C. If a conflict arises between the language in Article V and any other part
of this chapter, the provisions of this Article V shall prevail.
A. The franchisee shall provide access channels on the subscriber network
for the exclusive use of designated institutions.
B. The number and use of said channels will be prescribed in the franchise
agreements, and such channels shall be available on the lowest tier of
basic service without additional charge.
C. The franchisee shall make every reasonable effort to assign P.E.G.
(public, educational, government) channels to the same channels
assigned to equivalent channels by other providers within the Village
and in contiguous municipalities in which the franchisee also provides
such channels.
§ 204-39 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-43
204:467
§ 204-43. Renewal.
To the extent applicable, renewal shall be governed by the Cable Act.
§ 204-44. Service to Village.
Applications for franchises shall include proposals for the provision of
public, educational and governmental access to the telecommunications
system.
§ 204-43 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-44
204:468
ARTICLE VI
Fees and Compensation
§ 204-45. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the payment and recovery of
certain direct and indirect costs and expenses of the Village related to the
enforcement and administration of this chapter.
§ 204-46. Application review fee.
§ 204-47. Reimbursement of other Village costs.
In addition to any application fee required by this chapter, each person
to whom a telecommunications license or franchise or cable franchise is
granted pursuant to Articles III, IV or V of this chapter shall, within 30
days after written demand therefor by the Village, reimburse the Village
for all direct or indirect costs or expenses, including professional fees, but
not including salaries or overhead for Village employees, incurred by the
Village in connection with any application for a telecommunications license,
franchise or cable franchise, or a modification, amendment, renewal or
transfer thereof. Where the Village's authority with respect to such
application has been exercised in whole or in part by an entity to whom the
Village has delegated such authority, the Village's direct and indirect costs
and expenses as provided in this section, shall include the Village's share of
such expenses incurred by such entity.
§ 204-48. Compensation for public ways.
The Village may annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid
for the property rights granted to a telecommunications license or franchise
or cable franchise grantee. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Village
and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the granted
A. Each applicant for a telecommunications license or franchise pursuant
to Article III or IV of this chapter or an amendment or renewal thereof,
shall pay an application review fee as set forth in Chapter 109, Fees. No
application review fee shall be required of any applicant for a license or
franchise pursuant to Article V of this chapter.114
B. An applicant whose license or franchise application is withdrawn or
abandoned prior to approval or denial shall, within 60 days of such
withdrawal or abandonment, be refunded its application review fee,
less a reasonable sum to be determined by the Village as its expenses
incurred for the application and review process prior to the date of
withdrawal or abandonment. Such expenses may include all
ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection
with the application.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 204-45 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-48
204:469
property rights. Where a franchise or license agreement contains provision
for such compensation, no further compensation for public ways shall be
required pursuant to this section.
§ 204-49. Compensation for Village property.
If a right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and
occupy Village property for the installation of telecommunications facilities,
the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the Village, unless otherwise
agreed upon in the license or franchise agreement in addition to any other
fee or reimbursement provided for in this article.
§ 204-50. Construction permit fee.
Whenever a permit is required for any construction proposed by a
telecommunications licensee or franchisee, or cable television franchisee,
pursuant to any other law, rule or regulation, payment of any fee required
for such permit shall be required, unless otherwise agreed upon in the
license or franchise agreement.
§ 204-51. Annual fees.
Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each
license or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the Village
equal to 5% of the gross revenues received by the licensee or franchisee
pursuant to said license or franchise fee. Such annual fee may be used by
the Village for payment or reimbursement of costs incurred in connection
with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of the
public ways on behalf of the public and existing or future users and the
administration and supervision of the exercise of the license or franchise or
for any other purpose permitted by law.
§ 204-48 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-51
204:470
ARTICLE VII
Conditions of Grant
§ 204-52. Location of facilities.
All facilities shall be constructed, installed, located, used and operated
in accordance with the terms and conditions contained in a license or
franchise agreement.
§ 204-53. Construction permits.
All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction permits
for telecommunications facilities as required in Article VIII of this chapter.
However, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Village and a grantee
from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a license or franchise agreement, provided that such
alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
§ 204-54. Interference with public ways.
No licensee or franchisee may locate or maintain telecommunications
facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by
the Village, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or
be present in or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be moved
by the franchisee or licensee, temporarily or permanently, as determined
by the Village Engineer at the sole cost and expense of the franchisee or
licensee.
§ 204-55. Damage to property.
No franchisee or licensee, nor any person acting on their behalf, shall take
any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any
Village property, public ways of the Village, other ways or other property
located in, on or adjacent thereto.
§ 204-56. Notice of work.
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no
franchisee or licensee, nor any person acting on their grantee's behalf,
shall commence any nonemergency work in or about the public ways of the
Village or other ways without 10 working days' advance written notice to
the Village.
§ 204-57. Repair and emergency work.
In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a franchisee or licensee
may commence such repair and emergency response work as required
under the circumstances, provided that the notice is given the Village as
promptly as possible before such repair or emergency work or as soon
thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practicable.
§ 204-52 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-58
204:471
§ 204-58. Maintenance of facilities.
Each franchisee or licensee grantee shall maintain its facilities in a good
and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal,
state and local requirements.
§ 204-59. Relocation or removal of facilities.
Within 30 days following written notice from the Village, a license or
franchise grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently,
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications
facilities within the public ways, at the franchisee or licensees sole cost and
expense, whenever the corporate authorities shall have determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
§ 204-60. Removal of unauthorized facilities.
§ 204-61. Emergency removal or relocation of facilities.
The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the Village
A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Village or
other public improvement in or upon the public ways.
B. The operations of the Village or other governmental entity in or upon
the public ways.
A. No later than 30 days following written notice from the Village, any
franchisee, licensee, telecommunications carrier or other person that
owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications
system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways of the
Village shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or
appurtenances from the public ways of the Village.
B. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and its
facilities subject to removal in the following circumstances:
(1) Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's
telecommunications license or franchise.
(2) Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the
Village.
(3) If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise.
(4) If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior issuance of a required construction permit.
(5) If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location
not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications license or
franchise.
§ 204-58 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-61
204:472
as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in
response to any public health or safety emergency.
§ 204-62. Facilities maps.
Each registrant, franchisee or licensee shall provide the Village with an
accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications
facilities within the public ways and shall provide updated maps annually.
§ 204-63. Duty to provide information.
Within 10 days of a written request from the Village, each franchisee and
licensee shall:
§ 204-64. Grantee insurance.
A. Furnish the Village with information sufficient to demonstrate that the
franchisee or licensee has complied with all requirements of this
chapter and that all municipal sales, message and/or
telecommunications or other taxes due the Village in connection with
the telecommunications services and facilities provided by the
franchisee or licensee have been properly collected and paid by the
grantee.
B. Make all books, records, maps and other documents maintained by the
franchisee and licensee with respect to its facilities within the public
ways available for inspection by the Village at reasonable times and
intervals.
A. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each
franchisee and licensee shall, as a condition of the franchise or license,
secure and maintain the following insurance policies and shall provide
the Village with appropriate endorsements demonstrating with respect
to all liability insurance policies that the Village and its elected and
appointed officers, officials, agents and employees are named as
principal or additional insureds:
(1) Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
(a) Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
(b) Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
(c) Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
(2) Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
limit of $3,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each
accident.
(3) Workers' compensation within statutory limits and employers'
liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.
§ 204-61 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-64
204:473
§ 204-65. General indemnification.
Each licensee or franchisee shall, to the extent permitted by law, indemnify
and hold the Village and its officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses,
including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out
of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent,
careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the
grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or
removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering
telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such
acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or
by a grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter.
§ 204-66. Security fund.
(4) Comprehensive form premises/operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with
limits of not less than $3,000,000.
B. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be
maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the
telecommunications license or franchise and such other period of time
during which the grantee is operating without a franchise or license
hereunder or is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications
facilities. Unless otherwise agreed by the Village, each such insurance
policy shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood
and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to
renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the Village, by registered
or certified mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village of such
intent to cancel or not to renew."
C. In the event that the Village receives notice of such cancellation or
intention not to renew, within 20 days after receipt of said notice, and in
no event later than 10 days prior to said cancellation, the franchisee or
licensee shall obtain and furnish to the Village documentation of
replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this
section.
A. Where the license or franchise agreement provides for a security fund
to be used for payments of penalties, if any, imposed for violation or
breach of the conditions of any such agreement or license, such fund
shall serve as security for the full and complete performance of the
terms and conditions of the license or franchise agreement and the
requirements of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or
loss the Village pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the
grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or
permits of the Village.
§ 204-64 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-66
204:474
§ 204-67. Assignments or transfers of grant.
B. Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the Village shall
give written notice to the grantee:
(1) Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the
damages, cost or expenses which the Village has incurred by
reason of the grantee's act or default.
(2) Providing a reasonable opportunity for the grantee to first remedy
the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable.
(3) Providing a reasonable opportunity for the grantee to pay any
monies due the Village before the Village withdraws the amount
thereof from the security fund, if applicable.
(4) Providing that the grantee will be given an opportunity to review
the act, default or failure described in the notice.
C. The licensee or franchise shall replenish the required security fund
within 14 days after written notice from the Village that there is a
deficiency in the amount of the fund.
A. Ownership or control of a telecommunications system, license or
franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or
disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the
grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of
the Village, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or
delayed, as expressed by resolution, and then only on such reasonable
conditions as may be prescribed therein.
B. No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within 12
months after the initial grant of the license or franchise, unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.
C. Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant,
system or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred
before construction of the telecommunications system has been
completed.
D. The franchisee and licensee, and the proposed assignee or transferee of
the franchise, license, system or facility, shall provide and certify the
following information to the Village not less than 150 days prior to the
proposed date of transfer:
(1) Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and
conditions of the proposed transfer or assignment.
(2) All information required of a license or franchise applicant
pursuant to Article III, IV or V of this chapter with respect to the
proposed transferee or assignee.
(3) Any other information reasonably required by the Village.
§ 204-66 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-67
204:475
§ 204-68. Transactions affecting control of grant.
Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of
10% or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of the
ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise,
of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership
or working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system or of
control of the capacity or bandwidth of the grantee's telecommunications
system, facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an
assignment or transfer requiring Village approval pursuant to § 204-67
hereof. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from Village
approval.
§ 204-69. Revocation or termination of grant.
A license or franchise granted by the Village to use or occupy public ways
of the Village may be revoked for the following reasons:
E. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the
legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold
and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter.
F. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the
grantee shall reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect fees, costs
and expenses reasonably incurred by the Village in considering a
request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise.
G. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or
integral part of a system without prior approval of the Village under this
article or pursuant to a license or franchise agreement shall be void and
is cause for revocation of the grant.
A. Construction or operation in the Village or in the public ways of the
Village without a license or franchise grant of authorization.
B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
C. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
D. Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
E. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of the grantee's franchise or
license assets or a substantial interest therein.
F. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in any
application to the Village.
G. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
H. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter.
I. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the
Village.
§ 204-67 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 204-69
204:476
§ 204-70. Notice and duty to cure.
Unless otherwise provided in the license or franchise agreement, in the
event that the Village believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license
or franchise, it shall give the licensee or franchisee written notice of the
apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise
statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance
and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time, not exceeding 30
days, to furnish evidence that:
§ 204-71. Hearing.
The Village Board of Trustees, or a person designated by the Board of
Trustees for such purpose, shall consider the apparent violation or
noncompliance in a public meeting, with respect to which the corporate
authorities shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable
opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
§ 204-72. Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.
If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material
provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise or license agreement, the
corporate authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or
franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the
nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by
one or more of the following factors:
J. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
K. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.
L. Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.
A. Corrective action has been or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
B. Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
C. It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction
less than revocation.
A. Whether the misconduct was egregious.
B. Whether substantial harm resulted.
C. Whether the violation was intentional.
D. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements.
E. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
F. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
§ 204-69 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSES AND § 204-72
204:477
Chapter 207
THEATERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire safety in theaters — Ch. 167, § 167-22.
§ 207-1. License required to admit children unaccompanied by
parents.
On and after the date this chapter becomes effective, no child under the
age of 16 years will be admitted to any theater in the Village of Great
Neck Estates unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person,
unless such theater is licensed pursuant to and complies with the terms and
conditions of this chapter.
§ 207-2. Issuance of license; fee; expiration.115
Such license shall be in writing and shall be issued by the Mayor or Acting
Mayor, or by such other person as may be designated by the Board of
Trustees for such purpose, upon receipt of a written application therefor
and the payment of a license fee as set forth in Chapter 109, Fees. Each
license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it was issued,
except that if issued in the month of December of any year, it shall expire on
December 31 of the following year.
§ 207-3. Compliance with provisions.
Such license shall be issued upon the express condition, to which the
applicant by making such application agrees, that the terms and conditions
of this chapter and of § 121-b of the General Municipal Law, as now or
hereafter amended, shall be complied with.
§ 207-4. Revocation or suspension of license.
In case of any violation of any of the terms and conditions of such license or
of this chapter or of said § 121-b of the General Municipal Law, the Mayor,
Acting Mayor or person designated by the Board of Trustees to issue a
license under this chapter may suspend such license until the next meeting
of the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may revoke any license, or
may suspend the same for such period as the Board may determine, for any
such violation. In case of a revocation or suspension of such license, no part
of the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 204-72 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 207-5
207:478
§ 207-5. Terms and conditions of license issuance.
Each license is issued upon the following terms and conditions:
§ 207-6. Matron or supervisor license.116
The license issued to each matron or supervisor shall be in writing and
shall be issued by the Mayor, Acting Mayor or by such other person as
may be designated by the Board of Trustees for the purpose, upon receipt
of written application therefor and the payment of a license fee as set
forth in Chapter 109, Fees. Each license shall expire no later than the
expiration date of the license issued to such theater. Except as hereinafter
provided, any person qualified as a school teacher on any existing civil
service list or any registered nurse shall be entitled to such license, and no
fee shall be required of her. No such license shall be issued to any person
under the age of 25 years, or to any person whose license may have been
previously revoked, or to any person whom the Mayor or Acting Mayor or
person designated by the Board of Trustees may deem unfit for the duties
contemplated by this chapter.
A. That the owner, operator or manager of such theater shall set aside a
separate section of seats on the main or orchestra floor to be used
exclusively by such unaccompanied children. Adults shall not be
admitted to such section while it is reserved for children. Such section
shall be conspicuously marked or designated.
B. That no unaccompanied children shall be permitted in any balcony or
box.
C. That a seat in such section of the theater shall be provided for every
such child admitted to the theater, and such children admitted shall not
be permitted to stand.
D. That such children shall not be admitted to such theater during the time
when their school classes are in session or after the hour of 6:00 p.m. in
the afternoon.
E. That a matron or supervisor and, in addition, at least one assistant for
every 200 children in excess of 200 shall be provided by the owner,
operator or manager of such theater for the supervision of such
children, who shall give undivided attention to such supervision during
the time such children shall be in such theater.
F. Each such matron or supervisor shall be licensed by the Village in the
manner hereinafter provided.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 207-5 THEATERS § 207-7
207:479
§ 207-7. Revocation or suspension of matron or supervisor license.
In case any matron or supervisor to whom a license has been issued shall
violate or permit a violation of any of the terms and conditions of this
chapter or of § 121-b of the General Municipal Law or shall fail to confine
such children to the seats or section assigned for this purpose or shall fail to
keep such children under control or shall permit them to become unruly or
disorderly, or in case of a material misstatement in the application for such
license, the Mayor, Acting Mayor or the person designated by the Board of
Trustees to issue a license may suspend the same until the next meeting
of the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may revoke any license, or
suspend the same for such period as the Board may determine, for any such
violation. In case of a revocation or suspension, no part of the license fee
shall be returned to the applicant or person paying the same.117
Chapter 210
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 217.
§ 210-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, for the purpose of this chapter, the
following words shall have the meanings herein indicated:
ACCIDENT — Any incident or occurrence in which one or more vehicles
comes into contact with each other or other object, thereby causing
personal injury or property damage.
DRIVER — Any person driving a tow car for hire within the enforcement
jurisdiction of the Village.
FOR HIRE — Any incident where a fee, charge or other consideration is
directly or indirectly imposed for towing, carrying or removing any vehicle
and shall be inclusive of repairs made on a towed vehicle for a consideration
although no charge is expressly imposed for the towing of such vehicle. For
the purpose of this chapter, the towing of a motor vehicle with a registration
different from the tow car shall be presumed to be for hire.
OPERATE — The control and direction of the use of a vehicle for towing
from places within the enforcement jurisdiction of the Village.
OWNER — A person owning, leasing or controlling one or more tow cars
and driving, operating or causing any such vehicle to be operated for hire
within the enforcement jurisdiction of the Village.
117. Editor's Note: Former § 119-8, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 207-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 210-1
210:480
PERSON — An individual, partnership, unincorporated association,
corporation or other entity.
RESTRICTED LICENSE — That license issued to the owners of towing cars
and authorizing the holder thereof to engage in all tow car operations,
except that he may not respond to the scene of an accident or remove
a disabled vehicle from the scene of an accident; nor may he solicit any
person involved in an accident at the scene of such accident for the towing
of such vehicle, whether directly or indirectly, on his behalf or on behalf
of any other person, firm or corporation; nor may he, at the scene of an
accident where towing is required, make an estimate of the cost of repairs
or offer to make such an estimate or offer to make such repairs, although
no charge is imposed for towing. No such solicitation shall be made at the
scene of the accident nor from the private property in the vicinity of the
scene of the accident.
SCENE OF ACCIDENT — Any area of a street or private property where a
vehicular accident has occurred or to which a vehicle is removed to prevent
obstruction of traffic and will remain so until the vehicle or vehicles are
removed either under their own power or by a properly licensed tow car.
SOLICIT — To entreat, to approach with a request or plea, to strongly urge,
to accost or to try to obtain by asking.
TERMINAL — Any place of business maintaining twenty-four-hour service
and located within the Village, the Town of North Hempstead or within
an incorporated Village located within the area of the Town of North
Hempstead, where the licensee, as the sole business activity conducted on
the premises, or in conjunction with a business activity on the premises
owned or operated by the licensee, maintains a licensed tow car to respond
to calls regarding motor vehicles.
TOWING — The moving or removing of a motor vehicle by another vehicle
or tow car for hire.
TOWING CAR or TOW CAR — A vehicle which either is towing or is
equipped with a crane, winch or similar device designed to raise, remove,
push, pull or carry a motor vehicle or the front or rear end thereof. For the
purpose of this section, the following shall not be considered "towing cars":
TOWN — The Town of North Hempstead.
UNRESTRICTED LICENSE — That license which is issued to the owners
of towing cars authorizing the holder thereof to engage in all tow car
operations, including responding to the scene of an accident as hereinafter
provided. The Town Clerk shall have authority to limit the number of
A. Vehicles of a governmental agency.
Vehicles used exclusively for towing motor vehicles which are owned,
leased or operated by the owner or lessee of the towing vehicle or by
a person, firm or corporation which is affiliated with the owner of the
towing vehicle, and such vehicles have legibly inscribed on each side, in
letters not less than three inches high, the legend "not for public hire."
B.
§ 210-1 TOWING § 210-1
210:481
unrestricted towing car licenses to be issued hereunder to any one licensee
in accordance with such reasonable standards as he or she may establish.
VILLAGE — The Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ 210-2. Owner's license.
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any tow
car owned or controlled by him or permit the same to be operated
within the enforcement jurisdiction of the Village without first having
obtained and then having in force an owner's license therefor as
hereinafter provided.
B. Duration of license. Every license issued hereunder shall expire on the
30th day of June next succeeding the date of its issuance, unless sooner
revoked by the Town Clerk as hereinafter provided.
C. Application for license. Every person who desires to operate a tow car
or tow cars owned by him within the Village shall file with the Clerk of
the Town of North Hempstead, hereinafter referred to as the "Town
Clerk," a written application upon forms to be furnished by the Town
Clerk, verified under oath, stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and address of the place
from which tow cars are proposed to be garaged and dispatched,
specifying in the case of any corporation or unincorporated
association the names and addresses of each officer.
(2) All crimes of which the applicant or any member thereof, if an
unincorporated association, or any officer thereof, if a corporation,
has been convicted, stating the name and location of the court and
the date on which such convictions were had and the penalties
imposed therefor.
(3) The experience of the applicant in the towing of vehicles for hire.
(4) Any facts which tend to prove that the public conveniences
requires the granting of a license to the applicant.
(5) The number of vehicles proposed to be operated by the applicant
and a description of each such vehicle, including the make, model,
year of manufacture, New York registration number and motor
number thereof.
(6) The age and citizenship of the applicant and each member thereof,
if an, unincorporated association, and each officer thereof, if a
corporation.
(7) The location of any garages, storage areas and terminals proposed
to be used by the applicant.
(8) Whether the applicant wishes his name to appear on the town towcar
list as detailed below.
§ 210-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 210-2
210:482
(9) Any other relevant information which the Town Clerk may require.
D. Restricted and unrestricted licenses.
(1) Applicants for a restricted license or supplementary restricted
license will be required to pay a nonrefundable fee as set forth in
Chapter 109, Fees, and will be limited to normal towing and will not
be permitted at scenes of accidents.118
(2) Applicants for an unrestricted or supplementary unrestricted
license will be required to pay a nonrefundable fee as set forth in
Chapter 109, Fees, and will be allowed at accident scenes. The
unrestricted licensee will qualify as provided below:119
(a) The licensee shall own, operate and maintain a bona fide
terminal within the Town of North Hempstead or an
incorporated Village within the area of the Town of North
Hempstead.
(b) Such terminal shall maintain twenty-four-hour service to
respond to emergency calls regarding motor vehicles, and said
terminal shall be equipped to properly store and safeguard a
towed vehicle.
(c) The tow truck or trucks of such licensee shall be equipped with
a lifting boom or similar device in the rear of the truck, as well
as equipment to push all types of vehicles, a minimum one-andone-
half-ton power winch, dolly wheels, a snatch block, at least
100 feet of three-eighths-inch steel cable, a fire extinguisher, a
crowbar, an emergency flashing light, at least one dozen flares,
a heavy-duty broom and a shovel.
E. Additional requirements. Every individual applicant for an owner's
license shall, at the time of submitting his application:
(1) Submit two individual photographs of the applicant taken within 30
days prior to the date of the application, such photographs to be
1 1/2 inches by 1 1/2 inches in size, and such pictures must be a
true likeness of the applicant and must show neck, shoulders and
uncovered head.
(2) Be fingerprinted under the direction and supervision of the Town
Clerk.
F. Police investigation. Upon receipt of any application, the Town Clerk
may refer the same to any authorized investigative agency for whatever
investigation it shall deem necessary or advisable and report thereon.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-2 TOWING § 210-2
210:483
G. Issuance of license.
(1) If the Town Clerk shall find that the tow-car service in the town, and
particularly in the area in which the applicant proposes to operate,
is required by the public convenience and necessity and, from the
statements contained in the application for a tow car owner's
license, that the applicant is a fit person and capable of properly
conducting such tow car business conforming to the provisions of
this chapter, then the Town Clerk, upon the certification of each
tow car proposed to be operated by the applicant pursuant to this
section and the furnishing by the applicant of proof of insurance as
hereinafter provided, shall issue a license stating the name and
address of the applicant, the date of the issuance thereof and the
number of vehicles the applicant is authorized to operate. At the
same time, the Town Clerk shall issue for each vehicle licensed
hereunder a license bearing the words "Licensed Tow Car," an
assigned number and the year of issuance. Otherwise such
application shall be denied.
(2) Before making any findings as to whether public convenience and
necessity justify the issuance of a tow car owner's license, or the
licensing of additional tow cars, the Town Clerk shall cause to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
North Hempstead a notice stating that application has been made
and containing a statement that written arguments as to whether
public convenience and necessity require the licensing of such
vehicles must be filed with the Town Clerk on or before the date
fixed therein, which date must be not fewer than eight days after
the date of such publication. Any arguments so filed must be
considered by the Town Clerk in making findings as to public
convenience and necessity.
H. Facts to be considered. In making the findings required by the Town
Clerk, the Town Clerk shall take into consideration the number of tow
cars already in operation in the town, particularly in the area in which
the applicant proposes to locate his garage, storage areas and
terminals; whether existing tow car service is adequate to meet the
public need; the probable effect of additional tow cars on local traffic
conditions; the character, experience and responsibility of the
applicant; and the adequacy of the service which the applicant proposes
to give.
I. Additional information may be required. The Town Clerk, may, in his or
her discretion, before the issuance of a license, require the applicant
and any others having knowledge of the facts to submit to an
examination under oath and to produce evidence relating thereto, or
hold a hearing upon such application as hereinafter provided.
J. Application to add vehicles.
§ 210-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 210-2
210:484
(1) Every licensed owner who desires to add to the number of tow cars
which such owner is duly licensed to operate shall file a written
application under oath with the Town Clerk stating:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The applicant/owner's license number.
(c) Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that the
public convenience and necessity require such addition.
(d) A description of each such additional tow car, including the
make, model and year of manufacture.
(2) If the Town Clerk shall find that public necessity warrants the
addition of the tow car(s), the Town Clerk shall issue a
supplementary owner's license stating the name and address of the
applicant; the number of the owner's operator's license; the motor
number(s) and New York State registration number(s) of the
vehicle(s); the number of additional vehicles the owner is
authorized to operate; the date of issuance thereof; and, at the
same time, a license for each additional tow car in the form
designated under Subsection G, Issuance of license. Otherwise,
such application shall be denied.
K. Application for addition or change of place of service.
(1) Every owner licensed under this chapter who desires to add
additional places of tow car service or who desires to transfer a
place of tow car service shall file with the Town Clerk a written
application under oath, stating:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The applicant/owner's license number.
(c) Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that the
public convenience and necessity require such additional
places of tow car service or transfer of place of tow car service.
(d) The address of the additional place of tow car service or
transfer of tow car service.
(2) If the Town Clerk shall find that the additional places or transfer of
tow car service is in the public interest, then the Town Clerk shall
issue written authorization setting forth the additional places or
transfer, as the case may be, and the date thereof. Otherwise, such
application shall be denied.
L. License renewal. Any license issued under this section may be renewed
annually, for additional periods of one year from the date of expiration,
upon the filing of an application containing all the information required
§ 210-2 TOWING § 210-2
210:485
§ 210-3. Driver's license.
by the provisions of this chapter for original applications, with the
exception of any allegation as to public necessity.
M. Inspection of vehicle required. No license shall be issued or renewed
under this section which shall permit the use of any vehicle as a tow car
unless and until such vehicle has been inspected and certified by the
Town Clerk as conforming to the requirements as to condition and
inspection set forth in § 210-6C and D.
N. Liability insurance required. Before the issuance of a license under this
section, each applicant shall file with the Town Clerk evidence that it is
insured against public liability in the limits of $300,000 for personal
injury to each person, $500,000 for personal injury for each accident
and $25,000 for property damage, which insurance shall be maintained
in force during the period covered by the license.
O. License not transferable. The owner's license issued hereunder shall
not be transferable.
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a tow
car for hire within the Village as a driver or in connection therewith
unless such driver shall have first obtained a license from the Town
Clerk as hereinafter provided.
B. Duration of license. Every driver's license under this section shall be
effective as of the date of the granting thereof and shall expire on the
30th day of June next succeeding, unless sooner revoked by the Town
Clerk as hereinafter provided.
C. Application for license. Every person making an application for a
driver's license shall file a written, verified application, upon forms to
be furnished by the Town Clerk, setting forth the following information:
(1) The name, address and age of the applicant.
(2) A full description of the applicant, including height, weight, color of
eyes and hair, any scars or marks and the nature of any physical
infirmity from which the applicant may suffer.
(3) Recommendation by two residents of Nassau County, each of whom
has known the applicant for a period of three years or more and
each of whom will vouch for the applicant's sobriety, honesty and
general good character.
(4) Whether or not the applicant is a citizen of the United States.
(5) The names and addresses of the applicant's employers during the
last two years prior to his application.
(6) All crimes of which the applicant has ever been convicted, stating
the date and place of each such conviction, the name and location
§ 210-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 210-3
210:486
§ 210-4. Application for review.
Any applicant who shall have been denied a license under this chapter or
who shall have been issued a license for fewer tow cars than the number
for which application was made or whose license has been suspended or
revoked by the Town Clerk may, in addition to whatever other legal recourse
of the court in which and the date on which each such conviction
was had and the penalty imposed therefor.
(7) The number, class and date of issuance of the applicant's New York
State operator's license, as required by the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
(8) Any other relevant information which the Town Clerk may require.
D. Additional information. Every applicant for a driver's license shall, at
the time of submitting such application, also:
(1) Submit two individual photographs of the applicant taken within 30
days prior to the date of the application, such photographs to be
1 1/2 inches by 1 1/2 inches in size, and such pictures must be in a
true likeness of the applicant and must show only neck, shoulders
and uncovered head.
(2) Exhibit a current New York State operator's license, for inspection.
(3) Be fingerprinted under the direction and supervision of the Town
Clerk, as provided by law, together with any fee as may be
authorized.
E. Investigation required. Upon the receipt of any application, the Town
Clerk may refer the fingerprints to any authorized investigative agency
for inspection and report thereon.
F. Issuance of driver's license. Upon the completion of the investigation
provided for in this section, the Town Clerk shall issue a tow car driver's
license to the applicant if the Town Clerk shall find that the applicant
holds a New York State operator's license and is a qualified person to
drive a tow car, considering the applicant's experience, criminal and
driving records and character. Otherwise, such application shall be
denied.
G. Fees for driver's license. The fees for filing applications hereunder shall
be paid to the Town Clerk at the time the application is filed and shall
not be refunded if the application is not approved. Said fees shall be as
set forth in Chapter 109, Fees.120
H. License not transferable. The license issued hereunder shall not be
transferable.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-3 TOWING § 210-4
210:487
is available, apply to the Town Board for a review of the action by the Town
Clerk as hereinafter provided.
§ 210-5. Hearings.
§ 210-6. Issuance of vehicle licenses.
A. The application to review the Town Clerk's determination shall be in
writing, signed and verified by the applicant, and shall state the reasons
for claiming that the Town Clerk's determination was erroneous.
B. The application for such review must be filed with the Town Clerk
within 20 days of the receipt by the applicant, either by mail or in
person, of the denial of the Town Clerk.
C. Upon the filing of such application to review, the Town Board shall hold
a hearing thereon within 30 days from the filing of the application
referred to above, pursuant to the provisions hereinafter set forth.
A. Hearing by Town Board.
(1) Whenever it shall be provided herein that a hearing may be held by
the Town Board, such hearing shall be held on a date and at a place
and hour designated by the Town Board, but in no event shall this
date exceed 30 days from the date of the filing of the application for
review.
(2) The Town Clerk shall give notice thereof, stating the name and
address of the applicant or license holder concerned, the subject
matter of the hearing and the date, place and hour designated
therefor, by mailing a copy thereof to the applicant or license
holder concerned at the address shown upon the most recent
application of such applicant or licensee at least 10 days before
such hearing.
(3) At such hearing, the Town Board shall consider the application
made to the Town Clerk in relation to the Town Clerk's
determination and, in its discretion, may receive new or additional
evidence in support of or in opposition to the determination under
review.
(4) The applicant or license holder involved shall be entitled to be
represented by legal counsel and to present such competent and
material testimony or other evidence as may be relevant to the
subject matter of the hearing.
(5) All witnesses shall be sworn and examined under oath.
B. Board's decision. The Town Board, after such hearing, may grant,
refuse or revoke such license. The decision of the Board shall be subject
to review by proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules.
§ 210-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 210-6
210:488
§ 210-7. Suspension or revocation of license.
Causes for suspension and/or revocation of license:
A. Fees. Upon the issuance of a license or supplementary license, the fees
shall be payable to the Town Clerk.121
(1) Owner in town. License fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 109,
Fees.
(2) Owner from out of town.
(a) Any tow car owner, whose principal place of business is not in
the Village or elsewhere in the Town of North Hempstead, who
has obtained valid tow car licenses as set forth herein from a
municipality within the County of Nassau granting the same
privileges and pursuant to the same restrictions as set forth
herein which apply to tow car owners licensed by the Town of
North Hempstead, shall be exempt from the fee provisions set
forth herein and shall pay the fees set forth in Chapter 109,
Fees.
(b) Upon payment of the fee and issuance of said unrestricted
reciprocal license, a tow car owner is entitled to be placed on
the towing list of the Town of North Hempstead.
(c) The reciprocal license stated above shall be a filing fee and will
not be refunded if a license is not issued.
B. Record to be kept of licenses issued. The Town Clerk shall keep a record
of the name and address of each person to whom a tow car owner's
license has been issued under this chapter, showing the date and
number of such license and all renewals, suspensions and revocations
thereof, and a record of each tow car licensed hereunder, stating the
make, model, year of manufacture, New York State registration number
and motor number thereof and the name and address of the person
owning said tow car, and a record of each driver's license issued
hereunder, showing the name and address of such driver, his New York
State operator's license number, the driver's license issued hereunder
and the date of issuance of such driver's license.
C. Condition of vehicle. Every vehicle operated within the Village as a tow
car shall be kept mechanically fit, of good appearance and in a good,
safe condition for towing.
D. Inspection of vehicle required. The Town Clerk shall establish
reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of tow cars operated
upon the streets of the Village.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-6 TOWING § 210-7
210:489
§ 210-8. Regulations for owners.
A. Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked, for a
period to be determined by the Town Clerk, if the holder thereof shall
violate any provision of this law or any rule or regulation adopted
hereunder or of any law, rule or regulations of the Village or if the
holder thereof shall be convicted of a violation of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York, except parking violations, or of any law or
regulation of the State of New York or of any municipality of the State of
New York or of any crime or if the holder thereof shall be guilty of
making a false statement or misrepresentation on his or her
application. A license hereunder shall not be suspended or revoked by
the Town Clerk without a hearing having been held thereupon not less
than two business days after written notice thereof shall have been
given to the licensee, either in person or by registered or certified mail.
B. The Town Clerk, upon receiving information giving reasonable cause to
believe that the holder of any license issued hereunder has violated any
provision of this chapter or has been convicted of any violation referred
to in this section, or is guilty of having made a false statement or
misrepresentation in his or her application, may temporarily suspend
forthwith such license until such time as a hearing is held by the Town
Clerk as provided in this section and the Town Clerk shall have
rendered a determination thereon.
C. No person shall give or offer to give any payment, fee, reward or other
thing of value, directly or indirectly, for obtaining information of a
disabled vehicle, and it shall be unlawful to have printed any card or
other notice offering to give a payment, fee, reward or other thing of
value for such information. Violation of this subsection shall be a
ground upon which the Town Clerk may suspend any towing license
pursuant to final disposition in the manner set forth in this section.
A. Identification of vehicle. Each tow car operated hereunder shall have
inscribed on the outside of each front door the trade name and terminal
address of the owner, in letters not less than two inches in height, either
painted or otherwise securely affixed. The medallion shall be affixed to
the left front door or in a conspicuous place adjacent to the left front
door.
B. Display of rates. A tow car owner shall have legibly inscribed on each
side of the tow car, in letters and numerals not less than 1 1/2 inches in
height, the lawful towing rates, except that the Town Clerk may waive
this provision upon the determination that this provision is in conflict
with requirements of other state or municipal authorities.
C. Towing, storage and labor charges.
(1) Towing charges. The charges for towing shall be based solely upon
the distance that the motor vehicle is to be towed and shall not be
estimated or based upon the availability of tow cars. Towing
§ 210-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 210-8
210:490
charges shall be at the rate of not more than $25 for the first mile
or part thereof and not more than $2 for each additional mile or
part thereof.
(2) Storage charges. Outside storage charges shall be at the rate of not
more than $3.50 per day for the first seven days and not more than
$7.50 per day thereafter. Inside storage charges may be
determined by written agreement between the parties. All vehicles
must be stored on the premises of the licensee, whether indoors or
outdoors, and shall not be permitted on any public highway.
(3) Labor charges. It shall be lawful and proper to charge the following
additional labor charges.
(a) A charge not exceeding $20 for the use of dollies or a flatbed
truck only when the same are required due to the condition of
the vehicle to be towed.
(b) A charge not exceeding $10 per half hour or part thereof when
the use of special skills is required to right an overturned
vehicle or to remove it from an off-the-road location.
(4) The maximum towing and storage charges set forth in this section
shall not apply to:
(a) Motor trucks exceeding one-and-one-half-ton capacity.
(b) The towing of motor vehicles pursuant to a contract executed
prior to the need for towing, provided that such motor vehicles
are either owned or leased by the contracting party.
D. Estimates and repairs. No fee shall be charged either directly or
indirectly for making an estimate for repairs on any motor vehicle in an
accident or otherwise disabled without the prior written consent of the
owner of the disabled vehicle. The agreement form for repairs required
hereunder must be in substantially the following form:
AGREEMENT FOR REPAIRS
It is hereby agreed between __________________________ (insert name
and address of owner or person in charge authorized to enter
agreement) and __________________________ (insert name, address,
telephone number and license number of tow car of licensee or
repairer) that ____________________ (owner or person in charge) agrees
to pay the sum of _______________ dollars ($________) to _______________
(repairer) who, in consideration thereof, agrees to repair a
___________________ (year, make and type of automobile) New York
Registration No. __________, which was involved in an accident or
otherwise disabled and removed by a tow car.
§ 210-8 TOWING § 210-8
210:491
Licensee
Dated at , this day of , 20.
(Owner)[ ] (Person in Charge)[ ] (Check Appropriate One)
E. Towing authorization. Except as provided hereafter, no motor vehicle
shall be towed without an authorization on a form prescribed by the
Town Clerk signed by the owner of the vehicle or other person in charge
thereof. Such authorization shall be for the towing, labor and storage of
the vehicle only and shall show the rates to be charged for the towing,
labor and storage of said vehicle. Such signed authorization shall be
retained for a period of six months and shall be exhibited upon demand
to an official of the Village, Town of North Hempstead or any member of
the Nassau County Police Department or any other police department.
The towing authorization required hereunder must be in substantially
the following form:
TOWING AUTHORIZATION
(Insert name, address and phone number of licensed towing company)
Date: ____________
Name:
Address:
(City) (Town)
Make and type of car Year State registration number
Towed from to
Towing charges:
[Amount shown on filed schedule not to exceed $25 for the first
mile or part thereof; each additional mile or part thereof, $2]
Storage charges:
[Amount shown on filed schedule not to exceed $3.50 for each 24
hours or part thereof for the first seven days and $7.50 per day
thereafter. Inside storage additional.]
Labor charges:
Tow car driver's name:
Address:
License number:
Tow car's medallion number:
§ 210-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 210-8
210:492
State registration number:
I authorize the towing of the above automobile.
Signature of owner or person in charge
F. Towing from private property. No motor vehicle which is parked on
private property without authorization of the property owner shall be
towed therefrom unless the following conditions are met:
(1) The property owner or the owner's authorized agent shall file with
the police precinct having jurisdiction a copy of a written
agreement authorizing one or more tow car owners to tow
unauthorized parked cars.
(2) The property owner shall post in a conspicuous place or places and
at all entrances to the property, signs stating that unauthorized
parked cars will be towed away at the owner's expense, and stating
where the vehicle can be recovered.
(3) The authorized tow car owner shall tow unauthorized parked cars
only upon the direction of the property owner or the property
owner's authorized agent.
(4) The tow car owner shall notify or cause to be notified the police
precinct having jurisdiction of the towing of an unauthorized
parked car, and the location to which it is being towed.
G. Bill for towing,
(1) The owner of a tow car shall have prepared a pad of prenumbered
bills containing a printed billhead showing the name and address of
such owner's place of business. The operator of a tow car shall
prepare a bill on this billhead form in duplicate, the original of
which shall be furnished to the owner of the motor vehicle or such
owner's authorized representative. This bill must be printed in a
form approved by the Town Clerk and shall contain the following
information:
(a) The full name and address of the person engaging the tow car.
(b) The state registration number of the motor vehicle.
(c) The total amount to be charged for towing, labor and storage
(rate per 24 hours or part thereof).
(d) The full name and address of the operator of the tow car.
(e) The state registration number of the tow car.
(f) The tow car license number.
§ 210-8 TOWING § 210-8
210:493
§ 210-9. Regulations for drivers.
(2) The duplicate of the bill shall be retained by the tow car owner for a
period of six months at such owner's place of business as set forth
on his license. These bills shall be exhibited upon demand of any
official of the Village, Town of North Hempstead or any member of
the Nassau County Police Department. Upon payment of the bill
given to the owner of the motor vehicle or such owner's authorized
representative, the licensee shall acknowledge receipt of payment
of such bill.
H. Storage of vehicles at terminal.
(1) Any vehicle stored upon a premises designated by a licensed tow
car owner as a terminal shall be presumed to be so stored with the
full knowledge, permission and consent of said tow car owner.
(2) No tow car owner shall permit a terminal to be used for storage of
vehicles towed upon terminal premises unless the tow car
delivering such vehicle is duly licensed pursuant to this chapter.
(3) Any bill for storage of vehicles at such terminal shall contain the
name and business address of the tow car owner who towed the
vehicle onto the premises.
A. Requirements of drivers. A licensed tow car driver shall:
(1) Have his or her identification card in good condition in such
driver's possession at all times while engaged in such driver's
occupation as a tow car driver and, while so engaged shall also be
in possession of such driver's operator's license.
(2) Not permit any other person to use his identification card.
(3) Not be engaged on an unlicensed tow car or on a tow car for which
the license has been suspended or revoked.
(4) Promptly report the loss of an identification card to the Town Clerk.
(5) Report change of address to the Town Clerk within 48 hours.
(6) Have with him or her at all times while engaged in occupation as a
tow car driver properly authorized forms for towing and repair,
such forms to be printed and maintained by tow car owners.
B. Conduct at accidents. Each tow car driver at the scene of an accident
shall:
(1) Exhibit his or her identification card to the owner of the disabled
vehicle or any member of the Nassau County Police Department or
a designated representative of the Village or Town Clerk's office.
§ 210-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 210-9
210:494
§ 210-10. General requirements.
(2) Not remove any vehicle from the scene of an accident until proper
authorization has been signed by the owner of the disabled vehicle
or person in charge thereof or ordered by a police officer.
(3) Not remove any vehicle involved in an accident in which a person
has been injured until released by a duly authorized member of the
police department having jurisdiction at the scene of said accident.
C. Obedience to civil statutes mandatory. Every tow car driver shall obey
all traffic laws, local laws, rules and regulations while operating a tow
car and, upon conviction for any violation of such laws, rules or
regulations, shall report the same within three days to the Town Clerk,
advising the Town Clerk of the nature of the offense charged and the
name and location of the court. The reporting requirement set forth
herein shall not apply to parking violations.
A. Soliciting prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive along
any street or bridge in the Village and actively solicit towing work.
Solicitation of towing work by the operator or other occupant of a tow
car while parking or standing on any street or bridge is also prohibited.
A tow car operator shall not stop, stand or park at the scene of an
accident involving one or more vehicles without having been requested
or notified to do so by the owner of the disabled vehicle or such owner's
authorized representative or the police. Responding to a call merely
upon notification from gas station attendants, taxicab drivers or other
unauthorized persons shall be considered a violation of this provision.
B. Presentation of tow car list at accident scene. A police officer present at
the scene of an accident shall present a list of authorized tow car
operators to the owner or driver of any disabled motor vehicle, provided
that such person is physically able and capable of making such choice of
services, and said owner or driver shall have the right to require the
services of any available licensed tow car. It shall be unlawful for any
owner or driver of any licensed tow car to refuse to render such
services if such owner or driver of such disabled motor vehicle is able
and willing to pay the fee prescribed as set forth herein; provided,
however, that it is physically possible for such tow car to tow such
disabled motor vehicle and that such tow car is not already going to or
returning from a job.
C. Answers to communications required. Licensed tow car owners and
drivers, when required, will answer all communications received from
the Village Clerk and/or Town Clerk.
D. License to be surrendered on demand of the Village Clerk and/or Town
Clerk. It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver to refuse to surrender
a license or licenses to the Village Clerk and/or Town Clerk upon
demand after such license or licenses have been suspended, revoked or
expired.
§ 210-9 TOWING § 210-10
210:495
E. Overcharges prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to demand
or receive any payment in excess of the maximum charges permitted by
this law.
F. Agreement for repairs and estimates.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any tow car owner or driver or any other
person to make repairs or to charge a fee, directly or indirectly, for
making an estimate for repairs on any motor vehicle involved in an
accident or otherwise disabled without entering into a signed
agreement with the owner or other person in charge of said
disabled motor vehicle fixing the cost on a form heretofore
prescribed.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any tow car owner or driver or any other
person to enter into an agreement for the repair or for the estimate
for repairs where the owner or person in charge of the motor
vehicle involved in an accident is to be hospitalized because of such
accident until the expiration of at least 24 hours from the time of
such accident, unless the injured person has, before the expiration
of said time, been discharged from the hospital.
G. Record book of accident calls. At the place of business set forth on his
or her license, every unrestricted tow car owner shall maintain for one
year a bound record book of all calls for towing service at the scene of
an accident, to be available for inspection by the police or office of the
Village Clerk or Town Clerk. Entries in this book shall be legible, made
in ink and written in English at the time the call is received and shall
specify:
(1) The name of the person making a call.
(2) The time of the call.
(3) The time of arrival at the scene of the accident.
(4) Disposition.
H. Disposition of licensed tow car. Every owner, upon the sale or other
disposition of a licensed tow car, shall within 24 hours notify the Town
Clerk of such sale or other disposition and surrender the license or
licenses and medallion.
I. Administration by Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall have the power to
prescribe reasonable rules and regulations for the proper and efficient
administration and enforcement of this chapter.122
122. Editor's Note: Former § 120-11, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now § 1-1.
§ 210-10 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 210-10
210:496
Chapter 213
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 109.
Gardeners and landscapers — See Ch. 136.
Damage to streets and public property — See
Ch. 191, Art. IV.
§ 210-10 TOWING § 210-10
210:497

ARTICLE I
Removal or Alteration of Habit
§ 213-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 213-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meanings ascribed herein:
APPLICANT — The owners of real property or the duly authorized agent of
such owners.
HABIT — The natural growing characteristics of any tree, which includes
branch spread and distribution, branch height aboveground and root spread
and distribution.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, public agency, public utility or organization of any kind or the
agent thereof.
REAL PROPERTY — All real property in the Village, whether improved or
unimproved.
SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATION — Any cutting, pruning, elevating or other
alteration of the habit of a tree which impairs or endangers the life of
such tree or destroys its natural symmetry. The term "substantial alteration"
includes, but is not limited to, destruction or removal of a tree, heavy or
unnecessary cutting of top branches (topping), cutting of major lower limbs
(severe elevating) or drastic pruning, but shall not include customarily
accepted or ornamental pruning as defined by National Arborist
Association's standards for pruning of shade trees.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates hereby finds
and determines that it has been established that trees provide a natural
habitat for the wildlife of our area, absorb air pollution, provide oxygen,
deter soil erosion and flooding and offer a natural barrier to noise. As
the removal of trees deprives us of these benefits and disrupts the
ecological balance in nature, it is therefore the purpose of this article to
prevent the indiscriminate destruction and removal of trees in the
Village of Great Neck Estates.
B. The Board of Trustees further notes the findings of the New York State
Environmental Quality Review Act,123 including the extent to which the
Village is obligated to serve as a steward of air, water, land and living
resources, and the extent to which the Village is obligated to protect the
environment for the use of this and further generations. It is the intent
of the Board of Trustees to recognize these responsibilities in part, by
providing these procedures, as well as to preserve the health, welfare
and general character of the community, which is reflected in the
abundance of trees in the Village of Great Neck Estates.
123. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 213-1 TOWING § 213-2
210:499
TREE — Any woody plant, its root system and the environment within the
area defined by the outermost limits of its branches, which is at least seven
inches in diameter at a height of four feet six inches above the base of the
trunk.
VILLAGE OFFICIAL — The Village Building Official or such other person as
may be designated by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of Trustees.
§ 213-3. Permit required; applicability.
§ 213-4. Administration and enforcement.
§ 213-5. Permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy or substantially
alter the habit of one or more trees on any real property unless a permit
has been obtained pursuant to this article.
B. This article shall not apply in an emergency situation (as determined by
the Village Official) or to the removal, destruction or substantial
alteration of any tree made in accordance with an accepted building or
landscape plan that is part of an approved subdivision, building permit,
site plan or other permit approved by the Village of Great Neck Estates.
A. The Village Official shall administer and enforce this article, and choose
replacement trees, as hereinafter provided.
B. The Village Official shall perform the following duties:
(1) Receive and keep accurate records of tree removal permit
applications.
(2) Visit and inspect the site and the trees described in the application,
as well as contiguous and adjoining lands.
(3) Grant or deny applications for permits based on the standards for
granting permits as described in § 213-6 of this article.
(4) In case of emergencies involving but not limited to hurricanes,
windstorms, floods, freezes or other natural disasters, waive the
permit requirements of this article.
A. Any person who proposes to substantially alter one or more trees on
any real property within the Village shall make application to the
Village Official for a permit for such activity.
B. The permit application shall be made on such form as may be
prescribed by the Village Official and shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
(1) The names and address(es) of the applicant. If the applicant is a
legal entity other than a natural person, the application must state
§ 213-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 213-5
210:500
§ 213-6. Standards for granting of permits.
In determining whether to grant an application for a permit pursuant to this
article, the Village Official shall consider all pertinent factors, including but
not limited to the following:
the status of that entity as a corporation, partnership or other legal
form.
(2) Location of the real property, including the street address.
(3) Written consent of the owner(s) of the real property on which the
tree(s) are located, if the applicant is not the owner(s).
(4) The number of trees which are proposed to be substantially
altered.
(5) The purpose of the proposed substantial alteration.
(6) A diagram of the area or section of real property where trees are
proposed to be substantially altered, whether located on or off the
site, or where any disturbance of land is proposed, showing
location of all trees, indicating and identifying those trees to be
substantially altered and those trees to be preserved or
maintained, and the diameter and species of each such tree. Such
diagram shall also indicate the name and address of the person who
prepared the diagram.
(7) Location of all existing structures and driveways on the site,
including any proposed grade changes that might adversely affect
or endanger any trees on the site, and details of how the applicant
proposes to maintain and protect trees which are proposed to be
preserved or maintained.
(8) Any additional information which the Village Official may deem
necessary for evaluation of the application.
A. The physical condition of the tree(s) proposed to be substantially
altered and whether any tree proposed to be substantially altered is a
tree worthy of preservation.
B. The proximity to existing or proposed improvements of trees proposed
to be substantially altered, including the necessity of removing one or
more of such trees in order to construct proposed improvements.
C. The ease with which the applicant or owner could alter or revise the
proposed development or improvement to accommodate and preserve
existing trees.
D. The effect of the proposed substantial alteration on the ecological
systems, including the erosion potential, soil moisture retention and
flow of surface waters on the property.
§ 213-5 TOWING § 213-6
210:501
§ 213-7. Permit conditions.
The Village Official shall, as a condition of granting a permit:
§ 213-8. Permit application fee.
Each tree removal permit application shall be accompanied by a fee in an
amount set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 213-9. Penalties for offenses.
E. The need for visual screening in transitional zones or relief from glare,
blight, commercial or industrial ugliness or any other visual affront.
F. The effect on the area of substantial alteration as determined by
accepted tree management practices and/or the relandscaping of the
premises.
G. Any economic or other hardships that would be imposed upon the
applicant or owner were the permit denied.
A. Require the planting of the same or agreed-upon alternative species of
tree for each tree proposed to be substantially altered, which shall be at
least two inches in diameter, at a height of four feet above the base of
the trunk, or at least eight feet in height. The Village Official may, at his
discretion, waive part or all of this requirement.
B. Require the reasonable relocation of proposed driveways, surfaces and
subsurface improvements or drainage systems to protect the trees to be
preserved.
C. Regulate the days and hours of substantial alteration.
D. Require such safeguards as appropriate to minimize the environmental
impact of the proposed substantial alteration or any activities in
furtherance thereof.
E. Impose such other reasonable conditions as may be necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this article.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000
for each tree, the habit of which is substantially altered in violation of
this article.
B. Any person found guilty of violating this article may also be required by
the court to replace any or all trees, the habit of which was substantially
altered, with trees of a size and type selected by the Village Official, and
to plant said replacement trees within a specified period of time. All
such replacement trees must be at least four inches in diameter at four
feet six inches above the base of the trunk. Where such direction for
replacement of trees is made, no building permit, certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be issued for the real
§ 213-6 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 213-9
210:502
§ 213-10. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Village Official under
this article shall have the right, within 30 days from the date of such
determination by the Village Official, to appeal to the Board of Trustees,
in writing. Any such written appeal shall identify the manner in which the
appellant is aggrieved by the said determination, and shall state the reason
for the appeal. The Board of Trustees shall render a decision on the appeal
within 60 days of the filing of the appeal, and such determination shall be
final and conclusive.
property upon which such tree is located until such replacement has
been completed.
C. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, this article may be
enforced by civil action by the Village, including injunctive relief. In
such action, the Village may also seek a judgment requiring
replacement of any or all trees the habit of which was substantially
altered, with trees of a size and type selected by the Village Official, and
planting of said replacement trees within a specified period of time. All
such replacement trees must be at least four inches in diameter at four
feet six inches above the base of the trunk. Where such direction for
replacement of trees is made, no building permit, certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be issued until such
replacement has been completed.
§ 213-9 TOWING § 213-10
210:503

ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Sidewalk Trees
§ 213-11. Sidewalk tree defined.
As used in this article, a "sidewalk tree" is any tree, shrub, or other planting
located in a curb strip, and a curb strip is the area between the property
line of a private real property and the paved portion of any public street
or right-of-way abutting such property. The provisions of Article I of this
chapter shall not apply to the removal or alteration of habit of any sidewalk
tree, except as otherwise provided in this article.
§ 213-12. Responsibilities of owners or occupants.
§ 213-13. Emergencies.
In case of emergencies involving but not limited to hurricanes, windstorms,
floods, freezes or other natural disasters, the permit requirements of this
chapter may be waived by the Village Official.
§ 213-14. Penalties for offenses.
A. Every owner and occupant of any private property abutting on any
public street in the Village of Great Neck Estates is hereby required to
maintain any sidewalk tree in a curb strip abutting such property. Each
such sidewalk tree shall be maintained in a safe and healthy condition,
as required by this article or as directed by the Village Official defined
in § 213-1 of this chapter. Such responsibility shall include pruning,
cutting, or removal of such any such tree as directed by the Village
Official in order to protect the health of the tree, and/or to protect
public health and safety.
B. Each such owner or occupant shall be responsible for the normal care,
including watering, of each such sidewalk tree.
C. No such owner or occupant may remove or alter the habit of any such
sidewalk tree, nor cause or permit any such action, without the written
permission of the Village Official.
D. No such owner or occupant shall attach, or cause or permit to be
attached, any sign, notice or other object, nor fasten any wires, cables,
nails or screws, to any such sidewalk tree in a manner that is likely to
prove harmful to the tree, without the written permission of the Village
Official.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000
for each violation. Each violation with respect to a separate tree shall
constitute a separate violation. Each day upon which a continuing
violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 213-11 TOWING § 213-14
210:505
§ 213-15. Enforcing and supervising officer.
The Village Official is hereby empowered to give such notices, orders and
directions as may reasonably be necessary or appropriate for enforcement
of the provisions of this article, or otherwise to keep the public streets and
sidewalks safe for public travel.
§ 213-16. Liability.
In addition to any penalties otherwise provided by law for violations of
this code, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be
responsible civilly to the Village, and to any person injured or who sustains
property damage, for all loss, damage, and expense (including reasonable
attorneys' fees) incurred by reason of such violation. Each such person who
violates the provisions of this article also shall hold the Village of Great
Neck Estates harmless from and indemnify the Village against any and all
claims, damages, expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) arising
out of such violation.
§ 213-17. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Village Official under
this article shall have the right, within 30 days from the date of such
determination by the Village Official, to appeal to the Board of Trustees,
in writing. Any such written appeal shall identify the manner in which the
appellant is aggrieved by the said determination, and shall state the reason
for the appeal. The Board of Trustees shall render a decision on the appeal
B. Any person found guilty of violating this article may also be required by
the court to replace any or all trees adversely affected by such violation
with trees of a size and type selected by the Village Official, and to plant
said replacement trees within a specified period of time. All such
replacement trees must be at least four inches in diameter at four feet
six inches above the base of the trunk. Where such direction for
replacement of trees is made, no building permit, certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be issued for the real
property upon which such tree is located until such replacement has
been completed.
C. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, this article may be
enforced by civil action by the Village, including injunctive relief. In
such action, the Village may also seek a judgment requiring
replacement of any or all trees adversely affected by such violation,
with trees of a size and type selected by the Village Official, and
planting of said replacement trees within a specified period of time. All
such replacement trees must be at least four inches in diameter at four
feet six inches above the base of the trunk. Where such direction for
replacement of trees is made, no building permit, certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be issued until such
replacement has been completed.
§ 213-14 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 213-17
210:506
within 60 days of the filing of the appeal, and such determination shall be
final and conclusive.
§ 213-17 TOWING § 213-17
210:507
Chapter 217
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 150. Towing — See Ch. 210.
§ 213-17 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 213-17
210:508
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 217-1. Definitions; interpretation.
A. Definitions of words and phrases.
(1) The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes
of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
Article 1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
(2) The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the
purposes of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in
the absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents'
Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.[Amended
9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
PARKING METER ZONE — A designated location upon or within
which the parking of vehicles is regulated by parking meters.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A plot or parcel of land or building owned
and/or leased by this Village, not including highways, upon or
within which the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs, parking
meters and/or permits.
B. Interpretation.
(1) Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein
or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
(2) Measurements. Any linear measurements specified for various
orders, rules and/or regulations contained in or adopted and/or
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to be approximate,
and such measurements, and the order, rule and/or regulation to
which they pertain, shall not be affected or altered in any way by
the widening of a street, by the construction of curbs, gutters or
sidewalks or by any other action which might tend to obliterate the
point from which such measurements were originally made. Unless
otherwise indicated, measurements shall be made from the nearest
curbline of the street(s) referred to in a location description or, if
there is no curbline, from the nearest pavement edge.
(3) Directions. For the purposes of this chapter, all streets and
highways in the Village shall be deemed to run north-south or eastwest,
and streets or highways running generally parallel to the
direction indicated shall be deemed to run in such direction.
§ 217-1 TOWING § 217-2
210:509
§ 217-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall install and maintain traffic control
devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter to
make effective the provisions of this chapter and may install and maintain
such additional traffic control devices as the Board of Trustees may deem
necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684
of that law.
§ 217-3. Schedules; adoption of orders, rules and/or regulations.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all orders, rules
and/or regulations adopted and/or issued under the provisions of this
chapter, there is hereby established a system of schedules, appearing
as Article IX of this chapter, in which shall be entered such orders, rules
and/or regulations after adoption and/or issuance. Such schedules shall
be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. Orders, rules and/or
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate
schedule, as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, the Police
Commissioner of the Village of Great Neck Estates is hereby
authorized, in consultation with the Village Police Department, to adopt
and issue orders, rules and/or regulations in accordance with and
implementing the provisions of this chapter and the Vehicle and Traffic
Law and, in particular, relating to the schedules established by this
chapter. A written report of any such orders, rules and/or regulations
shall be made by the Police Commissioner to the Board of Trustees at or
before the next regular meeting of the Board after the issuance of such
orders, rules or regulations, and such orders, rules or regulations shall
remain in effect until repealed or modified by the Police Commissioner
or the Board of Trustees.
§ 217-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-3
210:510
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 217-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated at the
intersections and locations described in Schedule A (§ 217-46).
§ 217-5. One-way roadways designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule B (§ 217-47) are
hereby designated as one-way streets, and vehicles shall proceed along
those streets or parts of streets only in the direction indicated.
§ 217-6. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule C (§ 217-48).
§ 217-7. U-turns.
The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction (otherwise
known as a U-turn) is hereby prohibited on any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule D (§ 217-49).
§ 217-8. Prohibited turns on red signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 1111(d)(2) of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law, no person shall make a right turn on a steady red signal at the
locations designated in Schedule E (§ 217-50).
§ 217-9. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule F (§ 217-51) are hereby designated
as stop intersections, and stop signs shall be erected as indicated.
§ 217-10. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule G (§ 217-52) are hereby designated
as yield intersections, and yield signs shall be erected as indicated.
§ 217-11. School crossings.
A. The intersections or locations described in Schedule H (§ 217-53) are
hereby designated as school crossings for pedestrian traffic between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of each day that school is in
session, or at such other hours not earlier than 7:00 a.m. nor later than
5:00 p.m. as may be determined by the Board of Trustees or Police
Commissioner.
B. Such crossings shall be marked by one or more lines on the pavement,
and appropriate warning signs shall be located so as to be clearly
§ 217-4 TOWING § 217-11
210:511
§ 217-12. Speed regulations.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the Village is hereby established at 30 miles per hour,
except that the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule I (§ 217-54) shall be as indicated
in said schedule.
§ 217-13. Truck route system.
§ 217-14. Snow emergency routes; penalties. [Added 4-12-2010 by
L.L. No. 1-2010; amended 4-13-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
Pursuant to New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1640(18), all public
streets and roads in the Village of Great Neck Estates are designated as
snow emergency routes. No person shall park or permit or continue parking
any motor vehicle on any snow emergency route during a period of snow
emergency, as designated by the Mayor or the Police Chief. The owner
of any vehicle parked on a snow emergency route more than one hour
after notification has been given to remove the vehicle shall be guilty of
a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not less
than $250 nor more than $750 for each period of five hours, or part thereof,
during which the vehicle remains parked on a snow emergency route after
such notice.
visible to traffic proceeding in either direction. [Amended 4-7-1986
by L.L. No. 3-1986]
C. At all times when the signs described in Subsection B are displayed, the
operator of any vehicle shall bring such vehicle to a full stop before
entering upon or crossing any such school crossing and shall not
proceed until all persons standing at the side of the roadway and
desiring to cross have crossed.
A. A truck route system, upon which all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer
combinations having a total gross weight in excess of five tons are
permitted to travel and operate, is hereby established and shall consist
of those streets and highways, or parts thereof, described in Schedule J
(§ 217-55).
B. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in excess of five
tons are hereby excluded from all streets and highways within the
Village except from those streets or highways, or parts thereof,
described in said Schedule J; provided, however, that this exclusion
shall not be construed to prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise
or other property along the streets or highways from which such
vehicles and combinations are otherwise excluded.
§ 217-11 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-14
210:512
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 217-15. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 217-16. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 217-17. No parking at any time.
The parking of vehicles is prohibited at all times in those streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule L (§ 217-57).
§ 217-18. Parking prohibited certain hours.
§ 217-19. Limited-time parking.
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the locations described in
Schedule N (§ 217-59) for a longer period of time than that designated,
during the hours indicated.
§ 217-20. Standing prohibited.
The standing of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the locations described in
Schedule O (§ 217-60) during the hours indicated.
§ 217-21. Stopping prohibited.
The stopping of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the locations described in
Schedule P (§ 217-61) during the hours indicated.
§ 217-22. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule Q (§ 217-62) are hereby designated
as loading zones during the hours indicated, and the parking of vehicles
in such locations is hereby prohibited during the hours indicated except
for the express purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or freight.
The designation of a location as a loading zone shall serve to temporarily
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all streets within the
Village between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. In addition to those hours specified in Subsection A above, the parking
of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the locations described in Schedule
M (§ 217-58) during the hours indicated.
§ 217-15 TOWING § 217-22
210:513
supersede any other parking prohibition or restriction which may exist for
such location.
§ 217-23. Parking on private property.
No person shall drive, park or place any vehicle upon the land of another
within the Village without the prior consent or invitation, express or
implied, of the owner, lessee or occupant of such land.
§ 217-24. Suspension of regulations. [Added 1-12-1998 by L.L. No.
1-1998; amended 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
The Board of Trustees, acting by resolution, may from time to time
designate particular days on which particular otherwise applicable parking
regulations as provided in this chapter shall not be enforced. Reasonable
notice of such suspension of regulations shall be given by posting signs or in
such other manner as the Board of Trustees may determine in its discretion.
This section shall not be deemed to authorize the Board of Trustees to act
by resolution to designate any days as holidays other than those holidays
designated in § 217-1 of this chapter.
§ 217-24.1. Handicapped parking. [Added 10-6-2005]
The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may designate one or more parking
spaces on public streets and roads which are reserved for vehicles lawfully
displaying handicapped parking permits. Such locations are listed in
Schedule S (§ 217- 64).
§ 217-22 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-24.1
210:514
ARTICLE IV
Metered Parking
[Amended 1-12-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998; 7-10-2006 by L.L. No.
7-2006; 6-10-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
§ 217-25. Designation of parking meter zones.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "parking meter" shall refer to
either an individual parking meter or a parking meter or other device
which serves to receive payments for parking fees and provide a record of
payments for parking in one or more parking spaces (including a "kiosk").
§ 217-26. Installation and operation of meters. [Amended
9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be responsible for the installation,
operation, maintenance, regulation, control and supervision of parking
meters in the Village.
§ 217-27. Manner of parking.
A. On-street parking meter zones. Parking meter zones are hereby
established upon those streets and highways, or parts thereof,
described in Schedule R (§ 217-63).
B. Off-street parking meter zones. Parking meter zones may be established
in any part or portion of an off-street public parking lot or area which is
owned, leased or maintained by the Village.
A. Installation.
(1) Pavement and/or curb markings shall be applied, where
practicable, outlining parking spaces adjacent to or in an area
covered by each parking meter in the parking meter zones
established pursuant to this article.
(2) Parking meters shall be installed immediately adjacent to the
parking spaces or in the reasonable vicinity thereof.
(3) No parking spaces shall be applied at, nor meters installed adjacent
to, locations where parking, standing or stopping is prohibited
pursuant to § 1202 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or by this or any
other local law of the Village where parking spaces are in conflict
with such prohibitions.
B. Operation.
(1) Each parking meter shall operate so as to indicate that the
appropriate fee has been deposited in such meter.
(2) Each parking meter shall display or provide a record indicating the
expiration of the time period associated with the deposit of fees.
§ 217-25 TOWING § 217-27
210:515
§ 217-28. Use restrictions and regulations.
§ 217-29. Parking time limits; hours.
The parking of motor vehicles in on-street parking meter zones is hereby
prohibited for a longer period of time than two hours between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays or unless
otherwise provided by proclamation of the Mayor.
§ 217-30. Fees.
The fees for use of the parking meter zones established pursuant to this
article shall be as indicated in Schedule R (§ 217-63).
§ 217-31. Suspension of regulations.
The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may from time to time designate
holidays or other days on which otherwise applicable parking meter
regulations as provided in this article shall not be enforced. Reasonable
notice of such regulations shall be given by posting signs, by posting notices
on parking meters, by covering parking meters or in such other manner as
the Board may designate in its discretion.
A. Any vehicle parked in any parking space in a parking meter zone shall
be parked entirely within the lines or markings designating or outlining
the parking space regulated by a parking meter.
B. Any vehicle parked in a parking space regulated by a parking meter
shall be parked so that either the foremost or the rearmost part of such
vehicle shall be alongside of and next to the parking meter, depending
upon the location of the parking meter, or in the direction of travel of
the vehicle in entering or leaving the parking space.
A. Deposit of fee required.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space of any parking
meter zone during the hours of parking meter operation unless the
appropriate fee is promptly deposited in such meter.
(2) No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space of any parking
meter zone during the hours of parking meter operation while the
applicable meter is displaying a signal or has printed a record
indicating the expiration of the time period associated with the
deposit of fees.
B. Legal currency required. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit
in any parking meter any slug, button or other device or substance as
substitutes for coins of United States currency.
C. Injury to meters. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure,
tamper with, willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of, or
open without lawful authority, any parking meter.
§ 217-27 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-31
210:516
ARTICLE V
Village Parking Lots
§ 217-32. Designation of parking lots. [Amended 6-25-2008 by
Order No. 2-2008; 6-10-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
The following properties, owned, leased or maintained by the Village
pursuant to an easement or agreement, are hereby designated as Village
parking lots, the use of which for the parking of motor vehicles shall be
subject to the provisions of this article:
A. All that certain lot, piece or parcel of land, situate, lying and being in
the Incorporated Village of Great Neck Estates, Town of North
Hempstead, County of Nassau and State of New York, bounded and
described as follows:
BEGINNING at a point in the northeasterly side of Gateway Drive,
distant 156.69 feet northwesterly from the point where the said
northeasterly side of Gateway Drive connects with the northeasterly
side of Cedar Drive;
RUNNING THENCE northwesterly and northerly along the
northeasterly side of Gateway Drive 297.46 feet to the division line
between Lots 6 and 7 on "Section A, Great Neck Estates Map, property
of Villa Park Associates of Great Neck, L.I., McKnight Realty Co.,
Agent, 347 Fifth Avenue, N.Y.C., by Homer L. Bartlett, C. S. & C. E.,
November 1910" and filed in the office of the Clerk of the County of
Nassau on March 6, 1911, File No. 28, Case No. 211;
THENCE along said line forming an interior angle of one hundred
degrees fifty-two minutes ten seconds (100° 52' 10") with a chord
subtended by an arc having a length of 82.21 feet and the radius of
which is 299.37 feet, said arc being a segment of the northerly side of
Gateway Drive, 265.07 feet to the land now or formerly of Shea;
THENCE along said land, on a line forming an interior angle of one
hundred five degrees fifty-three minutes twenty seconds (105° 53' 20")
with the last-mentioned course 135 feet;
THENCE still along said land on a line forming an interior angle of
one hundred eighty-one degrees thirty-nine minutes (181° 39') with
the last-mentioned course 87.87 feet;
THENCE along a line forming an interior angle of eighty degrees
twenty-five minutes 20 seconds (80° 25' 20") with the last-mentioned
course 375.53 feet;
THENCE along a line forming an interior angle of one hundred eightyone
degrees nineteen minutes twenty-five seconds (181° 19' 25") with
the last-mentioned course 100.66 feet;
THENCE at right angles to the last-mentioned course 38.94 feet to the
point or place of beginning.
§ 217-32 TOWING § 217-32
210:517
§ 217-33. Designation of parking meter zone; regulations and
restrictions. [Amended 8-6-1984 by L.L. No. 8-1984; 6-10-2013 by
L.L. No. 5-2013]
B. Together with an easement more particularly bounded and described as
follows:
BEGINNING at a point on the southwesterly side of Middle Neck Road,
distant 239.13 feet northwesterly from the extreme northwesterly end
of the arc of a curve which connects the southwesterly side of Middle
Neck Road with the northerly side of Gateway Drive;
RUNNING THENCE northwesterly along the southwesterly side of
Middle Neck Road a distance of 35.01 feet;
THENCE southwesterly along the southwesterly side of Middle Neck
Road a distance of 100 feet;
THENCE southeasterly at right angles to the last-mentioned course a
distance of 15.79 feet;
THENCE continuing southeasterly on a line forming an interior angle
of one hundred seventy-eight degrees forty minutes thirty-five seconds
(178° 40' 35") with the last-mentioned course a distance of 19.22 feet;
THENCE northeasterly on a line forming an interior angle of ninetyone
degrees nineteen minutes twenty-five seconds (91° 19' 25") with
the last-mentioned course a distance of 100.03 feet to the
southwesterly side of Middle Neck Road, to the point or place of
beginning.
C. Together with another easement more particularly bounded and
described as follows:
BEGINNING at a point on the southwesterly side of Middle Neck Road,
distant 499.06 feet northwesterly from the extreme northwesterly side
of the arc of a curve which connects the southwesterly side of Middle
Neck Road with the northerly side of Gateway Drive;
RUNNING THENCE northwesterly along the southwesterly side of
Middle Neck Road a distance of 35 feet;
THENCE southwesterly at right angles to the southwesterly side of
Middle Neck Road a distance of 100 feet;
THENCE southeasterly parallel with the southwesterly side of Middle
Neck Road a distance of 35 feet;
THENCE northeasterly at right angles to the southwesterly side of
Middle Neck Road a distance of 100 feet to the southwesterly side of
Middle Neck Road, to the point or place of beginning.
D. The property owned by the Village and located on Maple Drive, 103.53
feet west of Middle Neck Road.
§ 217-32 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-33
210:518
§ 217-33.1. Maple Drive permit parking zone. [Added 6-25-2008 by
Order No. 2-2008]
A. The Village parking lots designated and described in § 217-32 are
hereby designated as parking meter zones, and the provisions of Article
IV, Metered Parking, of this chapter shall be applicable to and in such
zones except as modified or otherwise provided herein.
B. The parking meter zones provided for in Subsection A above shall be
divided into two areas, as described below, and the parking of vehicles
in such areas shall be subject to the time limits and parking rates
indicated: [Amended 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
Area
Designation
Time
Limit Rate Description
A 4 hours $0.25/1/2
hour
Those parking stalls furthest
from Middle Neck Road,
comprising approximately 25%
of the total number of stalls,
but not to exceed 50 stalls
B 4 hours $0.25/1/2
hour
All other stalls
C. The parking meters provided for in this section shall control parking
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in each day except
Sundays and legal holidays. Except by permit, as provided in § 217-34,
there shall be no parking in the parking meter zones provided for
herein between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
D. Each of the aforesaid areas shall be marked and indicated by suitable
signs stating when and for what period public parking is permitted and
when and for what period public parking by permit, as provided in
§ 217-34, is permitted.
E. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or of any other provision
of this article, the Police Commissioner may, by regulation, establish or
amend reasonable regulations for the control of parking in Village
parking lots, including, without limitation, the direction of vehicles to
be parked, the permitted hours of parking, the location thereof or the
amounts required to be paid therefor.
A. The parking lot designated in Village Code § 217-32D is hereby
designated as a permit parking zone, and the provisions of Article IV,
Metered Parking, shall be applicable to such zone except as modified or
otherwise provided in this section.
B. Parking shall be permitted in the Maple Drive permit parking zone at
any time on any day, provided that the parked vehicle shall be parked
head in, and shall have affixed and displayed on its rear bumper a
§ 217-33 TOWING § 217-33.1
210:519
§ 217-34. Permits.
current blue permit, in the form issued by the Village Clerk, showing
the vehicle registration plate number.
C. Blue permits shall be issued only to those persons eligible pursuant to
order of the Police Commissioner, as in effect or amended from time to
time, shall be valid for one month each, and shall be renewable to the
extent determined by order of the Police Commissioner from time to
time.
D. No person shall park a vehicle in the Maple Drive lot contrary to the
posted signs, instructions of the Police Department or the regulations
contained herein.
A. Classes. There are hereby established three classes of parking permits
for use in the parking meter zone established in § 217-33, said classes
of permits to be known as "black permits," "red permits" and "green
permits." Notwithstanding any other provision of law applicable to
parking in said parking meter zone, no permit shall be issued pursuant
to this section to permit the parking of any vehicle with a gross vehicle
weight of 10,000 pounds or more, and no such vehicle shall park in any
location, or at any time, where a permit for such parking is required.
[Amended 12-13-1999 by L.L. No. 8-1999]
B. Number. There shall be valid and outstanding at any one time an
unlimited number of black permits and green permits and a number of
red permits to be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees, all
of which permits shall be issued as prescribed herein.
C. Effective time periods.
(1) A black permit shall enable the parking of a vehicle in Area A or B
for any period of time between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the
succeeding day on any day of the week, without the need for
insertion of a coin as otherwise required.
(2) A green permit shall enable the parking of a vehicle in Area A or B,
in spaces designated for that purpose by the Superintendent of
Public Works, at any time for an unlimited period of time.
(3) A red permit shall be issued only to the persons meeting the
qualifications established by the Board of Trustees by resolution
and shall enable the parking of a vehicle in Area A or B, in spaces
designated for that purpose by the Superintendent of Public Works,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day.
D. Issuance; fee. The black and red parking permits provided for herein
shall be issued by the Village Clerk to resident or nonresident
applicants, and the green permits shall be issued to resident applicants
only, upon payment of the fees prescribed therefor by resolution of the
Board of Trustees. Such resolution shall also establish the terms of such
§ 217-33.1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-34
210:520
§ 217-35. Removal of vehicles.
In addition to any other penalties which may be provided in this chapter, any
vehicle parked illegally under the provisions of this article may be removed
and stored as provided in Article VI, Removal and Storage of Vehicles.
§ 217-36. Suspension of regulations. [Added 1-12-1998 by L.L. No.
1-1998]
The Board of Trustees, by resolution, may from time to time designate
holidays or other days on which otherwise applicable parking meter
regulations as provided in this article shall not be enforced. Reasonable
notice of such regulations shall be given by posting signs, by posting notices
on parking meters, by covering parking meters or in such other manner as
the Board may designate in its discretion.
permits and may provide for payment of said fees in monthly or other
periodic payments.
E. Permit sticker. The permit shall be in the form of a bumper sticker and
shall indicate thereon the expiration date and that the permit is subject
to revocation as herein provided. Any vehicle parked pursuant to a
permit must have a permit sticker issued by the Village Clerk affixed
and conspicuously displayed on the rear left bumper of such vehicle.
(1) In the event that a vehicle for which a permit sticker has been
issued is transferred to another person, the sticker shall be
removed and destroyed. No person to whom a permit sticker is
issued shall transfer such permit sticker to another person. No
person shall display on a vehicle or operate a vehicle on which is
displayed a sticker which has been issued for another vehicle.
(2) The Village Clerk may issue a replacement permit sticker to replace
a valid permit sticker which has been destroyed, defaced or lost, or
to a permit holder who has disposed of a vehicle to which a permit
sticker was affixed and who has acquired a different vehicle, upon
receipt of whatever evidence of such facts, including the removal of
the original sticker from the disposed vehicle, as the Clerk may
require, without charging any fee therefor.
F. Termination of permit. If any permit holder shall be convicted of or shall
plead guilty to a violation of this chapter on two occasions during any
year, or if the permit holder shall fail to make timely payments of permit
fees, the permit issued to such permit holder may, in the discretion of
the Village Clerk, be terminated, and the permit sticker shall be
destroyed, and the permit holder shall not be eligible for issuance of a
new permit for a period of 12 months after such second conviction or
plea.
§ 217-34 TOWING § 217-36
210:521

ARTICLE VI
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 217-37. Authority to remove and impound vehicles.
Any vehicle parked or abandoned on any highway in the Village during
a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency, or found unattended
where it constitutes an obstruction to traffic, or any vehicle parked or
abandoned on any highway in the Village where stopping, standing or
parking is prohibited, may be removed by or under the direction of the
Village or any officer or employee thereof.
§ 217-38. Storage and charges. [Amended 4-12-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2010]
After removal of any vehicle as provided in § 217-37, such vehicle shall be
stored in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. Such owner, or the
person in charge of the vehicle, may redeem the same upon payment to the
Village of the amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in
effecting such removal, and an administrative charge of $100 plus $25 for
each day or fraction thereof until the date of release or delivery, the date
of removal and the date of release or delivery being each regarded as a
separate day.
§ 217-39. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Village, or a designated officer or employee
thereof, to ascertain the name of the owner of such vehicle or person having
same in charge and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such
vehicle and of the amount which will be required to redeem same.
§ 217-37 TOWING § 217-39
210:523

ARTICLE VII
Traffic Violations Bureau
§ 217-40. Authorization to establish.
The Village Justice Court of the Village of Great Neck Estates, Nassau
County, New York, is hereby authorized to establish a Traffic Violations
Bureau to assist the Court in the disposition of offenses in relation to traffic
violations. The existing Traffic Violations Bureau is continued.
§ 217-41. Authorization to dispose of traffic violations.
Such Traffic Violations Bureau, when established, is authorized to dispose
of violations of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations when such
offenses do not constitute the traffic infraction known as speeding, or a
misdemeanor or felony, by permitting a person charged with an offense,
within the limitations stated in Article 14-B of the General Municipal Law,
to answer, at any time from the receipt of the summons and a time 48 hours
prior to the return day thereof, at such Traffic Violations Bureau, either
in person or by written general or special power of attorney, by paying a
prescribed fine and, in writing, waiving a hearing in court, pleading guilty
to the charge and authorizing the person in charge of the Bureau to make
such a plea and pay such a fine in court.
§ 217-42. General powers; procedure.
A. Such Traffic Violations Bureau shall have the powers and shall be
subject to the limitations set forth in Article 14-B of the General
Municipal Law and shall be subject to such additional limitations as the
court establishing it may designate.
B. The procedure before such Traffic Violations Bureau shall be that
provided in said Article 14-B of the General Municipal Law.
§ 217-40 TOWING § 217-42
210:525

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties; Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 217-43. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-19-1984 by L.L. No.
2-1984; 6-12-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995; 6-14-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004;
5-14-2012 by L.L. No. 9-2012]
§ 217-44. When effective.
A. General penalties. Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as follows:
for a first conviction, a fine of not more than $150 or imprisonment for
not more than 15 days, or both; for a conviction of a second violation,
both of which were committed within a period of 18 months, a fine of
not more than $225 or imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or
both; upon a conviction of a third or subsequent violation, all of which
were committed within a period of 18 months, a fine of not more than
$300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
B. Penalties for parking violations. Every person convicted for violation of
a parking regulation contained in this chapter shall be punished by a
fine in an amount determined by the court, but in no event more than
$750. In the event that such person fails to appear on or before the
designated return date of an appearance ticket issued for such
violation, said fine may be increased by an amount to be determined by
the court, but not to exceed an additional $150 for each period of 30
days, or part thereof, after such return date. The Traffic Violations
Bureau of the Village of Great Neck Estates is authorized to establish
fines for violations of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
other than the traffic infraction known as "speeding" or a misdemeanor
or felony, and penalties for late appearance in response to charges of
such violations, all to the extent permitted by General Municipal Law
§ 371, where the person charged with such violations pleads guilty to
such violations as permitted by law, provided that the fines and
penalties so established shall not exceed the fines and penalties
otherwise authorized by this section. [Amended 2-5-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014]
A. Except those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, this chapter and
any orders, rules and/or regulations adopted and/or issued hereunder
shall be effective January 1, 1981.
B. Any part or parts of this chapter and any orders, rules and/or
regulations adopted and/or issued hereunder which are subject to
approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York shall take effect from and after the day on which approval in
writing is received from the New York State Department of
Transportation.
§ 217-43 TOWING § 217-45
210:527
§ 217-45. Repealer.
All prior local laws, ordinances, orders, rules and/or regulations, or parts
of such, of this Village regulating traffic and parking are hereby repealed,
except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any
local law, ordinance, order, rule and/or regulation hereby repealed prior to
the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 217-45 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-45
210:528
ARTICLE IX
Schedules124
§ 217-46. Schedule A: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-4, traffic control signals shall
be installed, maintained and operated at the following intersections and
locations:
Intersection (Location)
Bayview Avenue and Hickory Drive
Bayview Avenue and North Clover Drive
Cedar Drive and Bayview Avenue [Added 5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
Maple Drive and Middle Neck Road
Middle Neck Road at Allenwood Road [Added 5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
Middle Neck Road at Beverly Road [Added 5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
Middle Neck Road at Cedar Drive [Added 5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
Middle Neck Road at Embassy Court [Added 5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
Middle Neck Road at Linden Boulevard [Added 5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
§ 217-47. Schedule B: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-5, the following described streets
or parts of streets are designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Clover Drive [Amended
6-13-2008 by Order No.
1-2008; 7-12-2010 by
Order No. 1-2010]
West From Hilltop Drive to 100 feet
west of the westerly property
line of 71 Clover Drive
Elm Street [Repealed 6-13-2008 by Order No. 1-2008]
Linden Boulevard
(northerly roadway)
West From Middle Neck Road to
Clover Drive
124. Editor's Note: The orders, rules and/or regulations contained initially in this article were
issued by the Police Commissioner 10-14-1980 pursuant to § 217-3A of this chapter,
effective 1-1-1981, at the same time that L.L. No. 5-1980, as contained in this chapter,
became effective. Subsequent changes in such orders, rules and/or regulations of the
Police Commissioner are noted where appropriate.
§ 217-46 TOWING § 217-47
210:529
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Linden Boulevard
(southerly roadway)
East From Clover Drive to Middle
Neck Road
Maple Drive East From Hillside Avenue to
Middle Neck Road
Margouleff Circle North
[Added 12-10-1990 by
Order No. 2-1990]
West From easterly terminus to
westerly terminus
Margouleff Circle North
and South [Added
12-10-1990 by Order No.
2-1990]
North From southern terminus to
northern terminus, on the
easterly portion
Margouleff Circle North
and South [Added
12-10-1990 by Order No.
2-1990]
South From northern terminus to
southern terminus, on the
westerly portion
Margouleff Circle South
[Added 12-10-1990 by
Order No. 2-1990]
East From westerly terminus to
easterly terminus
§ 217-48. Schedule C: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-6, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn
At Intersection
of
Western parking lot exit
from 117 Cutter Mill
Road [Added
10-21-2010 by Order
No. 2-2010]
South Left turn (from
8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and
from 3:00 p.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Cutter Mill Road
§ 217-49. Schedule D: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-7, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Ascot Ridge [Added 7-8-2002 by
Order No. 1-2002]
Entire length
Cedar Drive [Added 6-13-2008 by
Order No. 1-2008]
From Middle Neck Road to Gateway
Drive
Linden Boulevard [Added
6-9-1997; amended 9-8-1997]
All portions, trucks only. U-turns by
other motor vehicles are permitted.
§ 217-47 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-49
210:530
Name of Street Location
Middle Neck Road [Added
5-1-1992 by Order No. 1-1992]
All portions
§ 217-50. Schedule E: Prohibited Turns on Red Signals. [Amended
5-1-1992 by Order No. 1-1992; 6-9-2003 by Order No. 2-2003]
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-8, no person shall make a right
turn at a steady red signal at the following locations:
Location
(Intersection)
Prohibited Right Turn for Traffic
Proceeding
Bayview Avenue and Hickory Drive Eastbound on Hickory Drive onto
southbound Bayview Avenue
Bayview Avenue and North Clover
Drive
Westbound on North Clover Drive
onto northbound Bayview Avenue
Maple Drive and Middle Neck
Road
Eastbound on Maple Drive onto
southbound Middle Neck Road
Margouleff Circle North Eastbound on Margouleff Circle North
onto Middle Neck Road southbound
Middle Neck Road at Allenwood
Road
Westbound on Allenwood Road onto
northbound Middle Neck Road
Middle Neck Road at Beverly Road Westbound on Beverly Road onto
northbound Middle Neck Road
Middle Neck Road at Embassy
Court
Westbound on Embassy Court onto
northbound Middle Neck Road
§ 217-51. Schedule F: Stop Intersections. [Amended 10-31-1990 by
Order No. 1-1990; 5-23-2000 by Order No. 1-2000; 6-9-2003 by
Order No. 2-2003]
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-9, the following described
intersections are designated as stop intersections:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Amherst Road East Bayview Avenue
Amherst Road South Mirrielees Road
Amherst Road East West Bayview Avenue
Ascot Ridge East Cutter Mill Road
Ascot Road North Mirrielees Road
Ash Drive East Myrtle Drive
Ash Drive West Bayview Avenue
§ 217-49 TOWING § 217-51
210:531
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Aspen Place North Cedar Drive
Boxwood Drive North Cedar Drive
Boxwood Drive North Pine Drive
Boxwood Drive South Pine Drive
Cedar Drive East Boxwood Drive
Cedar Drive East/West Myrtle Drive
Cedar Drive West Ridge Drive East
Cedar Drive West Vista Drive
Chestnut Drive East Deepdale Drive
Chestnut Drive West Bayview Avenue
Clover Drive East Hilltop Drive
Clover Drive East Middle Neck Road
Clover Drive East/West Gateway Drive
Clover Drive North North Clover Drive
Clover Drive South Hilltop Drive
Clover Drive West Deepdale Drive
Clover Drive West North Clover Drive
Crystal Drive North Mirrielees Circle
Cutter Mill Road
(Western exit from
parking lot at 117)
[Added 10-21-2010
by Order No.
2-2010]
East/West/
South
Cutter Mill Road
Deepdale Drive East/West Deepdale Drive
Deepdale Drive
[Added 8-10-2018
by Order No.
1-2018]
North Clover Drive
Deepdale Drive North North Clover Drive
Deepdale Drive North/East Myrtle Drive
Deepdale Drive South Cedar Drive
Deepdale Drive
(westerly intersection)
South Cedar Drive
Elm Street East/West Hillside Avenue
Elm Street West South Drive
Gateway Drive East/West Myrtle Drive
§ 217-51 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-51
210:532
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Gateway Drive
[Added 8-10-2018
by Order No.
1-2018]
Northeast Deepdale Drive
Gateway Drive North/South Clover Drive
Gateway Drive South Cedar Drive
Gateway Drive South Myrtle Drive
Gateway Drive
[Added 8-10-2018
by Order No.
1-2018]
Southeast Magnolia Drive
Gateway Drive West Deepdale Drive
Gateway Drive West Magnolia Drive
Glenwood Drive East Deepdale Drive
Glenwood Drive West North Clover Drive
Great Neck Estates
Park Exit
East Shore Drive
Hickory Drive West Ridge Drive East
Hickory Drive West Vista Drive
Hillcrest Drive East Bayview Avenue
Hillcrest Drive
(northerly leg)
East Bayview Avenue
Hillside Avenue North Cedar Drive
Hillside Avenue North/South Elm Street
Hillside Avenue North/South Maple Drive
Hilltop Drive North Clover Drive
Hilltop Drive (east
and west)
South Linden Boulevard
Jordan Drive East Boxwood Drive
Juniper Drive North Cedar Drive
Laurel Drive East Bayview Avenue
Laurel Drive North/South Pine Drive
Linden Boulevard West Clover Drive
Locust Drive East Bayview Avenue
Magnolia Drive East Deepdale Drive
Magnolia Drive East Gateway Drive
§ 217-51 TOWING § 217-51
210:533
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Magnolia Drive
[Added 8-10-2018
by Order No.
1-2018]
West Deepdale Drive
Magnolia Drive West Myrtle Drive
Maple Drive East/West South Drive
Maple Drive North Ash Drive
Maple Drive South South Drive
Maple Drive West Bayview Avenue
Maple Drive West Hillside Avenue
Maple Drive West Myrtle Drive
Mirrielees Circle
[Added 4-9-2007 by
Order No. 1-2007]
East Ascot Ridge
Mirrielees Circle East Crystal Drive
Mirrielees Road West Amherst Road
Myrtle Drive North North Clover Drive
Myrtle Drive North Oak Drive
Myrtle Drive North/South Cedar Drive
Myrtle Drive South Magnolia Drive
Myrtle Drive South Maple Drive
North Circle Drive East Vista Drive
North Circle Drive West Shore Drive
North Clover Drive East/West Deepdale Drive
North Clover Drive East/West Myrtle Drive
North Clover Drive South Glenwood Drive
Oak Drive West Bayview Avenue
Old Cuttermill Road North Ascot Ridge
Pine Drive East Bayview Avenue
Pine Drive East/West Laurel Drive
Prospect Place
[Added 7-29-2015
by Order No.
2-2015]
North Ridge Drive East
Ridge Drive East North Hickory Drive
§ 217-51 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-51
210:534
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Ridge Drive East
[Added 7-29-2015
by Order No.
2-2015]
East/West Prospect Place
Ridge Drive East North/South Stewart Drive
Ridge Drive East South Cedar Drive
Ridge Drive East South Ridge Drive West
Ridge Drive West North Hickory Drive
Ridge Drive West North Ridge Drive East
Shore Drive South Cedar Drive
South Circle Drive East Vista Drive
South Circle Drive West Shore Drive
South Drive East/West Larch Drive
South Drive North Cedar Drive
South Drive North Elm Street
South Drive North/South Maple Drive
South Drive West Bayview Avenue
Stewart Drive East Ridge Drive East
Stewart Drive West Vista Drive
Sycamore Drive East Myrtle Drive
Sycamore Drive West Bayview Avenue
Tulip Drive North Gateway Drive
Village Hall Lot Exit South Gateway Drive
Vista Drive North Hickory Drive
Vista Drive South Cedar Drive
Wilbur Drive [Added
5-18-2012 by Order
No. 1-2012]
West Deepdale Drive
§ 217-52. Schedule G: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-10, the following described
intersections are designated as yield intersections:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 217-51 TOWING § 217-53
210:535
§ 217-53. Schedule H: School Crossings.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-11, the following intersections or
locations are designated as school crossings:
Sign on
At Intersection of
(or Location)
(Reserved)125
§ 217-54. Schedule I: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-12, speed limits are established
as indicated upon the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Amherst Road 25 Entire length
Ascot Ridge 25 Entire length
Ash Drive 25 Entire length
Aspen Place 25 Entire length
Boxwood Drive 25 Entire length
Cedar Drive 25 Entire length
Chestnut Drive 25 Entire length
Clover Drive 25 Entire length
Deepdale Drive 25 Entire length
Elm Street 25 Entire length
Gateway Drive 25 Entire length
Glenwood Drive 25 Entire length
Gloucester Court 25 Entire length
Hickory Drive 25 Entire length
Hillcrest Drive 25 Entire length
Hillside Avenue 25 Entire length
Hilltop Drive 25 Entire length
Hilltop Drive East 25 Entire length
Hilltop Drive West 25 Entire length
Jordan Drive 25 Entire length
Juniper Drive 25 Entire length
125. Editor's Note: The entry for Bayview Avenue at the intersection of Amherst Road was
repealed 6-9-2003 by Order No. 2-2003.
§ 217-53 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-54
210:536
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Laurel Drive 25 Entire length
Linden Boulevard 25 Entire length
Locust Drive 25 Entire length
Magnolia Drive 25 Entire length
Maple Drive 25 Entire length
Maple Street 25 Entire length
Margouleff Circle
[Added 12-10-1990
by Order No. 2-1990]
25 Entire length
Mirrielees Circle 25 Entire length
Mirrielees Road 25 Entire length
Myrtle Drive 25 Entire length
North Circle 25 Entire length
North Clover Drive 25 Entire length
Oak Drive 25 Entire length
Oakland Place 25 Entire length
Pine Drive 25 Entire length
Prospect Place 25 Entire length
Ridge Drive East 25 Entire length
Ridge Drive West 25 Entire length
Shore Drive 25 Entire length
South Circle 25 Entire length
South Drive 25 Entire length
Spruce Place 25 Entire length
Stewart Drive 25 Entire length
Sycamore Drive 25 Entire length
Tulip Drive 25 Entire length
Vista Drive 25 Entire length
Wilbur Drive 25 Entire length
Willow Place 25 Entire length
§ 217-55. Schedule J: Truck Route System.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-13, the following streets and
highways, or parts thereof, are designated as a truck route system:
§ 217-54 TOWING § 217-55
210:537
Name of Street Location
Bayview Avenue Entire length
Cedar Drive [Repealed 7-11-2007 by Order No. 2-2007]
Cutter Mill Road Entire length
Middle Neck Road [Added
5-1-1992 by Order No. 1-1992]
Entire length
§ 217-56. Schedule K (Reserved)
§ 217-57. Schedule L: No Parking at Any Time.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-17, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Ascot Ridge [Added
8-29-2003 by Order
No. 3-2003]
North From Bayview Avenue to a point
300 feet west of Bayview Avenue
Ascot Ridge [Added
8-29-2003 by Order
No. 3-2003]
South From Bayview Avenue west to
Mirrielees Road
Ascot Ridge [Added
9-14-1998 by Order
No. 1-1998]
South/West Entire length
Bayview Avenue
[Added 10-27-1993
by Order No. 1-1993]
North/South From the southerly boundary of
the Village of Great Neck Estates
to Cedar Drive
Cedar Drive North/South From Middle Neck Road 200 feet
west thereof to Deepdale Drive
Chestnut Drive [Added
6-9-2009 by Order
No. 1-2009]
North From Bayview Avenue to a point
40 feet east thereof
Clover Drive North From Middle Neck Road to a
point 150 feet west thereof
Clover Drive South From Middle Neck Road to
Hilltop Drive
Elm Street [Added
8-29-2003 by Order
No. 3-2003]
North From a point 115 feet west of
Middle Neck Road to a point 140
feet west of Middle Neck Road
Elm Street [Added
8-29-2003 by Order
No. 3-2003]
South From a point 125 feet west of
Middle Neck Road to a point 250
feet west of Middle Neck Road
Gateway Drive East/West From Cedar Drive to Deepdale
Drive
§ 217-55 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-57
210:538
Name of Street Side Location
Hickory Drive [Added
8-29-2003 by Order
No. 3-2003]
North From Bayview Avenue to a point
150 feet west thereof
Hilltop Drive East
[Added 8-29-2003 by
Order No. 3-2003]
East/West From Linden Boulevard to a point
75 feet north thereof
Linden Boulevard
[Added 8-29-2003 by
Order No. 3-2003]
South From a point 110 feet west of the
southwest corner of the
intersection with Middle Neck
Road to a point 195 feet west of
such corner
Linden Boulevard South From Middle Neck Road to a
point 50 feet west thereof
Maple Drive North From Middle Neck Road to a
point 150 feet west thereof
Maple Drive South From a point 100 feet west of
Middle Neck Road to a point 50
feet west thereof
Middle Neck Road
[Added 8-29-2003 by
Order No. 3-2003]
West From a point 75 feet south of the
southwest corner of the
intersection with Linden
Boulevard to a point 115 feet
south of such corner
Mirrielees Road
(Avenue) [Added
9-14-1998 by Order
No. 1-1998]
South Entire length
North Circle Drive
[Added 8-29-2003 by
Order No. 3-2003]
North/South From Shore Drive to a point 500
feet east thereof
North Clover Drive
[Added 8-29-2003 by
Order No. 3-2003]
North From Bayview Avenue to a point
200 feet east thereof
North Clover Drive
[Added 8-29-2003 by
Order No. 3-2003]
North From Clover Drive to a point 350
feet northeast of Clover Drive
North Clover Drive
[Added 8-29-2003 by
Order No. 3-2003]
South From Bayview Avenue to a point
100 feet east thereof
North Clover Drive
[Added 8-29-2003 by
Order No. 3-2003]
South From Clover Drive to Myrtle
Drive
§ 217-57 TOWING § 217-57
210:539
Name of Street Side Location
South Drive [Added
8-29-2003 by Order
No. 3-2003]
East/South From Ash Drive to Larch Drive
South Drive [Added
8-29-2003 by Order
No. 3-2003]
West/North From Ash Drive to Larch Drive
§ 217-58. Schedule M: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-18B, the parking of vehicles is
prohibited in the following locations during the hours indicated:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Elm Street North/South 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From 150 feet west of
Middle Neck Road to
Hillside Avenue
Hillside Avenue East/West 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From Elm Street to the
southerly Village line
§ 217-59. Schedule N: Limited-Time Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-19, the parking of vehicles is
prohibited in the locations described below for a longer period of time than
that designated, during the hours indicated:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
All public streets, roads
or highways in the
Village, except where a
different restriction is
expressly provided in
this Code [Added
2-14-1994 by Order
No. 1-1994; amended
12-10-2018 by Order
No. 2-2018]
-- 2 hrs./All --
Ascot Ridge North/South 30 min./7:00
a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
From Cutter Mill
Road to a point
100 feet west
thereof
Elm Street North/South 30 min./7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
From a point 150
feet west of
Middle Neck
Road to Hillside
Avenue
§ 217-57 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-59
210:540
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Elm Street North/South 2 hrs./7:00
a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
From Hillside
Avenue to South
Drive
Hillside Avenue East/West 30 min./7:00
a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
From Cedar
Drive to Maple
Drive
Linden Boulevard North/South 2 hrs./7:00
a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
From a point 150
feet west of
Middle Neck
Road to Clover
Drive
Linden Boulevard North/South 30 min./7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
From a point 50
feet west of
Middle Neck
Road to Clover
Drive
Linden Boulevard
[Added 3-12-2001 by
Order No. 1-2001]
South From a point 110
feet west of the
southwest
corner of the
intersection with
Middle Neck
Road to a point
195 feet west of
such corner
Maple Drive North/South 30 min./7:00
a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
From a point 150
feet west of
Middle Neck
Road to Hillside
Avenue
Maple Drive South 2 hrs./7:00
a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
From Hillside
Avenue to South
Drive
Middle Neck Road
[Added 3-12-2001 by
Order No. 1-2001]
West From a point 75
south of the
southwest
corner of the
intersection with
Linden
Boulevard to a
point 115 feet
south of such
corner
§ 217-59 TOWING § 217-60
210:541
§ 217-60. Schedule O: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-20, the standing of vehicles is
prohibited in the following locations during the hours indicated:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 217-61. Schedule P: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-21, the stopping of vehicles is
prohibited in the following locations during the hours indicated:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Cutter Mill Road [Added
5-29-2003 by Order No.
1-2003]
North All From the northeast
corner of the intersection
with Bayview Avenue to a
point 365 feet east of said
intersection
Middle Neck Road [Added
5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
East All From the northeast
corner of the intersection
with Allenwood Road to a
point 38 feet north
Middle Neck Road [Added
5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
East All From the southeast
corner of the Intersection
with Allenwood Road to a
point 70 feet south
Middle Neck Road [Added
5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
East All From the northeast
corner of the intersection
with Beverly Road to a
point 53 feet north
Middle Neck Road [Added
11-14-2002 Order No.
2-2002]
East All From a point 53 feet
north of the northeast
corner of the intersection
with Beverly Road to a
point 163 feet north of
such intersection
Middle Neck Road [Added
4-12-2004]
East All From a point 405 feet
north of the northeast
corner of the intersection
with Beverly Road to a
point 418 feet north of
such intersection
Middle Neck Road [Added
5-1-1992 Order No.
1-1992]
East All From the southeast
corner of the intersection
with Beverly Road to a
point 130 feet south on
Middle Neck Road
§ 217-60 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-61
210:542
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Middle Neck Road [Added
5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
East All From a point 163 feet
north of the northeast
corner of the intersection
with Beverly Road to a
point 373 feet north of
such intersection
Middle Neck Road [Added
5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
East All From a point 418 feet
north of the northeast
corner of the intersection
with Beverly Road to a
point 473 feet north of
such intersection
Middle Neck Road [Added
5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992]
East All From the northeast
corner of the intersection
with Embassy Court to a
point 37 feet north
§ 217-62. Schedule Q: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-22, the following locations are
designated as loading zones during the hours and days indicated:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Elm Street North 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
Mon. - Fri.
Parking meter zone
Middle Neck Road West 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
Mon. - Fri.
Parking Meter Space
No. 9
Middle Neck Road
Municipal Parking
Lot exit ramp
North All times Entire length
§ 217-63. Schedule R: Parking Meter Zones. [Amended 9-10-1984;
2-9-1987; 12-10-1990 by Order No. 2-1990; 5-1-1992 by Order No.
1-1992; 5-25-2000 by Order No. 2-2000; 7-10-2000 by Order No.
3-2000; 10-5-2000 by Order No. 4-2000; 12-16-2004 by Order No.
1-2004; 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
In accordance with the provisions of § 217-25A, the following streets and
highways, or parts thereof, are designated as parking meter zones, and the
fee for use of said parking meter zones shall be as indicated:
§ 217-61 TOWING § 217-63
210:543
Name of Street Side Fee/Time Location
Elm Street Both $0.25/1/2 hr.;
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.; 1 hour limit
From Middle
Neck Road to a
point 150 feet
west thereof
(except for
loading zones
from 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon)
Linden Boulevard North $0.25/1/2 hr.;
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.; 2 hour limit
From Middle
Neck Road to a
point 200 feet
west thereof
Linden Boulevard South $0.25/1/2 hr.;
9:00 am to 6:00
p.m.; 4 hour limit
From Middle
Neck Road to a
point 300 feet
west thereof
Maple Drive Both $0.25/1/2 hr.;
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.; 1 hour limit
From Middle
Neck Road to a
point 150 feet
west thereof
Margouleff Circle
North and South
Both The same as
provided in
Village Code
§ 217-33
Entire length
Middle Neck
Road
Both $0.25/1/2 hr.;
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Entire length
within Village
Middle Neck
Road
West $0.25/1/2 hr.;
9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.; 4 hour limit
From Linden
Boulevard to a
point 225 feet
south thereof
Middle Neck
Road
West $0.25/1/2 hr. 9:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
$45 per month
for permit,
parking
permitted any
time
Easement area of
lots 41, 43, 65
and 66
$35 per month
for permit,
parking
permitted
between 9:00
a.m. and 6:00
p.m.
Easement area of
lots 41, 43, 65
and 66
§ 217-63 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-63
210:544
$35 per month
for permit,
parking
permitted
between 6:00
p.m. and 9:00
a.m.
Easement area of
lots 41, 43, 65
and 66
Note: The fees herein provided with respect to areas designated as Middle
Neck Road, west side, shall not be applicable during the term of any
easement agreement binding upon the Village and the property owner
which provides for a different fee for parking in such easement area.
§ 217-64. Schedule S: Handicapped Parking Spaces. [Added
10-6-2005]
The following locations are designated exclusively for parking for vehicles
lawfully displaying handicapped parking permits issued pursuant to the
Vehicle and Traffic Law:
A. Parking space 303, on the south side of Linden Boulevard, 100 feet west
of Middle Neck Road and consisting of the third designated parking
space from Middle Neck Road.
B. Parking spaces 149, 150 and 151, located 210 feet west of Middle Neck
Road on Margouleff Circle South. [Added 11-12-2005; amended
9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
C. Parking spaces 146, 147 and 148, located 140 feet west of Middle Neck
Road on Margouleff Circle North. [Added 11-12-2005; amended
9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
§ 217-63 TOWING § 217-64
210:545
Chapter 225
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 129.
Gardeners and landscapers — See Ch. 136.
Water Authority franchise — See Ch. A236.
§ 217-64 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 217-64
225:546
ARTICLE I
Conservation and Usage
[Adopted 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994 (Ch. 126, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ 225-1. Findings.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, except where the context demonstrates otherwise:
AUTHORITY — The Water Authority of Great Neck North.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — One or more tubes, pipes or hoses, or any
combination thereof, and all accessory valves, sprinklers and other devices,
if any, which are used to transport and release water for the purpose of
irrigation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, entity or other organization of any kind,
including municipal districts, municipal corporations and public authorities.
SENSOR — A rain or soil moisture sensor capable of interrupting the
operation of an irrigation system when watering, as determined by the
sensor, is not required by virtue of rain or soil moisture, in accordance with
the following suggested criteria:
A. The New York State Legislature has found that the potable water for the
northern portion of the Great Neck peninsula is derived from aquifers
which are the sole source of water for all of Long Island. The New York
State Legislature has further found that the issues of contamination and
conservation of the aquifers and the need to better manage the
groundwater system on the north of the Great Neck peninsula (which
had been operated by a private utility until 1985) were of such
statewide concern that the Legislature heretofore created the Water
Authority of Great Neck North. It was the expressed hope of the State
Legislature in establishing the Authority that the Authority would not
only protect, preserve and enhance the quality and quantity of the
water within its supply area, but would also serve as a model and leader
for other water suppliers to better manage, conserve and protect the
groundwaters within and outside its supply areas. Said Authority, after
investigating water conservation and regulation programs, has
recommended that all of the municipalities within or partially within the
jurisdiction of the Water Authority of Great Neck North adopt water
conservation regulations substantially similar to those contained in this
article.
B. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Great Neck Estates hereby
determines that it would be in the best interest of the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Village of Great Neck Estates to adopt
said water conservation regulations.
§ 225-1 WATER § 225-2
225:547
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Great Neck Estates.
WATER — Any water obtained from the Authority or from underground
within the Water Authority of Great Neck North District.
§ 225-3. Applicability; defense.
§ 225-4. Limitation of irrigation systems. [Amended 11-14-1996 by
L.L. No. 11-1996]
A rain sensor shall be a type capable of detecting minimum of 1/8 inch
of rainfall and automatically interrupting and preventing the irrigation
system from operating. A rain sensor shall further be capable of
allowing the rainfall to evaporate and, when sufficient evaporation
has occurred, to automatically reset and allow continuation of normal
irrigation in accordance with the programmed schedule. The rain
sensor shall be set to interrupt and prevent the irrigation system from
operating at a measure of rainfall no greater than the measure
designated by the Board of Trustees by resolution.
A.
A moisture sensor shall be of a type capable of detecting the matric
potential of the soil in which it is used and automatically interrupting
and preventing the irrigation system from operating at a pressure no
greater than the pressure designated by the Board of Trustees by
resolution.
B.
A. This article shall apply to all persons using water in the Village of Great
Neck Estates, whether or not such person using water shall have a
contract in his own name for water service within the Village.
B. This article shall not apply to the use or distribution of water to or onto
one or more tennis courts for the purpose of maintaining said courts in
a condition suitable for the playing of tennis.
C. In any prosecution for any violation of this article, it shall be an
affirmative defense that the alleged violation did not involve the use of
water obtained from either the Authority or from underground within
the Water Authority of Great Neck North District.
A. No irrigation system shall be used on or between such hours as the
Board of Trustees may designate by resolution from time to time.
Notice of the adoption of such resolution or any amendments thereto
shall be published once in the official newspaper of the Village;
provided, however, that failure to make such publication shall not affect
the validity or enforcement of such resolution or amendments.
B. No irrigation system shall be used prior to April 15 or after November 1
in any calendar year.
C. Irrigation by the day of the week. No irrigation system shall be used on
any day except the days indicated hereinafter, depending upon the
number address of the premises where the irrigation system is located:
§ 225-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 225-4
225:548
(1) Premises with odd-number addresses: Mondays, Wednesdays and
Fridays only.
(2) Premises with even-number addresses: Sundays, Tuesdays and
Thursdays only.
(3) Premises with no address number or multiple-number addresses,
including odd and even numbers: Sundays, Tuesdays and
Thursdays only.
D. Irrigation by the odd/even day of the week. The owner or occupant of
any premises where an irrigation system was equipped on April 15,
1996, with a control device which could not be set to automatically
irrigate on the schedule set forth in Subsection C hereof may apply for
an exemption from the schedule set forth in such subsection, which
exemption shall remain in effect for so long as such control device
continues to be used to control for such irrigation system. During the
period of any such exemption, the irrigation system at such premises
may be used only in accordance with the following schedule, depending
upon the number address of the premises where the irrigation system is
located, provided, however, that no irrigation system shall be used on
any premises more than three days in any one calendar week:
(1) Premises with odd-number addresses, on odd-number calendar
days.
(2) Premises with even-number addresses, on even-number calendar
days.
(3) Premises with no address number or multiple-number addresses,
including odd and even numbers, on even-number calendar days.
E. Exemptions.
(1) Any owner or occupant of premises who seeks an exemption as
provided in Subsection C hereof shall file with the Authority a
signed, written application for such exemption, including the
following:
(a) The address of the premises.
(b) The name of the manufacturer, model or other specific
identification of the control devices, to the extent known.
(c) Permission for a representative of the Authority to perform
such investigation as may be appropriate to ascertain and
confirm whether the control device cannot be set to conform to
the requirements of Subsection C hereof.
(2) Such exemption, if approved, shall continue until the control device
is removed or replaced and may be renewed for so long as such
control device continues to be used for the said irrigation system.
No such control device shall be removed or replaced unless the
§ 225-4 WATER § 225-4
225:549
§ 225-5. Sensors required.
§ 225-6. Penalties for offenses.
new or replacement control device can conform to the
requirements of Subsection C hereof and, upon the installation
of such new or replacement control device, said exemption shall
terminate without any further action by the Authority or the
Village. In the event of any such replacement or removal, the owner
of the control device promptly shall advise the Village Clerk and the
Authority. As used in this subsection, the term "removal" shall not
include temporary removal for purposes of repair.
(3) Upon the approval by the Authority of an exemption upon
application as provided in this section, the owner or occupant of the
premises for which such exemption is approved shall file a copy of
such approval with the Village Clerk and upon such filing the
exemption shall be applicable as provided in this section.
A. On or after April 15, 1995, no person shall use an irrigation system in
the Village with any type of device which automatically turns the system
on and/or off unless such irrigation system is controlled by a properly
working sensor.
B. In the event that the Village has reasonable cause to believe that an
irrigation system is not controlled by a properly working sensor as
required by this article, notice by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, shall be given to the owner and/or tenant of the
premises where such irrigation system is located or to the person under
whose name the account for such water is listed with the Authority,
requiring that the owner and/or tenant submit a certification, in a form
supplied by the Village, that an irrigation system is controlled by a
properly working sensor as required by this article or that an irrigation
system does not exist on the property. The failure of such owner to
submit the required certification within 15 days of the mailing of said
notice shall be punishable as a violation. A false statement in such
certification shall be punishable as provided in the Penal Law for a false
statement made under oath.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, permit or allow any
violation of this article on any premises in the Village.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punishable
as provided for violations of this Village Code.126 Each violation of each
provision of this article shall be deemed a separate offense and each
such offense subject to punishment as provided in this Code. Each day
that a violation of the same provision of this article continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, General Penalty.
§ 225-4 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 225-6
225:550
C. Any Judge or Justice who imposes sentence upon any person for
violating any provision of this article may require, as a condition of
probation or as a condition of discharge, pursuant to Penal Law § 65.10,
that any such person who has or uses a fixed-in-place irrigation system
shall modify such irrigation system by installing, at such person's sole
cost and expense, a separate waterline and water meter for such
system.
§ 225-6 WATER § 225-6
225:551

ARTICLE II
Drilling, Digging or Tapping into Water Sources
[Adopted 12-12-1994 by L.L. No. 7-1994 (Ch. 126, Art. II, of the
1981 Code)]
§ 225-7. Legislative findings.
The State Legislature heretofore has found that the potable water for the
northern portion of the Great Neck peninsula is derived from aquifers
which are the sole source of water for all of Long Island and that the
issues of contamination and conservation of the aquifers and the need
to better manage the groundwater system on the Great Neck peninsula,
which had been operated by a private utility in 1985, are of statewide
concern. By reason thereof, the State Legislature heretofore created the
Water Authority of Great Neck North ("Authority"), with the purposes of
protecting, preserving and enhancing the quality and quantity of the water
within the Authority's supply area, and to serve as a model and leader
for other water suppliers to better manage, conserve and protect the
groundwaters within and outside their respective supply areas. After
investigating water conservation, regulation and management programs,
the Authority has recommended that all of the municipalities within, or
partially within, the Water Authority of Great Neck North District adopt
regulations prohibiting drilling, digging or tapping into any aquifers or
other subsurface source of water, in order to avoid the possibility of
contamination to the aquifer systems, pumping which could adversely affect
salt water intrusion into the public supply wells, and unregulated
overpumping which could adversely deplete supply facilities and affect the
delicate balance of pumping from public supply wells. Upon review of such
proposed water conservation measures, the Board of Trustees hereby finds
and determines that it would be in the best interest of the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Village to adopt the regulations contained
in this article.
§ 225-8. Permit required; exceptions.
No person, firm or entity shall drill, dig or tap into any aquifer or other
subsurface source of water within the Village without having first obtained
a permit from the Board of Trustees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
permit for such activity shall be required where such activity is conducted
by the Water Authority of Great Neck North or the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
§ 225-9. Permit procedure; revocation.
A. A permit may be granted by the Board of Trustees to authorize drilling,
digging or tapping into an aquifer or other subsurface source of water
within the Village only upon written application, demonstrating the
need for such activity. Each such application shall be accompanied by
the written consent of the Water Authority of Great Neck North. Such
application for permit may be granted only upon a finding that the
§ 225-7 WATER § 225-9
225:553
proposed activity will not have a substantial adverse effect upon the
water supply, or the quality or quantity of water.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Board of Trustees may grant such
an application for permit in an appropriate case without the approval of
the Water Authority of Great Neck North, after a public hearing on the
application for such permit. Notice of such hearing shall be given in the
same manner as required for adoption of a local law, and written notice
of which shall also be given to the Water Authority of Great Neck North
at least 10 days prior to the date of the said public hearing. Such
application for permit may be granted without the approval of the
Water Authority of Great Neck North only upon a finding that the
proposed activity will not have a substantial adverse effect upon the
water supply or the quality or quantity of water, and upon a finding that
failure to approve such permit will cause unusual hardship to the
applicant.
C. Any permit granted pursuant to this article may be made subject to
reasonable conditions imposed thereon by the Board of Trustees, and
may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Trustees in the event of
noncompliance with any of the said conditions.
§ 225-9 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 225-9
225:554
Chapter 230
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and plumbing — See
Ch. 95.
Development of filled-in land — See Ch. 113.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 126.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 129.
Property maintenance (housing
standards) — See Ch. 167.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194.
§ 225-9 WATER § 225-9
225:555

ARTICLE I
Title and Definitions
§ 230-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Building Zone
Ordinance of the Village of Great Neck Estates."
§ 230-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular.
B. Definitions. Certain words of this chapter are defined for the purpose
thereof as follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — Includes every building devoted solely to an
accessory use.
ACCESSORY USE — Includes every use customarily incident to the
principal building or use, and includes all of the uses specified as
accessory in this chapter.
ALTERATION — As applied to any building or structure, means any
change or rearrangement in the structural parts or exterior wall or
framework of existing facilities. It includes any enlargement, whether
by extending any side, front or rear building line, or by increasing any
height, or by moving from one location or position to another. It also
includes the enclosure of a space previously open.
BASEMENT — That space of a building or structure which is partially
below grade, more than 50% of the height of which space, measured
from finished slab to the finished floor next above, is above the mean
ground level."[Added 1-17-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
BOUNDARY STREET — Any public street or private street or way now
or hereafter existing situated upon or adjoining the boundary line of the
Village or any part thereof, whether such street or way is situated in
whole or in part within or without the Village.
BUILDING — Any structure or combination of structures above or
below the surface of the ground, except a wall or fence four feet or
less in height. It includes a swimming pool and includes a wall or fence
more than four feet in height and a combined wall and fence whose
total height is more than four feet.[Amended 3-1-1965 by Ord. No.
104]
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal crosssectional
area of the buildings on a lot, including swimming pools,
and excluding freestanding walls or fences, cornices, eaves, gutters or
chimneys projecting not more than 18 inches, steps, one-story open
porches, bay windows not extending through more than one story
§ 230-1 WATER § 230-2
225:557
and not projecting more than five feet, balconies and terraces.[Added
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
CELLAR — That space of a building or structure which is partially
or entirely below grade, at least 50% of the height of which space,
measured from finished slab to the finished floor above, is below the
mean ground level.[Added 1-17-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The materials, written and/or graphic,
including but not limited to maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports
and other descriptive material that identify the goals, objectives,
principles, guidelines, policies, standards, devices and instruments for
the immediate and long-range protection, enhancement, growth and
development of the Village.[Added 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
CORNER LOT — A parcel of land at the junction of two or more
intersecting streets.
DEPTH OF A LOT — The mean distance from the street line of a lot to
its rear line, measured in the general or average direction of the side
lines of the lot.
DWELLING — A place of abode of one or more families. It does not
include a house coach or a trailer used or designed to be used in
conjunction with a motor vehicle.
ENTRANCE TO THE VILLAGE — So much of a street entering the
Village as lies between the intersection of such street with the side lines
of a boundary street and a line within the Village parallel with the side
of such boundary street and situated 100 feet distant therefrom. Where
a street intersects an entrance to the Village, that portion of such street
shall also be included within the meaning of the term "entrance to the
Village" which lies between the intersection of such entrance to the
Village with a boundary street and a line within the Village parallel
with the side of such boundary street and situated 100 feet distant
therefrom.
FAMILY — One or more persons, including household servants, living
and cooking together in a unit which is the functional and factual
equivalent of a traditional permanent family unit, having the
cohesiveness of a traditional family, and which does not include any
transients, boarders or persons in a temporary living arrangement. The
term "family" shall also include any housekeeping unit defined by state
law as a single-family residential use. Where there is more than one
kitchen in a dwelling, other than a kitchen used exclusively by or for
servants, it shall be presumed that the dwelling is occupied by more
than one family.[Amended 11-16-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
FENCE — An enclosure, barrier or boundary made of posts, boards,
wires, stakes, rails, plastic, chain link mesh or similar type materials,
including landscaping, which prohibits or inhibits unrestricted travel or
view between properties or portions of properties or between the street
or public right-of-way and a property.[Added 4-12-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004]
§ 230-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-2
225:558
FINISHED GRADE LEVEL — The level of the completed surface of
the lawn, walk, driveway, patio or terrace at the point of
measurement.[Added 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross areas of the several floors of all
principal and accessory buildings on a lot, measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls. "Floor area" shall not include cellar space,
but shall include:[Added 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; amended
11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002; 1-17-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The total floor area of all buildings on the
lot, including accessory buildings, divided by the total lot area.[Added
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
FRONT BUILDING LINE — A line across the full width of the lot parallel
with the street line, as nearly as may be, and passing through the wall
of the principal building nearest the street. It is not necessarily the
front of the house, nor does it necessarily contain the main entrance to
the house.
FRONT YARD — A yard situated on the same lot as a principal building
or use, situated between the street line and the nearest wall of the
principal building. In the case of a lot adjoining two or more streets,
whether such streets intersect or not, the yard on each street is a front
yard.
GROUND LEVEL — The level of the ground in its natural state or the
level of the finished grade, whichever is more restrictive, at the point
of measurement. The "mean ground level" is the average elevation of
the ground level measured at ten-foot intervals along the entire area
being measured and is not the mean between the highest and lowest
points.[Amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
HEIGHT OF A BUILDING — The vertical distance, in the case of flat
roofs, from the mean ground level along the foundation of the building
to the highest point of the roof. In the case of pitched roofs, it is
(1) Basement space;
Floor space of each story above the basement and below the attic,
whether or not floor has been installed, that provides structural
headroom of eight feet or more;
(2)
That portion of attic space that provides structural headroom of
seven feet or more;
(3)
(4) Floor space in interior balconies and lofts;
Floor space in roofed terraces, and exterior balconies or porches,
if more than 50% of the perimeter thereof is enclosed in whole or
in part, but not including any portion thereof enclosed by a parapet
having a height not more than three feet eight inches or a railing
open more than 50% and having a height not more than three feet
eight inches.
(5)
§ 230-2 WATER § 230-2
225:559
measured to a point halfway between the eaves and the peak of the
highest gable.
HEIGHT:SETBACK RATIO — A calculation designed to regulate the
height of buildings in relation to setbacks. It is essentially in the form of
an inclined plane beginning at the mean ground level of the portion of
the lot line nearest the building (as demonstrated in the illustration set
forth hereinafter) and rising toward the building at the ratio specified in
this chapter. For the purposes of this calculation, and to accommodate
building on sloping sites, the mean ground level of said portion of the
lot line shall not be increased or decreased more than five feet relative
to the mean ground level at the foundation of that wall of the building.
No part of any building or structure, other than minor architectural
features such as chimneys, skylights, dormer windows, etc., shall be
permitted to extend above said plane.[Added 9-12-1994 by L.L. No.
5-1994; amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — All buildings, as defined herein, as well
as all areas on the ground or elevated above the ground which are
comprised of materials through which water cannot flow, such as
asphalt, concrete, masonry or wood. The term "impervious surface"
includes artificial or natural materials or structures, such as pavement,
roads, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots and rooftops that are covered
by impenetrable materials such as asphalt, concrete, brick, or stone,
and soil or other materials which are highly compacted. A surface
composed in part of impenetrable material is considered to be
impervious, whether or not rainfall, snowfall or water can infiltrate
through such surface.[Added 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
amended 10-10-2016 by L.L. No. 9-2016]
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or designed to be occupied by one
main building or use and the accessory buildings or uses customarily
incident to it, including such open spaces as are arranged or designed
to be used in connection with such building or use. It includes the word
§ 230-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-2
225:560
"plot." A lot may or may not be the land shown as a separate parcel on a
duly filed map, sales map or developer's diagram. All adjoining parcels
of property now or hereafter held in common ownership, regardless
of the nature of the constituent parcels or the date, source or manner
of acquisition, shall be deemed merged into a single lot and shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as if it had
constituted a single lot at the date this chapter was adopted.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE — One that does not conform
to the regulations now or hereafter in force applying to the district in
which it is situated.
PREEXISTING NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE — A
nonconforming building or use which, at the time the building was
constructed or altered, or the use commenced, or at a later date,
conformed with the regulations applying to the district in which it was
situated and which became a nonconforming building or use solely
because of the original adoption of the Building Zone Ordinance, or the
subsequent adoption of an amendment to such ordinance, or a change
in district boundaries.
PRIVATE GARAGE — A building used for the storage of one or more
motor vehicles owned or used by the owner or tenant of the lot on which
it is erected for a purpose accessory to the use of the lot.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building, other than a private garage, used for
the storage of motor vehicles.
REAR BUILDING LINE — A line across the full width of a lot parallel
with the rear line of a lot, as nearly as may be, and passing through the
wall of the principal building nearest the rear line of the lot. In the case
of a lot adjoining two or more streets which do not intersect, there is
ordinarily no rear building line.
REAR YARD — A yard on the same lot as the principal building or use,
situated between the rear line of the lot and the nearest wall of the
principal building.
REAR YARD — A yard on the same lot as the principal building or use,
situated between the rear line of the lot and the nearest wall of the
principal building.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is: [Added 4-12-2004
by L.L. No. 1-2004]
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
§ 230-2 WATER § 230-2
225:561
REQUIRED YARD — The portion of the yard lying within the minimum
limits provided by this chapter for the district in which the lot is
situated.
RETAINING WALL — A structure erected between lands of different
elevation to prevent the washing down or erosion of earth from the
upper slope level and/or to support an earthen bank.[Added
4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
SIDE BUILDING LINE — A line from the front building line to the rear
building line (or, in case there is no rear building line, from one front
building line to the other) on each side of the lot passing through the
side wall of the principal building.
SIDE YARD — A yard on the same lot as the principal building, situated
between the side line of the lot and the nearest wall of the building and
bounded by the front and rear building lines.
STORY — That part of a building included between any floor and the
floor next above it, or if there is no floor above, the ceiling or flat roof
above. In computing the number of stories, any story the ceiling of
which is more than seven feet above the mean ground level along the
foundation of the building shall be deemed the first story.[Amended
11-14-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
STORY, HALF — A story under a sloping roof having a pitch of not
more than 1.5 vertical to 1.0 horizontal, the floor of which is not more
than two feet below the top of plate.[Added 11-14-2006 by L.L. No.
11-2006]
STREET — Includes a public or private highway, road, avenue, lane or
alley and any and all proposed streets shown on any Official Map or
Comprehensive Plan of the Village or any amendment or modification
thereof now or hereafter adopted by the Board of Trustees or the
Planning Board of the Village.
STREET ENTERING THE VILLAGE — Any public or private street
or way in the Village now or hereafter existing which intersects a
boundary street.
STREET FRONTAGE — In the case of an interior lot, the distance
between the points where the side lines of the lot intersect the side line
of the street which the lot adjoins. In the case of a corner lot, it is the
distance between the point where either side line of the lot intersects
the side line of the street and the point where the side lines of the
streets intersect each other. Where the side line of the street is not a
straight line, the street frontage shall be measured along a traverse line
connecting the points above stated. In determining the street frontage
of a corner lot, the frontage on the street not selected shall not be taken
into account.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 230-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-2
225:562
STREET LINE — A dividing line between a lot and the side line of a
street. Where the lot adjoins a public street it is ordinarily the property
line.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
use, occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of land or water, except that this term shall not include
a driveway, sidewalk or path located directly on the surface of land
and not protruding above that surface.[Added 4-12-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
TRANSIENT DWELLING UNIT — A property or dwelling unit occupied
for residential use or habitation, including all single-family and twofamily
residences, apartments or other dwelling units, by one or more
persons who are not the owner or a family member of the owner of
such property or unit, and for which rent or other compensation of
value is received by the owner and/or paid by the occupant, directly
or indirectly, in exchange for such occupancy, for a period of less
than eight consecutive days. The term "transient dwelling unit" shall
not include any lawfully operating commercial hotel/motel business
establishment operating exclusively for and catering to transient
clientele. The presence of one or more of the following factors shall
create a presumption that a property or dwelling unit is being used as
a transient dwelling unit: the property or dwelling unit is offered for
occupancy on a short-term rental website, such as Airbnb, Home Away,
VRBO or similar websites, or the property or dwelling unit is offered for
occupancy in any medium as being available for occupancy for a period
of less than eight days. The foregoing presumption may be rebutted
by documentary or other evidence presented to and satisfactory to the
Building Inspector that the dwelling unit is not a transient dwelling
unit.[Added 10-10-2016 by L.L. No. 8-2016]
WALL OF A BUILDING — The exterior bearing wall or structure
supporting any part of the building extending more than two feet above
or more than three feet below the ground level. An exterior chimney is
deemed part of the wall whether or not it supports any other part of the
building or structure. Attention is called to the provisions of § 230-21,
which prohibits structures in the required yards whether or not they
constitute part of the wall of the principal building.
WIDTH OF A LOT — The mean distance from side line to side line of
a lot, measured in the general or average direction of the front or rear
lines of the lot.
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as the principal
building or use, which is open and unobstructed from the ground to
the sky except by trees, shrubbery, telephone or electric light wires and
poles, hedges, retaining walls and fences six feet or less in height.
§ 230-2 WATER § 230-2
225:563

ARTICLE II
Building Zone Districts
§ 230-3. Establishment of districts; map. [Amended 4-5-1965 by
Ord. No. 105]
§ 230-4. Conformance with district regulations required.
No building or part of a building shall be erected, altered or used except in
conformity with the regulations herein prescribed for the district in which
such building is located. No premises shall be used for any purpose other
than a purpose permitted in the district in which such premises is located.
§ 230-5. Minimum requirements as to lots sold, divided or set off.
No lot shall be sold, divided or set off in such a manner that either the
portion sold, divided or set off, or the portion remaining:
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the Village of Great Neck Estates is
hereby divided into the following classes of districts designated as
follows: [Amended 2-14-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
Residence A District
Residence B District
Residence BB District
Residence BC Intermediate District
Residence C District
Business D District
B. Such districts are as shown on the Zoning Map which accompanies this
chapter and which is hereby declared to be a part hereof, as the same
has been or may hereafter be amended.127 The districts designated on
said map are hereby established.
A. Shall be less than the minimum size prescribed by the regulations
relating to the district in which it is situated; or
B. Shall fail to provide the yards or other open spaces required by the
regulations relating to the district in which it is situated in respect to
any building or use then existing; or
C. Shall fail to provide the minimum building area required by the
regulations relating to the district in which it is situated in respect to
any building or use then existing; or
D. Shall contain any building or use not permitted by the provisions of this
chapter; or
127. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk, where it is
available for inspection and use during regular office hours.
§ 230-3 WATER § 230-5
225:565
§ 230-6. Uses prohibited in all districts. [Added 4-8-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
No building or premises in any district of the Village shall be used, and no
building shall be erected or altered, for or in furtherance of:
§ 230-7. Residence A District.
In the Residence A District the following regulations shall apply:
E. Shall fail to have the street frontage required by the regulations
relating to the district in which the lot or any part thereof is situated;
or
F. Shall directly or indirectly violate any of the terms or conditions
heretofore or hereafter imposed by the Board of Appeals in granting a
variance or special exception under the provisions of this chapter or
upon an appeal under the provisions of the Village Law;
unless the portion which fails to comply with the foregoing
requirements is added to and becomes part of an adjoining lot in such
a way that the adjoining lot, as so enlarged, complies with all of such
requirements.
A. The sale, dispensing, or consumption of any good, substance, material
or product, whether as a principal, primary, accessory, incidental or
ancillary use of the building or premises, in violation of any law, rule or
regulation of the United States or the State of New York, or of any other
governmental body having jurisdiction over such activity or property.
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "dispensing" shall include,
without limitation, the preparation or physical delivery of, but not the
issuance of an order, authorization or prescription for, a good,
substance, material or product.
A. Uses. No building shall be erected, altered or used and no lot or
premises shall be used except for one of the following purposes:
[Amended 10-5-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981; 2-14-2004 by L.L. No.
2-2005; 1-6-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014; 3-14-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
(1) A dwelling for not more than one family.
(2) Municipal parks, municipal playgrounds and municipal
recreational areas and buildings accessory thereto.
(3) Governmental and municipal purposes, including Village Hall,
police booths, sheds and other facilities for the storage of Village
vehicles, equipment and supplies, municipal docks and landings.
(4) School buildings owned, operated and maintained by a duly
constituted school district.
§ 230-5 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-7
225:566
(5) Uses accessory to the principal use to which such building, lot or
premises is devoted, subject to the conditions and regulations set
forth in § 230-16 of this chapter and subject to any additional
conditions and regulations applicable to specific classes of
accessory uses, including the following:
(a) If lawfully existing on January 1, 2016, the office of a person
practicing one of the professions enumerated in § 230-17 who
occupies as a principal residence the principal dwelling on the
property where such office is situated.
[1] No such use lawfully existing pursuant to this subsection
may continue on or after July 1, 2016, unless the owner of
the property where such use is claimed to exist shall
register such use with the Village Clerk on or before July 1,
2016, on a form to be provided by such Clerk. Such
registration shall include the full name and other
identifying information of the owner of such property and
each professional and employee engaged in the conduct of
such use. In the event such use is not registered as
required by this subsection, it shall be presumed that use
commenced on or after January 1, 2016, and such use shall
be unlawful and shall be discontinued. [Amended
4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
[2] In the event there shall be any change in the owner,
professional or employee(s) registered as owning such
property or engaging in such use, the owner of the
property on which such use is being conducted shall notify
the Village Clerk, in writing, 15 days after such change
and provide current updated information for such
registration.
(b) A private garage.
(c) Real estate signs, advertising only the premises on which they
are maintained, for sale, lease or rental.
(d) A fence or wall, including a retaining wall.
(e) A private swimming pool limited to the personal use of the
family of the owner or occupant of the principal building or
establishment and their house servants and guests.
(f) Living quarters may be permitted in lawful accessory
buildings, including garages, only for the full-time servant or
servants of the occupant(s) of the principal building, employed
only to provide services in the principal residence. Living
quarters so occupied may include separate housekeeping units
for such servants. Such living quarters shall not be occupied by
any person other than such full-time servant or servants.
§ 230-7 WATER § 230-7
225:567
[1] No occupancy of living quarters in an accessory building
shall commence or be established on or after January 1,
2014, without a special use permit from the Board of
Trustees.
[2] On or before February 1, 2014, the owner of any property
where living quarters exist in any accessory building on
December 31, 2013, shall register such living quarters
with the Village Clerk, and such registration shall include
the full name and other identifying information of each
occupant of such living quarters and the status of each
such occupant which entitles such occupant to reside in
such living quarters. In the event a living quarters is not
registered as required by this subsection, the right to
continue any use of the accessory building for such living
quarters shall terminate on February 1, 2014, unless a
special use permit is obtained from the Board of Trustees.
In the event any use of an accessory building for living
quarters claimed to exist on December 31, 2013, is not
registered as required by this section, it shall be presumed
that use commenced on or after January 1, 2014, and the
continuation or resumption of such occupancy or use shall
require a special permit pursuant to this section.
[3] In the event of any change in the persons occupying any
living quarters in an accessory building, the owner of the
property on which such building is located shall notify the
Village Clerk within 10 days of such change, including the
name of each person who no longer resides in such
accessory building and the name, other identifying
information and status of each person who has
commenced residency in such building.
[4] In the event the owner of property on which living quarters
are located in an accessory building fails to register
pursuant to this section on or before February 1, 2014, the
right to continue or resume use of such living quarters
shall terminate on such date. Thereafter, no occupancy of
such accessory building for living quarters shall be
permitted without a special use permit from the Board
Trustees.
B. Height. No building having a pitched roof shall be erected or altered
which is higher than 2 1/2 stories and 33 feet. No building having a flat
roof shall be erected or altered which is higher than two stories and 24
feet. The minimum incline qualifying as a pitched roof shall be six
inches in vertical rise for every 12 inches of horizontal distance (6:12).
In addition, the maximum vertical dimension from the mean ground
level to the uppermost front eave shall not exceed 20 feet. [Amended
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
11-14-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
§ 230-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-7
225:568
C. Size of lot. Minimum lot size 19,360 square feet. No principal building or use, together with its accessory
buildings or uses, shall be erected upon or shall occupy a lot or piece of
ground having an area of less than 19,360 square feet.
D. Building area. No principal building, together with its accessory
buildings, shall occupy in the aggregate more than 20% of the area of
the lot. The total area occupied by accessory buildings shall not exceed
7% of the area of the lot. [Amended 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
E. Front yards. Where two or more buildings exist on the same side of the
street with, and within 200 feet of, any part of a lot on which
construction or alteration of a building is proposed, the front building
line of the building which is proposed to be constructed or altered shall
conform substantially to those of such existing buildings, except that no
such building proposed to be constructed or altered need be set back
more than 50 feet from the street line, and no such building proposed to
be constructed or altered shall have its front wall nearer to the street
line than 30 feet. [Amended 2-14-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
F. Rear yards. The minimum distance between the rear line and the rear
wall of the building at any point shall not be less than the height of the
wall at such point, but in no event less than 30.0 feet plus an additional
0.25 foot for each foot or part thereof by which the depth of the lot
exceeds 100 feet. [Amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
G. Side yards. Except in the case of a corner lot, two side yards shall be
provided on each lot, each of which shall be at least 22 feet, and the
aggregate of which shall be at least 45 feet plus an additional 0.4 foot
for each foot or part thereof by which the width of the lot exceeds 110
feet. [Amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
H. Street frontage. No building shall be erected on a lot having a street
frontage of less than 110 feet. No lot shall have a street frontage less
than 90%, nor more than 110%, of the width of the lot at the rear lot
line. [Amended 5-8-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
I. Floor area ratio (FAR). [Added 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
(1) The FAR shall not require a lot in the A District to have a gross floor
area (GFA) less than 6,000 square feet. The FAR standards shall be
as follows:
Lot Size
(square feet)
Maximum
FAR
Maximum GFA Permitted
(square feet)
20,500 and under 0.33 6,000 - 6,765
20,501 - 22,000 0.32 6,766 - 7,040
22,001 - 23,500 0.31 7,041 - 7,285
23,501 - 25,000 0.30 7,286 - 7,500
25,001 - 30,000 0.29 7,501 - 8,700
§ 230-7 WATER § 230-7
225:569
§ 230-8. Residence B District.
In the Residence B District the following regulations shall apply:
Lot Size
(square feet)
Maximum
FAR
Maximum GFA Permitted
(square feet)
Over 30,000 0.28 Over 8,700, but not to exceed
9,000
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, for a
non-corner lot where the depth of the lot is more than two times the
width of the lot, the portion of the lot area located farther than two
times the width of the lot from the street line shall be reduced by
15% in computing the maximum gross floor area permitted for the
lot. Also see § 230-37 of this chapter. [Added 11-14-2002 by L.L.
No. 2-2002]
J. Height:setback ratio. The height:setback ratio for the front, side and
rear yards shall not exceed 0.8, 1.2 and 0.8, respectively. [Added
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005]
A. Uses. No building shall be erected, altered or used and no lot or
premises shall be used except for one of the purposes permitted in the
Residence A District.
B. Height. No building having a pitched roof shall be erected or altered
which is higher than 2 1/2 stories and 33 feet. No building having a flat
roof shall be erected or altered which is higher than two stories and 24
feet. The minimum incline qualifying as a pitched roof shall be six
inches in vertical rise for every 12 inches of horizontal distance (6:12).
In addition, the maximum vertical dimension from the mean ground
level to the uppermost front eave shall not exceed 20 feet. [Amended
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
11-14-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
C. Size of lot. Minimum lot size 12,900 square feet. No principal building or use, together with its accessory
buildings, shall be erected upon or shall occupy a lot or piece of ground
having an area of less than 12,900 square feet.
D. Building area. No principal building, together with its accessory
buildings, shall occupy in the aggregate more than 22% of the area of
the lot. The total area occupied by accessory buildings shall not exceed
7% of the area of the lot. [Amended 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
E. Front yards. Where two or more buildings exist on the same side of the
street with, and within 200 feet of, any part of a lot on which
construction or alteration of a building is proposed, the front building
line of the building which is proposed to be constructed or altered shall
conform substantially to those of such existing buildings, except that no
§ 230-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-8
225:570
such building proposed to be constructed or altered need be set back
more than 50 feet from the street line, and no such building proposed
to be constructed or altered shall have its front wall nearer to the street
line than 30 feet. [Amended 2-14-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
F. Rear yards. The minimum distance between the rear line and the rear
wall of the building at any point shall not be less than the height of the
wall at such point, but in no event less than 30.0 feet plus an additional
0.25 foot for each foot or part thereof by which the depth of the lot
exceeds 100 feet. [Amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
G. Side yards. Except in the case of a corner lot, two side yards shall be
provided on each lot, each of which shall be at least 15 feet, and the
aggregate of which shall be at least 35 feet plus an additional 0.4 foot
for each foot or part thereof by which the width of the lot exceeds 90
feet. [Amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
H. Street frontage. No building shall be erected on a lot having a street
frontage of less than 90 feet. No lot shall have a street frontage less
than 90%, nor more than 110%, of the width of the lot at the rear lot
line. [Amended 5-8-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
I. Floor area ratio (FAR). [Added 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994;
amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
(1) The FAR shall not require a lot in the B District to have a gross floor
area (GFA) less than 4,700 square feet. The FAR standards shall be
as follows:
Lot Size
(square feet)
Maximum
FAR
Maximum GFA Permitted
(square feet)
14,000 and under 0.37 4,700 - 5,180
14,001 - 15,500 0.36 5,181 - 5,580
15,501 - 17,000 0.35 5,581 - 5,950
17,001 - 18,500 0.34 5,951 - 6,290
18,501 - 20,000 0.33 6,291 - 6,600
Over 20,000 0.32 Over 6,600, but not to exceed
8,250
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, for a
non-corner lot where the depth of the lot is more than two times the
width of the lot, the portion of the lot area located farther than two
times the width of the lot from the street line shall be reduced by
15% in computing the maximum gross floor area permitted for the
lot. Also see § 230-37 of this chapter.
J. Height:setback ratio. The height:setback ratio for the front, side and
rear yards shall not exceed 0.8, 1.4 and 0.8, respectively. [Added
§ 230-8 WATER § 230-8
225:571
§ 230-9. Residence BB District.
In the Residence BB District the following regulations shall apply:
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005]
A. Uses. No building shall be erected, altered or used and no lot or
premises shall be used except for one of the purposes permitted in the
Residence A District.
B. Height. No building having a pitched roof shall be erected or altered
which is higher than 2 1/2 stories and 33 feet. No building having a flat
roof shall be erected or altered which is higher than two stories and 24
feet. The minimum incline qualifying as a pitched roof shall be six
inches in vertical rise for every 12 inches of horizontal distance (6:12).
In addition, the maximum vertical dimension from the mean ground
level to the uppermost front eave shall not exceed 20 feet. [Amended
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
11-14-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
C. Size of lot. Minimum lot size 10,000 square feet. No principal building or use, together with its accessory
buildings or uses, shall be erected upon or shall occupy a lot or piece of
ground having an area of less than 10,000 square feet.
D. Building area. No principal building, together with its accessory
buildings, shall occupy in the aggregate more than 23% of the area of
the lot. The total area occupied by accessory buildings shall not exceed
7% of the area of the lot. [Amended 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
E. Front yards. Where two or more buildings exist on the same side of the
street with, and within 200 feet of, any part of a lot on which
construction or alteration of a building is proposed, the front building
line of the building which is proposed to be constructed or altered shall
conform substantially to those of such existing buildings, except that no
such building proposed to be constructed or altered need be set back
more than 50 feet from the street line, and no such building proposed to
be constructed or altered shall have its front wall nearer to the street
line than 30 feet. [Amended 2-14-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
F. Rear yards. The minimum distance between the rear line and the rear
wall of the building at any point shall not be less than the height of the
wall at such point, but in no event less than 30.0 feet plus an additional
0.25 foot for each foot or part thereof by which the depth of the lot
exceeds 100 feet. [Amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
G. Side yards. Except in the case of a corner lot, two side yards shall be
provided on each lot, each of which shall be at least 15 feet, and the
aggregate of which shall be at least 30 feet plus an additional 0.4 foot
for each foot or part thereof by which the width of the lot exceeds 80
feet. [Amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
§ 230-8 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-9
225:572
§ 230-10. Residence BC Intermediate District.
In the Residence BC Intermediate District the following regulations shall
apply:
H. Street frontage. No building shall be erected on a lot having a street
frontage of less than 80 feet. No lot shall have a street frontage less
than 90%, nor more than 110%, of the width of the lot at the rear lot
line. [Amended 5-8-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
I. Floor area ratio (FAR). [Added 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994;
amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
(1) The FAR shall not require a lot in the BB District to have a gross
floor area (GFA) less than 3,900 square feet. The FAR standards
shall be as follows:
Lot Size
(square feet) Maximum FAR
Maximum GFA
Permitted
(square feet)
10,500 and under 0.40 3,900 - 4,200
10,501 - 12,000 0.39 4,201 - 4,680
12,001 - 13,500 0.38 4,681 - 5,130
13,501 - 15,000 0.37 5,131 - 5,550
Over 15,000 0.36 Over 5,550, but not to
exceed 7,400
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, for a
non-corner lot where the depth of the lot is more than two times the
width of the lot, the portion of the lot area located farther than two
times the width of the lot from the street line shall be reduced by
15% in computing the maximum gross floor area permitted for the
lot. Also see § 230-37 of this chapter.
J. Height:setback ratio. The height:setback ratio for the front, side and
rear yards shall not exceed 0.8, 1.4 and 0.8, respectively. [Added
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005]
A. Uses. No building shall be erected, altered or used and no lot or
premises shall be used except for one of the purposes permitted in the
Residence A District.
B. Height. No building having a pitched roof shall be erected or altered
which is higher than 2 1/2 stories and 33 feet. No building having a flat
roof shall be erected or altered which is higher than two stories and 24
feet. The minimum incline qualifying as a pitched roof shall be six
inches in vertical rise for every 12 inches of horizontal distance (6:12).
In addition, the maximum vertical dimension from the mean ground
§ 230-9 WATER § 230-10
225:573
level to the uppermost front eave shall not exceed 20 feet. [Amended
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
11-14-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
C. Size of lot. Minimum lot size 8,500 square feet. No principal building or use, together with its accessory
buildings or uses, shall be erected upon or shall occupy a lot or piece of
ground having an area of less than 8,500 square feet.
D. Building area. No principal building, together with its accessory
buildings, shall occupy in the aggregate more than 24% of the area of
the lot. The total area occupied by accessory buildings shall not exceed
7% of the area of the lot. [Amended 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
E. Front yards. Where two or more buildings exist on the same side of the
street with, and within 200 feet of, any part of a lot on which
construction or alteration of a building is proposed, the front building
line of the building which is proposed to be constructed or altered shall
conform substantially to those of such existing buildings, except that no
such building proposed to be constructed or altered need be set back
more than 50 feet from the street line, and no such building proposed to
be constructed or altered shall have its front wall nearer to the street
line than 30 feet. [Amended 2-14-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
F. Rear yards. The minimum distance between the rear line and the rear
wall of the building at any point shall not be less than the height of the
wall at such point, but in no event less than 25.0 feet plus an additional
0.25 foot for each foot or part thereof by which the depth of the lot
exceeds 100 feet." [Amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
G. Side yards. Except in the case of a corner lot, two side yards shall be
provided on each lot, each of which shall be at least 12 feet, and the
aggregate of which shall be at least 25 feet plus an additional 0.4 foot
for each foot or part thereof by which the width of the lot exceeds 70
feet. [Amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
H. Street frontage. No building shall be erected on a lot having a street
frontage of less than 70 feet. No lot shall have a street frontage less
than 90%, nor more than 110%, of the width of the lot at the rear lot
line. [Amended 5-8-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
I. Floor area ratio (FAR). [Added 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994;
amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
(1) The FAR shall not require a lot in the BC District to have a gross
floor area (GFA) less than 3,500 square feet. The FAR standards
shall be as follows:
§ 230-10 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-10
225:574
§ 230-11. Residence C District.
In a Residence C District the following regulations shall apply:
Lot Size
(square feet)
Maximum
FAR
Maximum GFA Permitted
(square feet)
9,000 and under 0.42 3,500 - 3,780
9,001 - 10,500 0.41 3,781 - 4,305
10,501 - 12,000 0.40 4,306 - 4,800
12,001 - 15,000 0.39 4,801 - 5,850
Over 15,000 0.38 Over 5,850, but not to exceed
6,200
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, for a
non-corner lot where the depth of the lot is more than two times the
width of the lot, the portion of the lot area located farther than two
times the width of the lot from the street line shall be reduced by
15% in computing the maximum gross floor area permitted for the
lot. Also see § 230-37 of this chapter.
J. Height:setback ratio. The height:setback ratio for the front, side and
rear yards shall not exceed 0.8, 1.5 and 0.8, respectively. [Added
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005]
A. Uses. No building shall be erected, altered or used and no lot or
premises shall be used except for one of the following purposes:
(1) Uses permitted in a Residence A District.128
B. Height. No building having a pitched roof shall be erected or altered
which is higher than 2 1/2 stories and 33 feet. No building having a flat
roof shall be erected or altered which is higher than two stories and 24
feet. The minimum incline qualifying as a pitched roof shall be six
inches in vertical rise for every 12 inches of horizontal distance (6:12).
In addition, the maximum vertical dimension from the mean ground
level to the uppermost front eave shall not exceed 20 feet. [Amended
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
11-14-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
C. Size of lot. Minimum lot size 6,000 square feet. No principal building or use, together with its accessory
buildings, shall be erected upon or shall occupy a lot or piece of ground
having an area of less than 6,000 square feet.
D. Building area. No principal building or use, together with its accessory
buildings or uses, shall occupy in the aggregate more than 25% of the
128. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), which immediately followed and listed churches
and other places of worship as permitted uses, was repealed 6-12-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006.
For current provisions on religious uses, see § 230-15.
§ 230-10 WATER § 230-11
225:575
area of the lot. The total area occupied by accessory buildings or uses
shall not exceed 7% of the area of the lot.
E. Front yards. Where two or more buildings exist on the same side of the
street with, and within 200 feet on either side of, a proposed or new
building, the front building line of such proposed or new building shall
conform substantially to those of existing buildings, except that no
building need be set back more than 50 feet from the street line, and no
building shall have its front wall nearer to the street line than 20 feet.
These requirements shall also apply to any alteration which affects the
front building line of an existing building.
F. Rear yards. The minimum distance between the rear line and the rear
wall of the building at any point shall not be less than the height of the
wall at such point, but in no event less than 20.0 feet plus an additional
0.25 foot for each foot or part thereof by which the depth of the lot
exceeds 100 feet. [Amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002;
7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
G. Side yards. Except in the case of a corner lot, two side yards shall be
provided on each lot, each of which shall be at least 10 feet, and the
aggregate of which shall be at least 20 feet plus an additional 0.4 foot
for each foot or part thereof by which the width of the lot exceeds 60
feet. [Amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
H. Street frontage. No building shall be erected on a lot having a street
frontage of less than 60 feet. No lot shall have a street frontage less
than 90%, nor more than 110%, of the width of the lot at the rear lot
line. [Amended 5-8-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
I. Floor area ratio (FAR). [Added 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994;
amended 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
(1) The FAR shall not require a lot in the C District to a gross floor area
(GFA) less than 2,700 square feet. The FAR standards shall be as
follows:
Lot Size
(square feet)
Maximum
FAR
Maximum GFA Permitted
(square feet)
7,000 and under 0.44 2,700 - 3,080
7,001 - 8,500 0.43 3,081 - 3,655
8,501 - 10,000 0.42 3,656 - 4,200
Over 10,000 0.41 Over 4,200, but not to exceed
5,200
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, for a
non-corner lot where the depth of the lot is more than two times the
width of the lot, the portion of the lot area located farther than two
times the width of the lot from the street line shall be reduced by
§ 230-11 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-11
225:576
§ 230-12. Business D District. [Amended 5-22-1966 by Ord. No. 108;
6-6-1966 by Ord. No. 109; 8-6-1973 by Ord. No. 131; 5-16-1977 by
L.L. No. 4-1977; 5-16-1977 by L.L. No. 5-1977; 8-6-1979 by L.L. No.
4-1979; 4-5-1982 by L.L. No. 3-1982; 6-7-1982 by L.L. No. 5-1982;
4-2-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
The following regulations shall be applicable in a Business D District:
15% in computing the maximum gross floor area permitted for the
lot. Also see § 230-37 of this chapter.
J. Height:setback ratio. The height:setback ratio for the front, side and
rear yards shall not exceed 1.0, 1.8 and 1.0, respectively. [Added
9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; amended 7-11-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005]
A. Uses. No building shall be erected, altered or used, and no lot or
premises shall be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more of
the following purposes and in accordance with the following
regulations: [Amended 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 11-26-1996
by L.L. No. 12-1996]
(1) Uses permitted as of right:
(a) Governmental or municipal use.129
(b) Retail sales of goods or merchandise (other than food), or
shops for the repair of goods and merchandise, provided that
such use shall not include the fabrication, manufacture,
conversion or alteration of any goods or merchandise except
for sale to a retail consumer, and further provided that such
use shall not include a dry-cleaning establishment. [Amended
4-12-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(c) Personal service establishments, such as a tailor, dressmaker,
barber, beauty salon or health club, but not including a drycleaning
establishment. [Amended 4-12-1999 by L.L. No.
3-1999]
(d) Bank or other financial institution.
(e) Offices for business or professional use, but not medical
offices. [Amended 10-6-2005 by L.L. No. 9-2005]
(f) Art studio or art gallery.
(g) Telephone exchange and telegraph offices.
(h) (Reserved)130
129. Editor's Note: Former § 128-12A(1)(b), regarding schools, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-13-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998.
130. Editor's Note: Former § 230-12A(1)(h) regarding garages was repealed 10-6-2005 by L.L.
No. 9-2005.
§ 230-11 WATER § 230-12
225:577
(i) Off-street parking facilities, provided without charge for
parking in such facilities, and only in conjunction with and
accessory to a lawful use on the same lot or premises.
(2) Conditional uses. The following uses may be conducted with a
permit from the Board of Trustees pursuant to this section:
(a) Bakery, grocery store or delicatessen, including seating for use
of patrons.
(b) Restaurant, for preparation and sale of food to seated patrons
for consumption on the premises. Such use may include use of
the premises for private parties during such hours and times as
the restaurant is authorized to be open. If expressly permitted
by the Board of Trustees, such use may include the incidental
sale of quickly prepared or preprepared foods for consumption
off the premises, or facilities for dancing or other musical or
other entertainment. Such restaurant uses shall also maintain
such other licenses or permits as may be required by law.
(c) A use which, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, is
substantially similar to a use which is expressly permitted or
conditionally permitted by this Code, provided that such use is
not prohibited by this Code pursuant to Subsection A(3) of this
section or otherwise.131
(d) Dry-cleaning establishments. [Added 4-12-1999 by L.L. No.
3-1999]
(e) Medical offices. [Added 10-6-2005 by L.L. No. 9-2005]
(3) Prohibited uses. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, the following uses are expressly prohibited in the Business
D district:
(a) Sale of fresh fish and seafood, except as a department of a
general food store.
(b) Sale of live poultry.
(c) Auction sales.
(d) Sale or exhibition of pets, birds, live fish or animals of any kind.
(e) Animal hospital, veterinary establishment or place for the
boarding, keeping or care of pets, birds or other animals.
131. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2)(d), Public or private elementary or secondary
schools, added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 2-12-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001; provided, however, that any permit heretofore
issued by the Village of Great Neck Estates for an educational use pursuant to such
section shall remain in effect and shall be treated for all purposes as if it had been
granted pursuant to Village Code § 230-15.
§ 230-12 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-12
225:578
(f) Open-front store or other place of business, including any use
where merchandise, goods, articles or food of any kind is sold
or delivered to persons located outdoors within the vicinity of
the building.
(g) Outdoor sale or display of goods or merchandise or food.
(h) Stores or shops or other enterprises for the sale of food or
beverages, which provide or make available any facility
(including, but not limited to, parking or standing space for one
or more motor vehicles) for the consumption of food or
beverages outside the building or structure or for the service
thereof from within the building or structure to the exterior
thereof.
(i) Stores or shops or other establishments [other than a
permitted bakery, grocery store, delicatessen or a use
authorized pursuant to Subsection A(2)(c) of this section] for
the sale of food or beverages primarily for consumption off the
premises, whether or not interior seating facilities are
provided or available.
(j) Outdoor parking of vehicles underneath all or part of a building
or structure or below grade.
(k) Establishment, facility, shop, office, parlor, business or other
nonresidential premises, the primary or ancillary use of which
includes or is intended to include the smoking of tobacco,
vegetable, herbal, or other organic substances on the
premises. Such prohibition shall include smoking of substances
through one or more hookah pipes (also commonly referred to
as a "hookah," "water pipe," "shisha," "narghile" or "bong") or
any other similar equipment or device. [Added 8-6-2014 by
L.L. No. 9-2014]
(l) The sale, dispensing, or consumption of any good, substance,
material or product, whether as a principal, primary, accessory,
incidental or ancillary use of the building or premises, in
violation of any law, rule or regulation of the United States or
the State of New York, or of any other governmental body
having jurisdiction over such activity or property. For the
purposes of this subsection, the term "dispensing" shall not
include the issuance of an order, authorization or prescription
for a good, substance, material or product by a person or entity
duly licensed to issue the same. [Added 1-11-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
(4) Requirements for conditional use permits.
(a) Where the Board of Trustees may authorize a conditional use
pursuant to this section, such use may be approved only upon
written application, on a form provided by the Village, and in
§ 230-12 WATER § 230-12
225:579
accordance with the same procedures as if such application
were for a permit to be issued by the Board of Appeals.
(b) The Board of Trustees may impose reasonable conditions upon
any such permit, including reasonable limitations for the
duration of the permit, the days or hours during which such
conditional use may be conducted and such other conditions as
may be reasonably necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(c) No use which is authorized by a conditional use permit shall be
changed to any other use unless such other use is authorized
pursuant to this section and, if required, a conditional use
permit is obtained for such other use. No use which is
authorized by a conditional use permit may be changed to a
different use of the same character, nor expanded to any other
or different premises, without the approval of the Board of
Trustees pursuant to this section.
(5) Abandonment or discontinuance of conditional uses or preexisting
uses. If any otherwise lawful use of property not authorized by the
current provisions of this chapter is abandoned, such use shall not
thereafter be permitted to resume or commence except in
accordance with the provisions of this section. The discontinuance
of any use for any reason for a period of six months or longer shall
be deemed to be an abandonment of the use, unless the Board of
Trustees determines that the discontinuance was involuntary or
unintentional.
B. Height and depth.
(1) No building shall be erected or altered which is higher than 2 1/2
stories or more than 25 feet, whichever is less, above ground level.
(2) No building shall be erected or altered which is lower than one
story or more than 10 feet, whichever is less, below ground level.
C. Building area. No principal building or use, together with its accessory
buildings, shall occupy in the aggregate more than 75% of the lot at the
curb level. A one-story building may occupy more than 75% of the lot
when authorized as a special exception by the Board of Appeals.
D. Front yards. No building shall be hereafter erected or altered which has
any part of its front wall nearer to the street line than 20 feet, with the
following exceptions:
(1) No front yard is required on Middle Neck Road.
(2) A front yard of a minimum depth of 10 feet is required on Cutter
Mill Road.
E. Rear yards. Every building hereafter erected or altered shall have a
rear yard of a minimum depth of 10 feet.
§ 230-12 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-12
225:580
§ 230-13. Business D Incentive District. [Added 7-14-2003 by L.L.
No. 2-2003]
F. Side yards. No side yards are required in a business district.
G. Sewer. All buildings hereafter constructed shall be connected with a
public sanitary sewer. Disposal of sanitary wastes on the property by
cesspools, tile fields or otherwise is prohibited.
H. Parking spaces. No building shall be constructed or altered or used
unless the parking spaces are provided and maintained as required by
this chapter.
A. In the Business D District, the Board of Trustees may, in its sole
discretion, and after a public hearing held as provided in this section,
change the zoning classification of property in the Business D District to
Business D Incentive District and permit a lot or premises to be
developed and used for Business D Incentive Development as an
incentive use, pursuant to Village Law § 7-703, and for no other use
except as otherwise provided herein. Any such zoning classification also
may include property owned or controlled by the applicant and
extending not more than 60 feet into an adjoining Residence B District.
Where property has been classified as a Business D Incentive District
by the Board of Trustees pursuant to this section, such property may be
used only for the Business D Incentive Zoning Development use
approved by the Board of Trustees and pursuant to the conditions
therein imposed by the Board of Trustees. [Amended 10-5-2011 by
L.L. No. 4-2011]
B. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to give any right or
presumption of right to zoning classification as a Business D Incentive
District property, or to a Business D Incentive Development permit to
any property owner or applicant.
C. No change of zone or incentive use permit shall be issued pursuant to
this section unless the Board of Trustees has made a determination that
such a permit is authorized and warranted under the standards set
forth herein. Such incentive use permit shall not be considered a
special use permit, nor a conditional use permit, for the purposes of
determining the standards to be applied in judicial review of any
determination to deny or grant such a permit, and shall instead be
solely within the discretion of the Board of Trustees.
D. Applications.
(1) An applicant for an incentive use permit for a Business D Incentive
Development permitted by this section shall provide to the Board
such information as would be required of an applicant for a change
of zone, and shall pay all fees required for applications for change
of zone and for incentive use permits.
§ 230-12 WATER § 230-13
225:581
(2) An application for change of zone to Business D Incentive District,
and for an incentive use permit, pursuant to this section shall be
made no later than June 1, 2011 ("deadline date"). An application
for such permit made prior to the deadline date may be amended
after that date, but only with respect to the same property which
was the subject of the initial application. [Amended 4-12-2004 by
L.L. No. 3-2004; 4-11-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
E. Buildings and land in the Business D Incentive District, and used or
developed pursuant to a Business D Incentive Development permit,
shall conform to all requirements for the Business D District, except as
otherwise permitted by this section, and by the incentive use permit
granted pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in
accordance with the conditions stated in any Business D Incentive
Development permit granted by the Board of Trustees, the Board of
Trustees, with respect to property in a Business D Incentive District,
may:
(1) Allow development and use of such property for multiple-family
residences in accordance with the provisions specified in the
Business D Incentive Development permit, subject to the following
restrictions:
The residential units shall be for not more than a one-bedroom
unit, and for two- or three-bedroom units, and the total number
of residential dwelling units shall not exceed one unit for each
530 square feet of area of the lot on which the subject property
is located; [Amended 5-9-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
(a) Minimum lot area per dwelling 530 square feet.
(b) There shall be at least 1.0 parking space for each residential
unit. All such parking spaces, other than a handicapped
parking space, shall be required to have a size at least nine feet
by 18 feet. Handicapped parking spaces shall comply with
applicable legal requirements;
(c) There shall be at least 1.0 parking space for each 380 square
feet of retail area on the property, but in any event there shall
be no less than two parking spaces for retail uses on the
property;
(d) The maximum height of the building shall be 5.0 stories, or 56
feet, whichever is less;
(e) The maximum permitted lot coverage shall be 97.0%;
(f) No front, side or rear yard setbacks from the property line shall
be required;
(g) All retail area at the site shall be at ground level, and the
minimum retail area on the site shall be 26.0% of the lot area;
(h) An access driveway shall have a width of at least 18 feet;
§ 230-13 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-13
225:582
(i) No loading zone shall be necessary; and
(j) The aisle adjacent to a parking space may be no less than 21
feet.
(2) Require the owner of the property, on its own behalf and on behalf
of its successors and assigns, to waive and relinquish any right to
seek or obtain any variance of the zoning regulations or conditions
applicable to such property with respect to the Business D
Incentive Development, whether such variances are sought or
authorized prior to, or subsequent to, the issuance of the incentive
use permit.
F. Further authority of the Board of Trustees. An incentive use permit
authorized by this section may be amended at any time after it is
granted, after written application and a public hearing in the same
manner as provided for the initial incentive use permit, provided that:
(1) No such amendment shall pertain to property other than that which
is the subject of the incentive use permit.
(2) No such amendment shall permit development or use of the subject
property in any manner other than as provided in this section or in
the Business D Incentive District.
G. Provisions for public amenities.
(1) An applicant for an incentive permit for a Business D Incentive
Development may apply for such permit by providing to the Board,
in addition to any other plans for the development of property for
which such permit is proposed, a proposal for the provision of
public amenities, including facilities for public use, and whether by
transfer, gift, lease, easement or otherwise, to the extent that the
same may be acceptable to the Board of Trustees, and feasible and
adequate. The determination whether any such plan is acceptable,
feasible, adequate, or in a form acceptable to the Village, shall rest
in the sole and unfettered discretion of the Board of Trustees.
(2) If the Board of Trustees, after public hearing, finds said plan to be
feasible and acceptable and finds that said plan shall not result in
any additional or excessive expense to the Village, then the Board
of Trustees may grant incentives in the form of permission for an
incentive use authorized by this section.
(3) In connection with the grant of incentive rights under this section,
the Board of Trustees may impose any additional terms and
conditions which it finds necessary and appropriate to effectively
secure for the Village the benefit of one or more community
amenities, or cash in lieu thereof.
H. Public hearing. No incentive use permit shall be granted pursuant to
this section except after a public hearing before the Board of Trustees.
§ 230-13 WATER § 230-13
225:583
§ 230-14. Design districts. [Added 4-12-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
The said public hearing shall be held and conducted in the same
manner as if it were a public hearing on an application to the Board of
Trustees for a change of zone.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to create a procedure by which
the Board of Trustees may designate contiguous lots and buildings in a
nonresidential zoning district as a design district so that a design
development plan may be adopted and implemented so that the
property within that area may be improved in a planned and unified
manner.
B. Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term "design district"
shall mean a zone or zones overlaid over all or a portion of one or more
existing nonresidential zoning districts so that property within any such
overlay zone is subject to a design development plan adopted by the
Board of Trustees of the Village.
C. Design development plans in design districts.
(1) Adoption. The Board of Trustees may, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this section, designate a design district
outside any residential use zoning district and adopt a design
development plan for such design district. Any such district shall
include no less than 60 feet of building frontage comprised either of
contiguous properties or properties facing across a public street or
sidewalk.
(2) Standards. Such a design development plan may be proposed by
the Board of Trustees. Once such a plan has been proposed, the
Board may, after due notice and public hearing, adopt a design
development plan for such district. In developing a design
development plan, the Board shall be governed by the following
standards:
(a) Whenever feasible, existing trees, lawn and shrubs will be
preserved or enhanced so as to maximize green space.
(b) Pedestrian activity will be encouraged in areas where
commerce and public safety make it most desirable.
(c) Whenever feasible, utilities shall be underground.
(d) Building facades will respect the architectural lines of
buildings.
(e) Whenever feasible, stone or masonry will be unpainted.
(f) Buildings will respect the scale of other buildings within the
design district.
§ 230-13 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-14
225:584
(g) One or more elements, such as awning treatment, color
material schemes or lettering style, will provide unity and
continuity within the design district so that the district will
have a coherent and recognizable design character.
(h) The treatment of any signs or attracting devices within the
district will achieve the same or greater levels of performance
and protection as other provisions of this chapter relating to
signs.
(i) The resulting design district will be compatible with adjacent
properties and not excessively similar or dissimilar to other
design districts within the Village so that the result is an
aggregation of compatible yet individual design districts.
(3) Content of plan. A design district plan shall contain at least the
following elements:
(a) A description, including location and design, of improvements,
such as trees, benches, tables, lighting standards, paving and
landscaping, to be located in or over public streets and
sidewalks.
(b) A description and rendering of elements of design units within
such district. Such elements may include but are not limited to
the following:
[1] Signs, including common or coordinated color, texture,
materials and letter schemes.
[2] Awnings and canopies.
[3] Banners.
[4] Lighting.
[5] Landscaping.
[6] Common and coordinated color, material or textural
schemes.
[7] Window displays.
[8] Architectural details.
[9] Attracting devices.
[10] Utilities.
(c) Such plan may consist of detailed drawings, plans and
specifications for design units, as well as written requirements,
but may not require extensive alteration in the structure or
interior of a building within the unit (other than window
displays).
§ 230-14 WATER § 230-14
225:585
(4) Conformity. Within the period specified in the design development
plan for any design district, all design units shall be made to
conform to its requirements. After such conformity has been
achieved, no change in any design unit subject to the plan (except
for normal maintenance), shall be commenced without a permit
issued by the Board of Trustees.
(5) Financing proposal.
(a) The Board of Trustees may, after holding a public hearing,
adopt a financing proposal for any designated design district
for which a design development plan has been adopted. A
financing proposal shall consist of a plan which sets forth those
improvements and decorative enhancements contained in the
design development plan which are to be paid for wholly by the
Village, wholly by benefit assessment or partly by each. The
Board of Trustees shall not adopt a financing proposal until a
public hearing has been held on the financing proposal, and
such hearing shall be held on at least 10 days' notice published
in the Village official newspaper. At any time after the
conclusion of such hearing, the Board of Trustees may adopt
the financing proposal as proposed or as modified by the Board
of Trustees at or after such public hearing.
(b) If the financing proposal provides for payment in whole or part
by benefit assessment, then the Board of Trustees, in adopting
the financing proposal and in apportioning and assessing the
part of the expense to be raised by benefit assessment, shall
conform to the requirements of the Village Law, the relevant
provisions of the Local Finance Law and all other applicable
provisions of law.
(c) In adopting a financing proposal, the Board of Trustees may
include a provision for the Village to acquire, by purchase or by
eminent domain, any real property or interest therein,
including but not limited to surface rights on a storefront for
the connection of any awning and/or the rights to the facade of
any such storefront in any premises located within the design
district. In providing for such acquisition, the Board of
Trustees shall specify the provisions of law pursuant to which
said acquisition shall proceed.
§ 230-14 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-14
225:586
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 230-15. Religious and educational uses. [Added 2-12-2001 by L.L.
No. 1-2001; amended 10-12-2006 by L.L. No. 9-2006]
A. Religious and educational (private elementary and secondary schools)
uses are permitted in the Residence A, Residence B and Business D
Zoning Districts in the Village with the permission of the Board of
Trustees, subject to compliance with the requirements set forth in this
section, and subject to the criteria set forth in this section, to protect
the public health, safety and general welfare.
(1) In granting or modifying a special use permit pursuant to this
section, the Board of Trustees may impose reasonable conditions to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) In granting or modifying a special use permit pursuant to this
section, the Board of Trustees may waive or vary any of the
provisions of Subsection B of this section.
B. In addition to the regulations otherwise applicable to religious and
educational uses pursuant to Subsection A of this section, each
building, structure or premises used for a religious and/or educational
use shall comply with the following conditions and limitations:
(1) Height.
(a) In the Residence A, Residence B and Business D Districts, no
building or structure used for a religious or educational use, or
a permitted accessory use, shall have a height (exclusive of a
steeple or spire) of more than two stories, or 25 feet, above the
grade at the level of each adjoining street, whichever is less.
Also, no steeple or spire on any such building or structure shall
have a height in excess of 20 feet above the top of the roof of
such building.
(b) In the Residence A and Residence B Districts, a pitched roof is
limited to a height of 33 feet above the grade at the level of the
adjoining street.
(2) Building area.
(a) In the Residence A District, the floor area ratio of all buildings
and structures on the lot or premises shall not exceed 0.28.
(b) In the Residence B District, the floor area ratio of all buildings
and structures on the lot or premises shall not exceed 0.32.
(c) In the Business D District, no building, structure or use,
together with any accessory buildings, structures or uses, shall
occupy more than 75% of the area of the lot, exclusive of any
portion of such lot that may consist of land under water.
§ 230-15 WATER § 230-15
225:587
(3) Minimum lot area.
(a) For religious uses, no such building, structure or use shall be
conducted on a lot having an area less than 30,000 square feet
in the Residence A and Residence B Districts and 20,000
square feet in the Business D District.
(b) For educational uses, no such building, structure or use shall
be conducted on a lot having an area less than 40,000 square
feet in the Residence A and Residence B Districts and 20,000
square feet in the Business D District.
(4) Required yards. The required yards shall be the same as the
requirements applicable to the zoning district.
(5) Street frontage. The required street frontage shall be the same as
the requirements applicable to the zoning district.
(6) Off-street parking. No religious or educational use shall be
conducted on a lot or premises unless paved off-street parking for
such use is provided on the same lot or premises in accordance
with § 230-52, Schedule of Off-Street Parking Space Requirements.
In granting or modifying a special use permit for any such use, the
Board of Trustees may reduce the parking requirements where it
can be demonstrated, through a parking analysis prepared by a
traffic engineer, that a reduction in the actual parking demand will
result from the operation of the use, in which event the Board may
impose conditions on the operation of such use to assure
compliance with the assumptions of such analysis.
(a) Each parking area shall be provided with adequate facility for
site drainage, which shall not drain into public roads or public
drainage systems.
(b) No parking space shall be located in a front yard or in a
required rear or side yard setback area.
(c) All parking spaces shall be maintained in good condition and
shall have adequate means of ingress and egress as approved
by the Board of Trustees.
(d) All parking spaces shall be at least nine feet by 18 feet, and
there shall be an aisle of at least 15 feet separating rows of
parking spaces.
(e) Every parking area shall be enclosed with a good-quality solid
sapling fence six feet in height, with a finished side facing the
property boundaries, entirely enclosing the parking area, with
the exception of such portions as are used for ingress or
egress. Said fence shall be properly landscaped and screened,
with shrubs and plants to be situated on the outside of such
fence, in accordance with landscaping plans approved by the
§ 230-15 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-15
225:588
§ 230-16. Accessory buildings and uses.
The following additional provisions shall apply to accessory buildings and
uses:
Board of Trustees as part of the approval of any conditional use
permit.
C. Criteria for issuance of special use permit. When considering an
application for a special use permit, the Board of Trustees shall ensure,
at a minimum, that the proposed use:
(1) Will be properly located in regard to transportation, water supply,
waste disposal, fire protection and other facilities;
(2) Will not create undue traffic congestion, traffic hazard, or
circulation conflicts;
(3) Will not adversely affect the value of property, character of the
neighborhood or the pattern of development;
(4) Will encourage an appropriate use of land consistent with the
needs of the Village; and
(5) Will not impair the public health or safety.
A. The accessory building or use must be located on the same lot as the
principal building or use to which it is accessory or on a lot immediately
adjoining it. If it is located on a lot immediately adjoining the lot on
which the principal building or use is located and the lots are severed,
the accessory use shall cease.
B. The accessory use shall not be carried on by any person other than the
occupant of the principal building or, in the case of vacant property, by
the owner of the lot.
C. The term "accessory use," as used in this chapter, shall not include any
parabolic, hemispheric or other antennae or other outdoor equipment
for receiving audio, visual or data signals from the air or space, except
that the use of antennae for such purposes shall be permitted as an
accessory use only if: [Added 2-6-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984]
(1) No more than one such antenna is located on a single lot or
premises.
(2) Such antenna is located on the roof of the principal building on the
lot or premises.
(3) The height of such antenna is not greater than six feet from the roof
of the principal building.
(4) In the case of parabolic or hemispheric antennae, the diameter of
the antenna does not exceed two feet.
§ 230-15 WATER § 230-17
225:589
§ 230-17. Professional offices.
Where a lot or premises in a residence district is permitted to be used
in part as the office of a professional person, the following additional
conditions and regulations shall apply:
§ 230-18. Private garages.
In a residence district a private garage is permitted only as an accessory
use and subject to the following conditions:
A. Such use is limited to the office of not more than one practitioner of
medicine, osteopathy, physiotherapy, dentistry, podiatry or psychology
duly licensed under the Education Law of the State of New York.
[Amended 12-1-1958 by Ord. No. 91132]
B. Not more than one nurse or assistant or associate worker may be
employed in such office.
C. No display of advertising and no sign shall be permitted except the
name of the professional person and letters or abbreviations indicating
the nature of his profession. No such sign shall be illuminated, except
by reflector buttons. No such sign shall exceed two feet in length or six
inches in height.
D. Such office must be located in, and as part, of the principal dwelling and
may not be housed in a separate building.
E. In no case may the practice of a profession be permitted as a principal
use.
F. It shall be unlawful for a practitioner of any of the professions set forth
in Subsection A hereof to maintain office hours or treat patients in an
office located in a residence district between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., except for emergency treatment. "Emergency treatment"
is hereby defined as urgent treatment requiring the immediate
attention of the practitioner with respect to a problem or condition not
immediately foreseen and which treatment cannot be held in abeyance
for authorized office hours without endangering the life or safety of the
patient. [Added 2-5-1973 by Ord. No. 129]
A. No business, service or industry may be carried on directly or indirectly
in or in connection therewith.
B. No commercial vehicle shall be stored or kept temporarily or
permanently in such garage or elsewhere on the lot.
C. When attached to or forming part of the principal building, no part of
the garage is permitted in a required yard.
132. Editor's Note: This subsection was also amended 11-5-1979 by L.L. No. 7-1979, which was
immediately repealed 12-3-1979 by L.L. No. 9-1979.
§ 230-17 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-18
225:590
§ 230-19. Real estate signs.
Real estate signs, if and when permitted in a residence district, must be
set back as far from the street line as if they were the main front wall of a
principal building. Such signs shall not exceed in the aggregate 12 square
feet in area and shall be set at least three feet above the ground level.
§ 230-20. Fences, walls and retaining walls. [Amended 11-1-1971 by
Ord. No. 126; 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
The following regulations shall apply to fences, walls and retaining walls:
D. When the garage is not attached to the principal building and does not
form a part thereof, every part of such garage shall conform to the
requirements of this Code for accessory structures. In addition, every
part of such garage shall be at least 10 feet from any residence,
including the residence to which it is accessory. [Amended
11-14-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
E. Whether or not attached to the principal building, no part of the garage
is permitted in the front yard.
A. No fence or wall shall exceed six feet in height. No retaining wall shall
have a height greater than that of the land in its natural state at the
point where such retaining wall is to be constructed. In the event that
any portion of a retaining wall has a height exceeding that of the land in
its natural state at the place where the retaining wall is to be
constructed, such retaining wall shall be treated, for the purposes of
this section, as a wall, notwithstanding that dirt and soil may be piled or
graded against it, and such wall shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Fences and walls must comply with the front yard, side yard and rear
yard restrictions applicable to a principal building or structure in the
district in which they are constructed, except as otherwise specifically
provided for in this section. Retaining walls need not comply with such
front yard, side yard or rear yard restrictions.
C. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Code, a fence of any
height and a wall of any height and a retaining wall having a height of
more than four feet above the lowest natural grade adjacent to the wall
shall not be erected until plans are filed with the office of the Village
Clerk, addressed to the Board of Trustees of the Village, and until a
building permit has been issued for the construction of such fence, wall
or retaining wall.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a
fence having a height of four feet or less may be erected in a side yard
or rear yard and may be erected along a side or rear yard property line,
and a fence having a height of six feet or less may be erected in a rear
yard or along a rear property line.
§ 230-18 WATER § 230-20
225:591
§ 230-21. Buildings in yards; permitted projections.
E. No fence or wall, regardless of height, shall be erected or constructed
or placed in that part of any lot lying in a front yard setback area, and,
in the case of a corner lot, no fence or wall shall be erected, constructed
or placed in that part of a lot designated and known as the "front yard."
A. Except as provided in § 218-17 and in this section, no building or other
structure shall be permitted in, upon or over a required front yard, rear
yard or side yard, with the following exceptions: [Amended 4-12-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993; 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
(1) Light pillars and light posts may be located in a front yard,
provided that the design, number and appearance of the same is
approved by the Architectural Review Board.
(2) Roofs, eaves, gutters and cornices may project into a required yard
not more than two feet.
(3) One-story bay windows may project not more than two feet six
inches for a width not exceeding eight feet.
(4) Unenclosed and unroofed platforms and steps, designed to provide
safe access to grade from service entrance doors, may project not
more than three feet six inches into a required side yard. The
horizontal surface of any encroaching platform and steps shall not
exceed 17.5 square feet into a required side yard.
(5) One-story open porches and one-story entry porticos may project
not more than five feet for a maximum width of nine feet into a
required front yard. Said width shall be centered on the center line
of the front door. Further, unenclosed and unroofed platforms and
steps, designed to provide safe access to grade from front doors,
may project not more than five feet into a required front yard, and
the horizontal surface of any such encroaching platform shall not
exceed 45 square feet.133
B. A building permitted for accessory uses and not connected with or
constructed as part of the principal building or establishment may be
situated in a required side or rear yard if it conforms with all of the
following requirements:
(1) No building or part thereof shall be permitted nearer to the rear
line or nearer to a side line than would be permitted for a principal
building. [Amended 1-6-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
(2) No building permitted in a rear yard shall exceed eight feet in
height from the mean ground level to the highest point of the roof.
[Amended 1-6-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
133. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding roofs, eaves, gutters and cornices, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002.
§ 230-20 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-21
225:592
§ 230-22. Transient dwelling units.134 [Added 10-10-2016 by L.L. No.
8-2016]
(3) Buildings permitted in the rear yard may occupy not over 20% of
the required rear yard area.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, except as otherwise
provided in this section, transient dwelling units are prohibited in all
zoning districts in the Village. Any person, acting as owner, occupant,
person with authority to permit use or occupancy of any property in the
Village, or as agent for any such person, who shall establish, maintain,
operate, let, lease, rent or suffer or permit a property in the Village to
be used as a transient dwelling unit, except as permitted by this section,
shall be guilty of a violation.
B. No transient dwelling unit shall be established, maintained, operated,
let, leased, rented, or used without a transient dwelling permit from the
Village. Any person, acting as owner, occupant, person with authority to
permit use or occupancy of any property in the Village, or as agent for
any such person, who shall establish, maintain, operate, let, lease, rent
or suffer or permit a property in the Village to be used as a transient
dwelling unit without a transient dwelling permit shall be guilty of a
violation.
C. No transient dwelling unit permit may be obtained or issued for a
dwelling unit for use as a transient dwelling unit more often than two
times in any calendar year.
D. Each person obtaining a transient dwelling unit shall pay a permit fee to
the Village in an amount determined from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Trustees.
E. Transient dwelling unit permits shall be issued by the Village Clerk,
upon submission of a properly completed application form promulgated
for such purpose by the Village Clerk, and upon payment of all required
fees. No such permit shall be issued for any premises at which a
violation of this section has occurred within the twelve-month period
prior to the proposed commencement date of the occupancy for which
the transient dwelling permit is requested.
F. No transient dwelling permit shall be transferable to or used by any
occupant other than an occupant listed in the permit application.
G. An application form for a transient dwelling unit Permit shall include, at
a minimum, the following information:
(1) The legal name, contact information (including e-mail and cell
phone) and mailing address of the owner of the property and the
principal proposed occupant of the property;
134. Editor's Note: Former § 230-22, Height of walls, was repealed 7-11-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005.
§ 230-21 WATER § 230-22
225:593
§ 230-23. Public garages and automobile service stations.
No public garage, automobile service station or gasoline filling station
shall be permitted, operated or maintained, except in accordance with the
following regulations:
(2) The physical and mail address of the property which is the subject
of the permit;
(3) The written sworn or acknowledged consent of the owner of the
property;
(4) The name and contact information for a representative of the
property owner as an emergency contact, who must be located
within Nassau County or within 25 miles of the Village, and who
must be available to manage the property at all times during the
period of the transient use.
H. Upon issuance of a transient dwelling permit, and at least five days
prior to the commencement of any use or occupancy of a premises
pursuant to such permit, the owner of the property which is the subject
of such permit, or the duly authorized agent of such owner, shall
provide written notice, by first-class mail or personal delivery, to the
owners or occupants of each abutting property, informing those
neighbors that a transient dwelling permit has been issued and
providing the name and contact information for the emergency contact
person. Proof of such notice shall be filed with the Village Clerk at least
five days prior to the commencement of occupancy of the property
pursuant to the permit.
I. Any person who suffers, permits, causes or commits any of the
following acts with respect to a transient dwelling unit shall be guilty of
a violation:
(1) Any act in violation of a requirement or prohibition in this section.
(2) Making a false statement in a permit application.
J. Any transient dwelling permit issued pursuant to this section may be
suspended or revoked by the Mayor or the Code Official for due cause,
in addition to any other applicable penalty provided by law. Written
notice of such suspension or revocation shall be given promptly by the
Village Clerk to the owner and the proposed occupant. The Board of
Appeals shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any appeal from
such suspension or revocation, and any person aggrieved by a
determination to suspend or revoke a transient dwelling permit may
appeal, in writing, to the Board of Appeals within 15 days after such
written notice.
A. The provisions of Ordinance No. 15 in relation to public garages,
automobile service stations and gasoline filling stations adopted
§ 230-22 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-23
225:594
§ 230-24. Regulations relating to Village entrances.
§ 230-25. Lots adjoining more than one street.
November 17, 1931, as now or hereafter amended, shall be complied
with.135
B. No part of the workshop or storage space shall be nearer than 25 feet to
any public street.
C. All entrances and driveways shall have an unobstructed width of at
least 15 feet.
D. No painting or repair work shall be done on the lot.
E. There shall be no opening in the side or rear wall or roof of such
building within 15 feet of any side or rear property line.
F. Where the lot adjoins a residence district, there shall be no opening in
the wall of the building on that side, and all existing doors and windows
on that side shall be permanently blocked and sealed.
G. No internal combustion engine may be used unless it is equipped with
an effective muffler or silencer.
H. All of the requirements of the Nassau County Fire Marshal or other
official, board or body shall be complied with.
A. No building or structure shall be constructed or maintained upon any
premises in the Village within 20 feet of the street line of any entrance
to the Village, as defined in this chapter.
B. No building or other structure shall be constructed or maintained
which shall have any entrance or entrances for the use of customers
and employees, or either of them, or for the receipt or delivery of goods
in or upon the side thereof facing any entrance to the Village; provided,
however, that this subsection shall not be construed to prevent the
construction and maintenance of emergency exits upon such side
thereof or the construction or maintenance thereon of windows for the
display of goods; and further provided that the Board of Trustees may,
in its discretion, permit the construction, maintenance and use of an
access road situated entirely within the business district of the Village
leading to a required parking space, if said Board should determine that
such access road is necessary or desirable for the convenient use of
such parking space and will not result in undue interference with
traffic. [Amended 9-4-1962 by Ord. No. 102]
A. In the case of a corner lot there shall be a front yard on each street. In
the Residence AA and Residence A Districts there shall be a rear yard
135. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 15 was superseded 4-1-1968 by Ord. No. 112, which continued in
effect provisions as to public garages, automobile service stations or gasoline filling
stations; see Ch. 167, Property Maintenance, § 167-51.
§ 230-23 WATER § 230-25
225:595
§ 230-26. Lots situated in more than one district.
In the case of a lot situated partly in each of two or more districts, no
principal building, use or establishment shall be constructed, altered or
maintained thereon except in conformity with the regulations applying
to the most highly restricted district in which such building, use or
establishment or any part thereof is situated. No accessory building, use
or establishment shall be constructed, altered or maintained unless the
principal building, use or establishment to which it is accessory is one
permitted in the district in which such accessory building, use or
establishment is situated.
§ 230-27. District boundaries.
opposite each front yard and no side yard. In residence districts other
than the Residence AA and Residence A Districts, there shall be a rear
yard opposite the narrower street frontage; the yard opposite the wider
street frontage shall be the side yard. [Amended 4-5-1965 by Ord.
No. 105]
B. In the case of a lot, other than a corner lot, which adjoins two or more
streets, a front yard is required on each street.
C. In the case of a residential corner lot, notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, the required side and rear yard setbacks for
such lot shall be the minimum fixed side and rear yard setbacks
established for the district in which the property is located, without any
addition to that minimum fixed setback based upon the width or depth
of the property. [Added 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
A. Building zone districts include all public or private streets, ponds,
streams and waterways adjacent thereto, whether or not so designated
upon the Zoning Map, including land underwater and land heretofore
or hereafter formed by filling, accretion, emergence, avulsion or
otherwise.
B. In case a public or private street, pond, stream or waterway, as shown
on said map, forms a boundary between two or more districts of
different classes, each district shall be deemed to extend to the middle
line of the street or the center of the pond or the thread of the stream or
waterway, as the case may be.
C. Where the widening of Middle Neck Road heretofore resulted in a
reduction of the depth of the business district to less than 100 feet, the
westerly line of the business district at such point shall be deemed
extended westerly a distance equal to such widening, it being intended
that at no point on Middle Neck Road shall the business district have a
depth of less than 100 feet.
§ 230-25 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-28
225:596
§ 230-28. Conformity with Comprehensive Plan.
For the purpose of computing the building area, the size of the lot, the
rear yard, the front yard, the side yards and the street frontage, every
public street and any proposed street or streets shown on any Official Map
or Comprehensive Plan of the Village or any amendment or modification
thereof now or hereafter duly adopted by the Board of Trustees or the
Planning Board shall be considered a public street with the same force
and effect as if the same had been duly opened and improved and made
available for public use; provided, however, that upon the acquisition of any
such street or streets or any part thereof, the Board of Trustees may, in its
resolution authorizing the acquisition, provide that the area of the street
or part thereof so acquired may be included in computing the building
area, the size of lot and the depth of the yard abutting thereon under any
application, submitted within five years after the date of such resolution, for
the construction, alteration or use of a building or other structure upon the
lot or lots of which the street or part thereof so acquired formed a part.
§ 230-29. Streets and land below high-water mark.
Except as provided in § 230-28, for the purpose of computing the building
area, the size of lot, the rear yards, front yards and side yards, the land
lying in the bed of any public or private street adjacent thereto, and the land
lying below the high-water mark of any pond, stream or waterway adjacent
thereto, shall be excluded, unless the application for a building permit shall
also provide for the bulkheading or filling in of a portion of such pond,
stream or waterway, in which case the land lying below the high-water line
as so relocated shall be excluded.
§ 230-30. Swimming pools.136
For the purpose of computing the building area, the required yards and
the distance from the lines of the lot, the walk or platform along the side
of a swimming pool, the base for the springboard or diving platform and
the foundation for the purifying apparatus, if any, shall be included. All
pools shall be constructed in accordance with standard practice. Each pool
shall be provided with permanently installed facilities for the complete
draining thereof. Such facilities shall include provisions, approved by the
Code Official, for disposing of the entire contents of the pool by means of
diffusion wells or otherwise beneath the surface of the ground within not
more than 48 consecutive hours. Such facilities shall be entirely separate
from the house drains and house sewer. In no case may the contents of the
pool be permitted to discharge, directly or indirectly, into a street or public
drain or catch basin or in, upon or under the land of another person without
his written consent or in such a way as to adversely affect the functioning
of the house drains or house sewer of another property.
136. Editor's Note: For additional regulations relating to swimming pools, see Ch. 167,
Property Maintenance, § 167-32.
§ 230-28 WATER § 230-31
225:597
§ 230-31. Height of buildings: exceptions.
§ 230-32. Special provisions for southwest corner of Cedar Drive
and Middle Neck Road.
All the provisions of this chapter relating to the Business D District shall
apply to that plot of land described as Plot B in a certain deed from Villa
Park Association of Great Neck to William Carroll Latimer, dated February
20, 1917, and recorded on February 26, 1917, in liber 463 of conveyance at
page 155, except as follows:
§ 230-33. Irregular lot size computation.
In case of an irregular parcel of land, the Board of Trustees shall have the
power to determine and designate what portion thereof shall be deemed to
be used in connection with the proposed building or use and what, if any,
portion thereof is not properly to be deemed used in connection therewith.
For the purpose of computing the size of the lot, only that portion of the
parcel of land which the Board of Trustees deems to be used in connection
with the proposed building or use shall be included.
A. The provisions of § 230-12 relating to the height of buildings in the
business district are subject to the following exceptions:
(1) Such provisions shall not apply to chimneys, flues, church spires,
cupolas, belfries, flagpoles or radio or television antennas.
(2) A parapet wall or cornice may extend above such height limit not
more than five feet.
(3) Chimneys or flues, bulkheads, elevator enclosures and water tanks
occupying in the aggregate less than 10% of the area of the roof on
which they are located may extend above such height limit by not
more than 12 feet.
B. The provisions of § 230-11 relating to the height of buildings in the
Residence C District shall not apply to church spires or belfries.
C. The provisions relating to the height of buildings in the residence
districts shall not apply to chimneys, flues, flagpoles and radio and
television antenna attached to the building or any part thereto.
A. No front yard shall be required on Middle Neck Road or on any part of
the curve on Cedar Drive abutting said property.
B. No side yard shall be required between the southerly line of Cedar
Drive and the southerly line of said parcel.
C. The distance between the rear lot line and the main rear wall of the
building shall be not less than 20 feet.
§ 230-31 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-34
225:598
§ 230-34. Land adjoining Queens County. [Added 4-5-1965 by Ord.
No. 105]
A lot now existing or hereafter created which adjoins the easterly line of
Queens County and lies entirely within 60 feet of the said Queens County
line and is in the same ownership as the lot situated in Queens County which
it adjoins, if said Queens County lot is used and occupied as a residence
for one family only, may be used as accessory to such Queens County
lot, notwithstanding that it has an area smaller than that required for the
district in which it is situated, provided that no building or structure is
erected or maintained thereon other than a boundary wall or fence and no
use is permitted on said lot or on the Queens County lot that it adjoins which
is not permitted in the district within the Village in which it is situated.
§ 230-35. Tennis courts. [Added 9-9-1974 by L.L. No. 1-1974]
A. No tennis court may be constructed or maintained except as an
accessory structure to an existing one-family dwelling located on the
same lot.
B. No tennis court, including the fence enclosing it, shall be built or
maintained in a front yard or within 20 feet of a rear or side lot line.
C. All tennis courts shall be completely enclosed with a chain link fence
which shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following specifications as long as the tennis court remains in
existence:
(1) Height: not less than 10 feet nor more than 12 feet above the
playing surface.
(2) Fabric: not less than nine-gauge steel having a uniform square
mesh with two inches between parallel sides. The mesh shall have a
green plastic coating.
(3) End and corner posts: two-and-one-half-inch ID galvanized pipe
with a wall thickness of 0.203 of an inch.
(4) Line posts: two-inch ID galvanized pipe with a wall thickness of
0.154 of an inch.
(5) Horizontal lines: There shall be three horizontal rails running
between the vertical posts situated at the top center and bottom of
the chain link fabric. These rails shall be one-and-one-fourth-inch
ID galvanized pipe having a wall thickness of 0.14 of an inch.
(6) Distance between posts: not more than 10 feet.
D. All tennis courts and the fencing surrounding same shall be completely
screened from adjoining properties by a living screen of coniferous
trees. Said trees shall be at least eight feet in height when planted and
shall be planted five feet on center between the fence surrounding the
court and the lot lines of the lot on which the court is located, on all
§ 230-34 WATER § 230-35
225:599
§ 230-36. Siting of wireless communications towers and antennas.
[Added 4-13-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
sides of the court not facing the dwelling on the same lot. Said
coniferous screening shall consist of Canadian hemlock or an alternate
approved by the Code Official and shall be maintained as long as the
tennis court remains in existence.
E. The height of the playing surface of the tennis court shall not be above
the existing mean level of the ground immediately surrounding the
court area prior to construction of the court.
F. No tennis court shall be constructed or maintained so as to permit any
drainage water to flow onto adjacent properties or public streets.
G. There shall be no artificial illumination of the tennis court.
H. The building permit and certificate of occupancy for a tennis court must
be obtained from the Board of Trustees after full compliance with all
the requirements of the law has been certified by the Code Official.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas.
(2) The goals of this section are to:
(a) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas.
(b) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas.
(c) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the
community.
(d) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower
sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single-use towers.
(e) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal.
(f) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening
and innovative camouflaging techniques.
(g) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively and efficiently.
§ 230-35 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-36
225:600
(h) Consider the public health and safety of communication
towers.
(i) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower
structures.
(3) In furtherance of these goals, the Village shall give due
consideration to the Village's Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Map,
existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving
sites for the location of towers and antennas.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or
long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on
the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower
or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of this section, including
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so
long as such approval is current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio
and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier
towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the
like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto.
C. Applicability.
§ 230-36 WATER § 230-36
225:601
(1) New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the
Village of Great Neck Estates shall be subject to these regulations,
except as provided in Subsection C(3) through (5), inclusive.
(2) Amateur radio station operators and receive-only antennas. This
section shall not apply to any tower, or the installation of any
antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated
by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for receive-only antennas.
(3) Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
section, other than the requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7).
(4) AM array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers
included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added
within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
(5) Television-reception-only and satellite-reception-only antennas.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the following
are not subject to regulation pursuant to this section, and do not
require a building permit, provided that such antenna is located on
the roof of a principal building or within a building:
(a) Antennas extending not more than four feet in height above the
building or structure upon which they are located, and used
only for reception of television signals.
(b) Antennas used only for the purposes of receiving satellite
signal transmissions, and having a diameter not more than two
meters when located in a business district, or not more than
one meter in diameter when located in a residential or
multifamily residential district.
D. General requirements.
(1) Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation
of an antenna or tower on such lot.
(2) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
§ 230-36 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-36
225:602
(3) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Code Official an inventory of its existing
towers, antennas or sites approved for towers or antennas that are
either within the jurisdiction of the Village or within one mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location,
height and design of each tower. The Code Official may share such
information with other applicants applying for administrative
approvals or special use permits under this section or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of
the Village; provided, however, that the Code Official is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting
that such sites are available or suitable.
(4) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(5) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
(6) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority
to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
§ 230-36 WATER § 230-36
225:603
(7) Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended
from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Code Official concludes
that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon notice
being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30
days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
(8) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities
located in the Village irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
(9) Nonessential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
(10) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/
or operation of a wireless communication system in the Village
have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises
with the Code Official.
(11) Public notice. For purposes of this section, any special use request,
variance request or appeal of an administratively approved use or
special use shall require public notice to all abutting property
owners and all property owners of properties that are located
within the corresponding separation distance listed in Subsection
G(2)(e)[1][b], Table 1, in addition to any notice otherwise required
by the Village Code for such applications.
(12) Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
(13) Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with
the requirements of Subsection H of this section.
(14) Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Village encourages the users of
towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of
multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
E. Permitted uses.
(1) General. The uses listed in Subsection E(2) as permitted uses shall
not require any approval from the Village.
§ 230-36 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-36
225:604
(2) Specific permitted uses. The following uses are specifically
permitted:
(a) Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or
otherwise controlled by the Village, provided that a license or
lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by
the Village.
F. Administratively approved uses.
(1) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas:
(a) The Code Official may administratively approve the uses listed
in Subsection F(2).
(b) Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the
Code Official by providing the information set forth in
Subsection G(2)(a) and (c) of this section and a nonrefundable
fee as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees to
reimburse the Village for the costs of reviewing the
application.
(c) The Code Official shall review the application for
administrative approval and determine if the proposed use
complies with Subsections D and G(2)(d) and (e) of this section.
(d) The Code Official shall respond to each such application within
60 days after receiving it by either approving or denying the
application. If the Code Official fails to respond to the applicant
within said 60 days, then the application shall be deemed to be
approved.
(e) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Code
Official may, in order to encourage shared use,
administratively waive any zoning district setback
requirements in Subsection G(2)(d) or separation distances
between towers in Subsection G(2)(e) by up to 50%.
(f) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Code
Official may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles,
administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower
to monopole construction.
(g) If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file
an application for a special use permit pursuant to Subsection
G prior to filing any appeal that may be available under the
Zoning Code.
(2) List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be
approved by the Code Official after conducting an administrative
review:
§ 230-36 WATER § 230-36
225:605
(a) Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of
additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said tower or antenna, in any nonresidential
district, provided that such tower or antenna is located at least
90 feet from any property used for residential purposes.
(b) Locating antennas on lawful existing structures or towers
consistent with the terms of Subsections F(2)(b)[1] and [2]
below.
[1] Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the Code Official
as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial,
professional, institutional or multifamily structure of eight
or more dwelling units, provided that:
[a] The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above
the highest point of the structure.
[b] The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations.
[c] The antenna complies with all applicable building
codes.
[d] The antenna is located at least 90 feet from any other
property used for residential purposes.
[2] Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached
to an existing tower may be approved by the Code Official
and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with
the proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of
antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall
take precedence over the construction of new towers,
provided that such collocation is accomplished in a
manner consistent with the following:
[a] A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna
shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower,
unless the Code Official allows reconstruction as a
monopole.
[b] Height.
[i] An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a
taller height, not to exceed 30 feet over the
tower's existing height, to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna.
[ii] The height change referred to in Subsection
F(2)(b)[2][b][i] may only occur one time per
communication tower.
§ 230-36 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-36
225:606
[iii] The additional height referred to in Subsection
F(2)(b)[2][b][i] shall not require an additional
distance separation as set forth in Subsection G.
The tower's premodification height shall be used
to calculate such distance separations.
[c] On-site location.
[i] A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate
the collocation of an additional antenna may be
moved on-site within 50 feet of its existing
location.
[ii] After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate
collocation, only one tower may remain on the
site.
[iii] A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be
measured from the original tower location for
purposes of calculating separation distances
between towers pursuant to Subsection G(2)(e).
The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no
way be deemed to cause a violation of Subsection
G(2)(e).
[iv] The on-site relocation of a tower which comes
within the separation distances to residential
units or residentially zoned lands as established in
Subsection G(2)(e) shall only be permitted when
approved by the Code Official.
(c) Locating any alternative tower structure in a nonresidential
zoning district that in the judgment of the Code Official is in
conformity with the goals set forth in Subsection A of this
section.
(d) Installing a cable microcell network through the use of
multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to
existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or
telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require
the use of towers.
G. Special use permits.
(1) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
special use permits for towers or antennas by the Board of
Trustees.
(a) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under Subsection
E of this section or permitted to be approved administratively
pursuant to Subsection F of this section, then a special use
§ 230-36 WATER § 230-36
225:607
permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the
placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
(b) Applications for special use permits under Subsection G shall
be subject to the procedures and requirements of this chapter
generally applicable to special use permit applications, except
as modified in this subsection.
(c) In granting a special use permit, the Board of Trustees may
impose conditions to the extent that the Board of Trustees
concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any
adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(d) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(e) An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the
information described in Subsection G and a nonrefundable fee
as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees to
reimburse the Village for the costs of reviewing the
application.
(2) Towers.
(a) Information required. In addition to any information required
for applications for special use permits pursuant to this
chapter, applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall
submit the following information:
[1] A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), zoning classification of the site and
all properties within the applicable separation distances
set forth in Subsection G(2)(e), adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines,
elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other
structures, topography, parking and other information
deemed by the Code Official to be necessary to assess
compliance with this section.
[2] Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
[3] The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
[4] The separation distance from other towers described in
the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to
Subsection D(3) shall be shown on an updated site plan or
§ 230-36 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-36
225:608
map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
[5] A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
[6] Method of fencing, finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
[7] A description of compliance with Subsections D(3), (4), (5),
(6), (7), (10), (12) and (13) and G(2)(d) and (e) and all
applicable federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations.
[8] A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
[9] Identification of the entities providing the backhaul
network for the tower(s) described in the application and
other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in
the municipality.
[10] A description of the suitability of the use of existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed
new tower.
[11] A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Village based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in
the event that the proposed tower is erected.
(b) Factors considered in granting special use permits for towers.
In addition to any standards for consideration of special use
permit applications pursuant to this chapter, the Board of
Trustees shall consider the following factors in determining
whether to issue a special use permit, although the Board of
Trustees may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of
one or more of these criteria if the Board of Trustees concludes
that the goals of this section are better served thereby:
[1] Height of the proposed tower.
[2] Proximity of the tower to residential structures and
residential district boundaries.
[3] Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
[4] Surrounding topography.
[5] Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
§ 230-36 WATER § 230-36
225:609
[6] Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
[7] Proposed ingress and egress.
[8] Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in Subsection G(2)(c) of this
section.
(c) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless
the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Board of Trustees that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers
or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by
the Board of Trustees related to the availability of suitable
existing towers, other structures or alternative technology.
Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the
following:
[1] No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
[2] Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
[3] Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support the applicant's proposed
antenna and related equipment.
[4] The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the
existing towers or structures would cause interference
with the applicant's proposed antenna.
[5] The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
[6] The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
§ 230-36 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-36
225:610
[7] The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology
that does not require the use of towers or structures, such
as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed
new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed
to render the technology unsuitable.
(d) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the Board of Trustees may reduce the standard
setback requirements if the goals of this section would be
better served thereby:
[1] Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75%
of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
[2] Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
(e) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply
to all towers and antennas for which a special use permit is
required; provided, however, that the Board of Trustees may
reduce the standard separation requirements if the goals of
this section would be better served thereby.
[1] Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
[a] Tower separation shall be measured from the base of
the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or
designated areas as specified in Table 1, except as
otherwise provided in Table 1.
[b] Separation requirements for towers shall comply with
the minimum standards established in Table 1.
Table 1
Off-Site Use/
Designated Area Separation Distance
Single-family or twofamily
residential units
200 feet or 300% height of
tower, whichever is
greater
Vacant residentially
zoned land
200 feet or 300% height of
tower,1 whichever is
greater
Multifamily residential
units
100 feet or 100% height of
tower, whichever is
greater
§ 230-36 WATER § 230-36
225:611
Table 1
Off-Site Use/
Designated Area Separation Distance
Nonresidentially zoned
lands or nonresidential
uses
None; only setbacks apply
NOTES:
1Separation measured from base of tower to closest
building setback line.
[2] Separation distances between towers. Separation
distances between towers shall be applicable for and
measured between the proposed tower and preexisting
towers. The separation distances shall be measured by
drawing or following a straight line between the base of
the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a
site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances
(listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
Table 2
Separation Distances Between Existing
Towers and Proposed Towers
Type of
Tower
Lattice Guyed Monopole
75 Ft in
Height or
Greater
Monopole
Less Than
75 Ft in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole 75
Ft in height
or greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole
less than 75
Ft in height
750 750 750 750
(f) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with
an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that
the Board of Trustees may waive such requirements, as it
deems appropriate.
(g) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit
is required; provided, however, that the Board of Trustees may
waive such requirements if the goals of this section would be
better served thereby.
§ 230-36 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-36
225:612
[1] Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least
four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
[2] In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or
waived.
[3] Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots,
natural growth around the property perimeter may be
sufficient buffer.
H. Buildings or other equipment storage.
(1) Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply
with the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 300
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 15 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than 65 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment
structure, if over 200 square feet of gross floor area or eight
feet in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be
located on the roof of the structure.
(b) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 15% of the roof area.
(c) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
(2) Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be
located in accordance with the following:
(a) In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may
be located:
[1] In a front or side yard, provided that the cabinet or
structure is no greater than 10 feet in height or 300 square
feet of gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located
a minimum of 20 feet from all lot lines. The cabinet/
structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of at least 48 inches and a planted height
of at least 36 inches.
§ 230-36 WATER § 230-36
225:613
[2] In a rear yard, provided that the cabinet or structure is no
greater than 15 feet in height or 300 square feet in gross
floor area. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least eight
feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(b) In commercial or industrial districts the equipment cabinet or
structure shall be no greater than 15 feet in height or 600
square feet in gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall
be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of
at least eight feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches. In
all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened
from view of all residential properties which abut or are
directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a
solid fence eight feet in height or an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of at least eight feet and a planted height of at
least 36 inches.
(3) Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 600 square feet of gross floor
area or be more than 15 feet in height and shall be located in
accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning
district in which located.
(4) Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of
Subsection H(1) through (3) may be modified by the Code Official in
the case of administratively approved uses or by the Board of
Trustees in the case of uses permitted by special use to encourage
collocation.
I. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that
is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall
remove the same within 90 days of receipt of a notice from the Village
notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to
remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower.
J. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Not expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed,
and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions
of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
(2) Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers lawfully constructed shall
be allowed to continue as they presently exist. Routine
maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like
construction and height) shall be permitted on such preexisting
towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a
§ 230-36 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-36
225:614
§ 230-37. Architectural features; floor area ratios. [Added
11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this
section.
(3) Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or
antennas. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection I, bona fide
nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed
may be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative
approval or a special use permit and without having to meet the
separation requirements specified in Subsection G(2)(d) and (e).
The type, height and location of the tower on-site shall be of the
same type and intensity as the original facility approval. Building
permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable
building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date
the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if
said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed
abandoned as specified in Subsection I.
A. In order to achieve the maximum floor area ratio hereinbefore
established in Code §§ 230-6I, 230-7I, 230-8I, 230-9I, 230-10I and
230-11I for a single-family dwelling, certain valuable architectural
features must be incorporated in the dwelling. These architectural
features are set forth in Subsection B below, and each of these features
is assigned a floor area ratio value. The floor area ratio for a singlefamily
dwelling (the base floor area ratio) shall be the maximum floor
area ratio hereinbefore established less the reduction in floor area ratio
set forth in Subsection C hereof. For each valuable architectural feature
incorporated in the dwelling, the value assigned to that feature in
Subsection B shall be added to the base floor area ratio, to an amount
not exceeding the maximum floor area ratio hereinbefore established
for the dwelling.
B. Architectural features and floor area ratio values.
Architectural Feature Floor Area Ratio Value
Peaked roof on 80% of the building area
of the dwelling
0.03
Peaked roof on one-story portions of the
dwelling
0.02
Minimum of two bay windows, each
having a framed area of at least 16
square feet
0.02
§ 230-36 WATER § 230-37
225:615
§ 230-38. Facades of single-family dwellings; garages. [Added
11-14-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
With respect to a single-family dwelling:
Architectural Feature Floor Area Ratio Value
Open porch, which will remain
unenclosed, on the front of the dwelling
having a minimum depth of five feet six
inches and a length which covers at
least 65% of the length of the front
facade of the dwelling (excluding the
garage and vestibule)
0.03
Projecting vestibule 0.02
Attached garage which is set back at
least 10 feet from the front line of the
dwelling
0.02
C. Districts and total reduction in floor area ratio.
District Total Reduction in Floor Area Ratio
Residence AA 0.03
Residence A 0.05
Residence B 0.06
Residence BB 0.06
Residence BC 0.06
Residence C 0.07
D. In order to encourage the retention and upgrading of single-family
dwellings which were built prior to 1950 and which have not been
altered subsequently so as to increase the floor area of said dwelling,
the provisions of Subsections A, B and C of this section shall not be
applied in the event of a proposed alteration and/or addition to said
dwelling, provided that the Building Department of the Village shall
certify, in writing, that:
(1) Such dwelling was built prior to 1950 and has not been altered
subsequently so as to increase the floor area of said dwelling; and
(2) Such proposed alteration and/or addition will not effect a change in
excess of 25% of the floor area of the dwelling as it existed in 1950;
and
(3) The proposed total floor area (existing and proposed) does not
exceed 110% of that which would be allowed pursuant to
Subsections A, B and C.
§ 230-37 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-38
225:616
§ 230-39. Maximum impervious surface. [Added 11-14-2002 by L.L.
No. 2-2002]
The maximum permitted horizontal area covered by buildings, accessory
buildings, patios, pavement, swimming pools and other impervious surfaces
on a lot shall be computed in accordance with the following table; provided,
however, that in no event shall more than 25% of any front yard be
comprised of impervious surfaces:
Maximum Permitted
Impervious Surface
Lot Area
(square feet)
For Base Lot Area
(square feet)1
For Lot Area Over
Base Lot Area1
0 to 4,000 0 45%
4,001 to 6,000 2,200 25%
6,001 to 12,000 2,900 17%
12,001 to 16,000 4,520 16%
A. No horizontal plane of a front or side facade shall extend for more than
30 feet without a change or break in said plane of at least 1.5 feet. A
projecting chimney which is less than five feet in width at eight feet
above the finished grade or which is facing the front yard shall not be
considered a change or break in a plane. The minimum length of each
plane shall be five feet.
B. No more than 75% of a two-story front or side facade shall be made in
one vertical plane; the balance of said facade shall follow a vertical
plane which is separated from the former plane by at least 1.5 feet. A
projecting chimney which is less than five feet in width at eight feet
above the finished grade or which is facing the front yard shall not be
considered a separation. The minimum length of each plane shall be
five feet.
C. At least 10% of each plane of each facade shall be comprised of
fenestration (windows and/or doors).
D. As determined by the Architectural Review Board, exterior building
materials such as stucco, brick, siding, etc., and architectural detailing
shall be consistent on all four elevations of the structure. There may be
more than one type of material or architectural detailing on each
elevation so long as all four elevations are consistent with one another.
E. No part of any street-front-facing garage shall be below the grade at the
curb adjacent to the property.
F. At least 80% of the roof surface shall qualify as a pitched roof by being a
minimum of six inches in vertical rise for every 12 inches of horizontal
distance (6:12).
§ 230-38 WATER § 230-39
225:617
Maximum Permitted
Impervious Surface
Lot Area
(square feet)
For Base Lot Area
(square feet)1
For Lot Area Over
Base Lot Area1
16,001 to 20,000 5,560 15
20,001 to 30,000 6,560 14%
30,001 to 40,000 8,960 13%
40,001 and larger 11,260 12%
1 NOTE: "Base lot area" is the minimum end of the lot size range in the
"Lot Area" column.
§ 230-39 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-39
225:618
ARTICLE IV
Signs
[Added 10-5-1976 by L.L. No. 5-1976]
§ 230-40. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to amend the Village's Building Zone
Ordinance by adopting new provisions to regulate signs and related matters
in order to protect and enhance Village property values; increase Village
commerce; reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions which
may be hazardous to motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians; reduce hazards
that may be caused by signs or other structures overhanging or projecting
over public rights-of-way; protect and enhance objects having a special
aesthetic interest or value; regulate the use of advertising media upon
or near streets and other public places; prevent destructive visual
overcompetition among occupants of commercial properties; facilitate the
reasonable needs of businesses to identify themselves in ways harmonious
with their environment; promote an attractive visual character for the
Village; protect and enhance the physical and visual environment of the
Village; encourage the most appropriate use of land; foster, encourage
and provide for uniformity or continuity of visual characteristics between
this community and neighboring communities; and promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the community, all in accordance with a
comprehensive visual conversion and development plan involving the
control of signs and related attracting devices.
§ 230-41. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTRACTING DEVICE — Any device, other than a sign, such as a banner,
pennant, bunting, streamer, colored strip or panel, flame, decorative light,
trade flag or similar device, which is visible from a public street or sidewalk,
including a device on or behind a window or glass door and which alone or
in combination with other devices or signs or merchandise is designed to
attract the public to the premises to which the device is appurtenant. It shall
not include merchandise or display and promotional articles and materials
customarily used in the sale of such merchandise.
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The length of a building fronting a public street
or sidewalk. In computing such building frontage, only the portion of the
face of the building fronting on the principal street shall be counted, unless
such building occupies a corner lot and faces two principal streets, in which
case both such faces shall be counted.
MERCHANDISE LABEL — The informational material found on the actual
container in which goods are customarily sold at retail, such as beverage
bottles, cereal boxes, standard type of gasoline pump bearing thereon in
usual size and form the name or type of gasoline, and so forth.
§ 230-40 WATER § 230-41
225:619
SIGN AREA — The area, in square feet, of the smallest circle, triangle or
rectangle or other shape which encloses all of the informational material
in the sign, as well as its display backing or border if different in color,
texture, materials or plane from the adjacent wall, window, sky or other
background. For projecting and freestanding signs, such sign area shall not
include incidental supports, though each face of the sign shall be separately
counted, and the combination of all faces totaled. For three-dimensional
symbols, the sign area shall be the area, in square feet, of the smallest
circle, triangle or rectangle or other shape which encloses the largest figure
constituting a cross section of the symbol.
SIGN HEIGHT — Computed by measuring the distance to the highest or
lowest portion of the sign, as the case may be, used in computing sign
area, excluding the supporting structure or bracing of the sign unless the
structure or bracing is made part of the message or face of the sign.
SIGN or SIGNS — Informational material, such as a word, abbreviation,
letter, punctuation mark, trademark, symbol or shape, as well as a
representation by picture, model, drawing or similar means, which is visible
from a public street or sidewalk, including material on or behind a window
or glass door, and which informs the viewer about the thing referred to,
including but not limited to its identity, location, price, merit or use. A sign
shall not, however, include a merchandise price sign smaller than six square
inches or a merchandise label, and in no event shall a sign include any
flag, emblem, insignia or display incidental to and customarily or commonly
associated with any national, local or religious holiday.
STOREFRONT FOOTAGE — That portion of the building frontage allocable
to street, store or office level within such building.
§ 230-42. Permit required; issuance procedure.
Except as hereinafter provided, no sign or attracting device may be erected,
altered or reconstructed, except for normal maintenance, without a permit
from the Village Board of Trustees or such person or persons as may be
designated by the Board of Trustees from time to time by resolution. Such
a permit may be granted only after compliance with the requirements
applicable to such sign or device and after receipt of a report in accordance
with the provisions of § 230-44 hereof. Applications for such a permit shall
be made on forms provided by the Village Board of Trustees, together
with such other information, such as photographs and drawings, as are
reasonably necessary to establish compliance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 230-43. Fees. [Amended 10-7-1987 by L.L. No. 4-1987]
The fee for permits shall be as otherwise provided by law.137
§ 230-44. Design review and reports.
137. Editor's Note: As to current fee provisions, see Ch. 109, Fees.
§ 230-41 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-44
225:620
§ 230-45. Sign specifications and requirements.
A. Referral. Before a permit for a sign or attracting device or a special
permit or a variance relating to a sign or attracting device may be
granted, the application for the permit, special permit or variance shall
be referred to the Code Official for a report.
B. Review considerations. In responding to applications, the Code Official
shall consider whether the materials, texture, colors and details of
construction are an appropriate expression of the design concept of the
work proposed, whether it is appropriate to and compatible with its
surroundings and whether such work would be consistent with the
purposes of this article; provided, however, that the Code Official shall
restrict his considerations to a reasonable and professional review.
C. Report content and procedure.
(1) In any report required under this article, the Inspector may make
recommendations, including approval, disapproval, amendments or
advice for possible conditions to be imposed, and such report shall
be written.
(2) A prospective applicant may seek informal advice from the
Inspector before application for a permit is made.
(3) Upon receipt of a design report, the Board of Trustees, as the case
may be, shall consider such report in its response and,
notwithstanding compliance with all other requirements of this
article, approve, disapprove, amend or impose conditions on such
application or proposed plan based on design considerations;
provided, however, that to the extent the decision of the Board
differs from the recommendations of a report, the Board shall state
the reasons for such difference in writing.
(4) Any applicant may, upon request, obtain a copy of the design
report.
(5) If the Code Official fails to report within 30 days of receipt of an
application, such failure to respond shall be deemed the equivalent
of a design report that the Inspector has no objection or comments
on the subject application.
A. On or after the effective date hereof, no sign shall be erected or altered
in the Village unless the sign meets the requirements of this section.
B. On or after the effective date hereof, no sign shall be erected or altered
in a residence district except a sign displaying only the name, address
or profession of the occupant of the premises. Such sign shall be no
larger than one square foot in sign area, shall not be illuminated unless
a professional sign, and otherwise shall conform to the sign top height,
motion, illumination and color requirements of this section.
§ 230-44 WATER § 230-45
225:621
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, such signs shall be
exempt from any permit requirements.
C. On or after the effective date hereof, no sign shall be erected or altered
in a business district unless the said sign meets the following
requirements:
(1) Sign top height. No sign shall have a sign top height higher than
the lowest of the following:
(a) Fifteen feet above the curbline.
(b) The bottom of the sills of the first level of windows above the
first story.
(c) The lowest roofline of the building.
(2) Permitted exterior sign area for street-level signs. Signs for a single
building or occupancy shall together not exceed the permitted sign
area, and all such signs shall have a total sign area of no more than
1.5 square feet for each foot of building frontage.
(3) Permitted interior sign area for street-level signs. No signs on or
behind a window or a door constituting part of such total sign area
shall have a sign area of more than 15% of the glass area of such
window or door.
(4) Permitted sign area for signs above street level. Only interior signs
shall be permitted for occupancies which are above street level.
The total sign area for such signs shall not exceed 1/3 of the glass
area of the window or door to which it is attached.
(5) Vertical dimension. No sign shall have a vertical dimension greater
than 2.0 feet.
(6) Overall dimensions. In no event shall any sign exceed 25 feet in
length or contain an area in excess of 75 square feet.
(7) Building relation. Each sign shall be attached on its entire surface
to the face of a building or within a door or window of a building.
(8) Projection. No sign shall, unless on an awning, project outward
more than 12 inches from the plane of the surface to which it is
attached.
(9) Plane. Each sign shall, unless on an awning, be parallel to the plane
of the building face.
(10) Motion. No sign shall contain or consist of moving parts or
intermittent light.
(11) Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated except indirectly or
internally with white light. Exposed neon tubing shall not be
permitted. Neon and other gastype illumination shall be permitted
§ 230-45 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-45
225:622
§ 230-46. Attracting devices restricted.
All attracting devices erected for 45 days or more shall be permitted only
by special permit, as hereinafter provided in § 230-47.
§ 230-47. Signs or attracting devices requiring special permits.
The Board of Trustees, in appropriate cases, after receipt of a design report
and recommendation by the Code Official, may, by resolution, permit the
following signs or attracting devices, subject to appropriate safeguards
consistent with the purposes of this article.
within an internally lighted sign, provided that such lighting is
transmitted through the letters or symbols of such display and such
letters or symbols are stencil cut or are otherwise designed for and
integrated into the face of the sign prior to erection and are not
glued or pinned or similarly affixed to the plastic face of the sign.
Internal lighting that floods through the translucent area of the
face of the sign not carrying the message or identifying letters shall
not be permitted. In no event shall an illuminated sign be placed or
directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be
directed or beamed upon any adjacent public or private premises
so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a nuisance or
traffic hazard. An underwriter's label shall be affixed to every sign
having an electrical component.
(12) Color. No sign shall use more than three colors (with black and
white considered colors) none of which may be fluorescent or "dayglo"
colors.
(13) Awning signs. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as
prohibiting any premises from having one or more awnings made of
cloth or canvas with iron or tube frames, provided that the lowest
part of each such awning shall be at least seven feet above the
sidewalk surface, and further provided that any permit required by
law is obtained for such awning. Any such awning which includes a
sign as defined in this chapter shall require a sign permit.
[Amended 3-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(14) Location. No sign shall be placed or located by any person on any
tree, light pole or utility pole or on any public property, street,
sidewalk or right-of-way.
A. Ground signs: for each building in a nonresidential district or any
nonresidential building in a residential district which is set back more
than 10 feet from the curbline of the nearest sidewalk or public street,
one ground-mounted sign no closer to the street than the inside edge of
the sidewalk, or curb if no sidewalk exists; such sign to otherwise
conform to the requirements of § 230-45C.
§ 230-45 WATER § 230-47
225:623
§ 230-48. Signs or attracting devices exempted.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, no permit shall be required
for the following signs or attracting devices:
B. Multiresidential signs: for each apartment or condominium or
cooperative building in a residential district, one ground-mounted or
wall sign to identify such building; such sign to have a sign area of no
more than 0.2 square foot for each foot of building frontage and to
otherwise conform to the requirements of § 230-45C. In no event shall
the total area of all signs exceed 60 square feet.
C. Projecting signs: wall-mounted projecting signs and three-dimensional
symbols, models or representations not extending more than three feet
over a public street or sidewalk; such objects, however, otherwise to
conform to the requirements of § 230-45C, and such signs also to have a
sign bottom height no lower than eight feet above the curbline.
D. Attracting devices: attracting devices erected for longer than 45 days.
E. Special identification signs: signs on or behind windows to identify
occupants of buildings, which occupants lack storefront footage within
such building; such signs to conform to all the requirements of
§ 230-45C except the sign top requirement.
F. Special entrance signs: signs indicating side or rear entrances to stores
or buildings; such signs to be no more than two square feet in sign area
and otherwise to conform to all the requirements of § 230-45C except
the permitted sign area requirement.
G. Signs for retail or service businesses without window space: A building
with any retail or service businesses without window space may have,
at the front entrance, in a single location, a sign or signs identifying
each such retail or service business. Said sign or signs shall comply
with all the requirements of § 230-45C, provided that the total area of
such sign or signs, taken collectively, may exceed up to 10% of the total
area permitted for exterior street level signs.
A. Sale signs: signs in any nonresidential district, or appurtenant to a
nonresidential use in a residential district, advertising special sales or
events, which signs may be displayed for a period not in excess of 14
days and which otherwise must conform to all the requirements of
§ 230-45C, except that the permitted interior sign area may be
temporarily increased by up to 50%, all of which increase may be
allocated to increase the applicable glass area limit.
B. Construction signs: signs temporarily erected in a nonresidential
district during construction or alteration of the premises on which the
sign is located. Such signs shall have a sign area of no more than 15 feet
and shall be removed as soon as the work is complete. Such signs shall
otherwise conform to the requirements of § 230-45C.
§ 230-47 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-48
225:624
§ 230-49. Nonconformity restricted; time limitations for removal of
obsolete signs.
C. Political signs: political signs incident to an election, provided that such
signs may be displayed no more than 60 days prior to the day of
election, must be removed within five days after the election and may
not be attached to a tree, post, utility pole or fence or otherwise placed
to obstruct vision of pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists. Such signs
must conform to all requirements of § 230-45C, except that the
permitted sign area may be 50% greater than that which is otherwise
permitted.
A. No sign or attracting device existing on the effective date of this article
shall be required to conform to its provisions, subject to the following
exceptions:
(1) Unless otherwise exempted, all attracting devices shall conform to
this article and shall be the subject of a permit issued hereunder
within two years of the effective date of this article.
(2) Unless otherwise exempted, all rooftop signs shall conform to this
article and shall be the subject of a permit issued hereunder within
two years of the effective date of this article.
(3) Unless otherwise exempted, all signs the exterior sign area of
which exceeds by more than 50% that permitted under § 230-45C
shall conform to this article and shall be the subject of a permit
issued hereunder within two years of the effective date of this
article.
(4) Unless otherwise exempted, all interior signs shall conform to this
article and shall be the subject of a permit issued hereunder within
six months of the effective date of this article.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 230-49A, signs or attracting
devices containing moving parts or intermittent lighting shall be made
nonmoving or nonintermittent within 60 days from the effective date of
this article.
C. In achieving conformity, the location of any previously existing sign
must be made to conform in color, plane and texture to the surrounding
building area if it remains visible after being replaced by a new sign.
D. Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona
fide business conducted, product sold or activity or service being
conducted shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or
person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or lot upon
which such sign may be found within 60 days of such cessation. Upon
failure to comply within the time specified, the Code Official is hereby
authorized to order removal of such sign, within 60 days of a written
notification, and expenses incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of
the building, structure or lot to which such sign is attached.
§ 230-48 WATER § 230-49
225:625

ARTICLE V
Off-Street Parking and Truck Loading Space
[Amended 9-8-1975 by L.L. No. 8-1975]
§ 230-50. General requirements.
Off-street parking and truck loading spaces shall be provided and kept
available as an accessory use to all permitted and special exception uses
of buildings, structures and lots in amounts not less than those specified in
this article.
§ 230-51. Method of determining off-street parking space
requirements.
§ 230-52. Schedule of Off-Street Parking Space Requirements.
[Amended 4-5-1982 by L.L. No. 3-1982]
Use Number of Spaces Required
Single-family dwelling 1 housed in a garage or carport
Hospital, nursing home or clinic 1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per employee
Office (except a professional office),
bank or savings and loan association
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
space
Professional office (except a home
professional office)
1 per 150 square feet of gross floor
space
A. The requirement for a single use (e.g., a single-family dwelling or a
retail store) shall be determined directly from the schedule of such
requirements which is a part of this article.
B. The requirement for a combination use made up of several component
uses (e.g., a retail store combined with an office building) shall be
determined by establishing the requirement for each component use
from the schedule of such requirements which is a part of this article
and adding them together.
C. When the required number of spaces is determined to result in a
fraction, it shall be increased to the next higher whole number.
D. If the use is not specifically listed in the schedule of such requirements,
the requirement shall be the same as for the most similar listed use, as
determined by the Board of Trustees.
E. A garage or carport may be used to meet the requirements of this
article, except as otherwise specified herein. The required access
driveway or aisle may not be used to meet the requirements of this
article.
§ 230-50 WATER § 230-52
225:627
Use Number of Spaces Required
Place of public assembly
(auditorium, church, convention
hall, theater, lodge, club, hall,
bowling establishment, gymnasium,
studio or other places of public
assembly not otherwise classified)
1 per 4 seats or per 4 persons which
can be legally accommodated, plus 1
per employee
Retail store or personal service shop 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor
area in excess of 500 gross square
feet, with a minimum of 2 spaces
School [Amended 7-13-1998 by
L.L. No. 5-1998; 2-8-1999 by L.L.
No. 1-1999; 10-12-2006 by L.L.
No. 9-2006]
1 for each staff member or
employee, plus 1 for each 8 students
in the 12th grade or above. Parking
areas for schools shall also include
sufficient on-site area(s) for pickup
and dropoff of students arriving and
leaving the premises by vehicle,
which areas shall first be approved
by the Board of Trustees.
All other businesses, including a
home occupation and home
professional office
1 per each 300 square feet of gross
floor area in excess of 500 square
feet of gross floor area, with a
minimum of 2 spaces
Filling station, parking garage or
repair garage
Sufficient parking spaces, as
determined by the Board of
Trustees, for all vehicles being
serviced at any one period of time,
plus a minimum of 5 additional
spaces
Restaurant 1 per 4 permanent seats or the floor
area equivalent, plus 1 space per
employee
§ 230-53. Private parking garages or off-street parking areas.
The following are supplemental use regulations for private parking garages
and off-street parking areas in residential and apartment districts:
A. Not more than one garage or carport parking space per dwelling unit
may be rented to persons living off the premises in the case of a onefamily
or two-family dwelling use; nor may more than one parking space
per each two dwelling units be rented to persons living off the premises
in the case of any other residential use.
B. Not more than one commercial vehicle may be parked on a premises,
and that vehicle shall be parked in a completely enclosed private
parking garage. Such commercial vehicle shall not exceed a gross
motor vehicle weight of 5,000 pounds or 25 feet in length. Such truck
§ 230-52 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-53
225:628
§ 230-54. Access driveway requirements.
§ 230-55. Off-street truck loading space requirements.
Every building or structure over 5,000 square feet in gross area or lot
used for nonresidential purposes shall be provided with off-street truck
loading spaces in accordance with the following schedule: one space for
each 10,000 square feet or a part thereof of gross floor area. Additional
requirements above 40,000 square feet shall be determined by the Board of
Trustees.
§ 230-56. Design requirements for off-street parking and truck
loading areas.
shall not contain any material that constitutes a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Village.
C. Not more than one unregistered vehicle may be stored outside an
enclosed building on any premises, provided that such vehicle is stored
on a surfaced driveway for a period not exceeding 30 days in any year.
D. Off-street parking for nonresidential activities, such as home
professional offices, shall not be located in any front yard, required side
yard or within 25 feet of any lot line.
A. Entrances and exits for off-street parking areas and garages may be
either separate or combined.
B. Every entrance or exit driveway shall have a minimum unobstructed
width of 10 feet. Parking areas with 10 spaces or more shall have at
least either two separate ten-foot driveways or a combined exit and
entrance driveway with an unobstructed width of 20 feet. Access
driveways shall be no closer than 25 feet to a street corner.
C. Access driveways for other than single-family or two-family dwellings
shall not exceed a center line gradient of 8%.
D. Curb cuts. No driveway shall be installed or constructed with access to
a street or road in the Village unless a curb cut permit has been issued
by the Village for such access. Such curb cut permit shall be issued in
the same manner as provided for issuance of a building permit. For the
purposes of this subsection, the term "driveway" shall mean and include
any path, paved or unpaved, over which it is intended that vehicles are
to travel, to exit a street or road and enter upon adjoining property.
[Added 8-12-1996 by L.L. No. 8-1996]
A. The parking area shall be located on the premises and shall be so
shaped as to provide for the parking of the required number of vehicles
as determined under this article. Minimum front yard setbacks, loading
and unloading areas and access driveways shall not be included when
computing the required amount of property for off-street parking.
§ 230-53 WATER § 230-56
225:629
Where access driveways are required for special purposes (e.g. drive-in
teller's window) they shall also be included.
B. The physical improvements of off-street parking and truck loading
areas shall include:
(1) Curbs, paving, sidewalks and drainage facilities complying with the
standards as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(2) All areas devoted to off-street parking and access driveways shall
be surfaced in accordance with specifications not less than those of
the Town of North Hempstead.
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to prevent overflow of
rainwater or other precipitation onto adjoining properties or public
streets.
(4) Access driveways for public areas shall be marked with arrows
indicating the proper flow of traffic, and individual parking spaces
shall be shown and maintained.
(5) Adequate lighting shall be provided in public parking areas to
assure the general safety and convenience of the public. All lighting
of premises shall be directed away from adjoining residences and
shall not exceed a height of 15 feet above the grade of the
premises. The location, candlepower, height and type of fixture to
be installed shall be first approved by the Board of Trustees.
(6) Parking areas shall be illuminated uniformly at night only during
the business hours of the store or buildings which they serve, which
illumination shall be extinguished within 1/2 hour after the close of
business, except security lighting, which shall be approved by the
Board of Trustees. Where said parking areas are directly adjacent
to residential districts, the lighting fixtures and equipment shall be
so designed and installed as to reflect away from, and to shield,
such residential districts from the lights of the parking areas.
(7) Adequate and appropriate screening for the protection of adjacent
properties as approved by the Board of Trustees shall be provided
and permanently maintained.
(8) No part of any required parking area, access driveways or loading
and unloading areas shall be used for the storage or abandonment
of any article or material.
(9) Off-street truck loading areas shall be surfaced in the same manner
as the parking areas.
C. All aisles within parking areas shall have a minimum width of 24 feet
when the parking spaces are at a ninety-degree angle with the aisle, 18
feet when the parking spaces are at 60º and 12 feet when the parking
spaces are at 45º.
§ 230-56 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-56
225:630
§ 230-57. Exemptions and waivers.
§ 230-58. Storage of unregistered motor vehicles on private
property.
The outside storage on private property of any unregistered and/or
unlicensed motor vehicle for a period longer than 15 consecutive days
is prohibited, unless such unregistered and/or unlicensed motor vehicle,
notwithstanding the year in which the same shall have been manufactured,
is, at all times while being so stored, kept in such condition and maintained
with such equipment that it will meet the minimum requirements to pass
the New York State motor vehicle inspection standards as provided by
D. Aisles and turning areas shall have adequate radii to assure ease of
mobility, ample clearance and convenient access and egress. Centerline
gradients of aisles shall not exceed 8%. Parking garage ramps shall
not exceed a gradient of 12%.
E. Parking spaces for automobiles shall have a minimum width of nine feet
and a minimum length of 20 feet.
F. Off-street truck loading spaces shall have a minimum width of 12 feet, a
minimum length of 25 feet and a minimum clearance height of 14 feet.
The related aisle shall have the same clear height.
G. Off-street truck loading areas shall be provided in a location that will
not interfere with accessory parking and means of ingress and egress
thereto.
H. Off-street parking and truck loading areas shall be designed to avoid
the impression of large-scale paved areas and shall include provision
for landscaping and screening.
I. Every parking space shall have free access to either an aisle or an
access driveway, unless provision is made for attendant parking.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any building or structure
or lot lawfully in use at the effective date of this article, whether
continued as a permitted use or as a legal nonconforming use or
thereafter converted or changed without enlargement to a different use
having the same parking and truck loading requirements.
B. Within an established municipal parking district wherein the
municipality has, as a matter of public policy, taken the responsibility
for providing adequate off-street parking facilities for all uses in the
district, the off-street parking space requirements stipulated in this
section shall be automatically waived.
C. The area within the Village bounded by Middle Neck Road, Linden
Boulevard, Gateway Drive and Cedar Drive and located within the
Business D District is hereby designated as a municipal parking district
for the purposes of this section. [Added 6-6-1977 by L.L. No. 7-1977]
§ 230-56 WATER § 230-58
225:631
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and all rules and
regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles for the
periodic inspection of motor vehicles in the State of New York, as the same
may be amended from time to time. This prohibition shall not apply to
the storage of such vehicles where the storage may be considered to be a
legitimate accessory or implied part of a permitted use.
§ 230-59. Parking of vehicles and recreational equipment. [Added
8-12-1996 by L.L. No. 8-1996; amended 1-14-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
No boat or motorized recreational equipment (including personal
watercraft) shall be parked or stored outdoors on any property used for
residential purposes in the Village where the boat or recreational
equipment is visible from the adjacent public street.
§ 230-60. Restriction on parking spaces for business. [Added
5-7-1979 by L.L. No. 2-1979; 6-7-1982 by L.L. No. 6-1982; 10-2-1986
by L.L. No. 10-1986]
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary and except
as provided herein, no part of any parking space or the entrances or
access roadways to be used in connection with any building in a
business district shall be located in a residence district.
B. In the case of property in a residence district and located north of
Cedar Drive and within 150 feet of Middle Neck Road, the Board of
Trustees may grant a special permit for the use of such property for
such purposes, as provided in this section.
C. A permit as provided in Subsection B hereof may be granted only
where:
(1) The property in the residential district abuts or adjoins the lot or
premises in the business district in connection with which the
parking is to be used.
(2) Access to the parking area is over or through the lot or premises on
which the business use is conducted.
(3) The area in the residential district to be used for or in connection
with the parking of vehicles is not more than 150 feet from Middle
Neck Road.
(4) Such parking is located at least 20 feet from the boundary of
adjacent lots or premises used for residential purposes or located
in a residential district.
(5) The parking of vehicles is to be at ground level or in an enclosed
structure not more than one story or 10 feet below ground level,
whichever is less.
§ 230-58 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-60
225:632
§ 230-60.1. Planning Board authority to grant special permits
regarding off-street parking. [Added 1-13-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
(6) No parking is to be permitted in any structure having a height of
more than one story or 10 feet, whichever is greater.
(7) Such use exists on June 1, 1986, in connection with a building in
the business district. No such permit shall be granted for such use
if the use is to commence after June 1, 1986.
D. In the event that a permit is granted for parking on a lot on premises
within a residential district, as provided in this section, no residential
use or other use of the lot or premises shall be permitted.
E. Any permission granted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to this
section may be made subject to reasonable conditions imposed for the
protection of neighboring properties and the community, as may be
necessary or reasonable in any particular circumstance, including,
without limitation, conditions as to landscaping, maintenance, location
and duration of parking and duration of special permission.
A. Upon application by an owner (or authorized agent of an owner) of any
property in the Village other than a property used or to be used for a
single-family residence, the Planning Board may grant a special permit
to allow off-street parking for such property in quantity, or location,
other than may otherwise be required by law. The Planning Board may
grant such special permit, in its sole discretion, upon such reasonable
terms and conditions as may be appropriate in the circumstances and
consistent with this section.
B. Prior to granting any such special permit, the Planning Board shall
determine whether such relief, and such conditions, will be in the
interest of the public health, safety or general welfare, and otherwise
will be in harmony with the provisions of the Village Code and will not
adversely affect the neighborhood or community. The Planning Board
also shall consider the availability of public parking in the area of the
subject property, and the availability of public parking on private
property off site.
C. Public hearing and decision on special use permits. Prior to approving
any special permit pursuant to this section, the Planning Board shall
conduct a public hearing with respect to such application. The
procedures for making application, and for notice and conduct of such
hearing, shall be the same as those which apply to an application to the
Board of Appeals for a variance pursuant to this chapter.
D. In any case where the Planning Board grants a special permit which
waives, varies, or otherwise modifies the requirements of this Code for
off-street parking, the decision of the Planning Board shall expressly
state the number of spaces required to be provided pursuant to this
Code or otherwise required for such premises by law (including
§ 230-60 WATER § 230-60.1
225:633
pursuant to any prior variances or preexisting legal requirements),
the number of spaces required to be provided as determined by the
Planning Board, and the number of spaces that, by reason of the
determination of the Planning Board, are not required to be provided.
§ 230-60.1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-60.1
225:634
ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
[Amended 9-12-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994; 8-9-1999 by L.L. No.
5-1999; 11-14-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
§ 230-61. Existing nonconforming uses, premises, buildings or
structures. [Amended 2-27-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007; 2-5-2014 by
L.L. No. 3-2014]
A. Nonconforming uses. Any nonconforming use lawfully existing on the
effective date of the original Building Zone Ordinance on February 23,
1926, or lawfully established at any time thereafter in accordance with
the laws of the Village at the time the use was established, but which
does not conform to the requirements of this Code adopted or amended
thereafter and currently in effect, may be continued, provided that:
(1) No nonconforming use shall be altered, enlarged or extended in
any building or structure or on any premises, or at the expense of a
conforming use, nor shall any nonconforming use be extended to
any portion of a building, structure or property not previously used
lawfully for such nonconforming use. If any nonconforming use is
abandoned, reduced in scope or size, or changed to or replaced in
whole or in part by a conforming use, the said nonconforming use
shall not thereafter be resumed, altered, enlarged or expanded.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a nonconforming use shall be
considered to have been enlarged if it has been changed in any
manner which results in an extension of the use to any portion of a
building or premises where such use was not previously conducted
or which was not previously used for such use, an increase in the
floor area or land area occupied or utilized by the use, an increase
in the times or days of operation of the use, or a change in the
nature or scope of the use. The foregoing factors shall not be
exclusive, and where appropriate circumstances exist to support
such conclusion, the Code Official may conclude that an
enlargement of a nonconforming use has occurred even in the
absence of any of such factors.
(3) No nonconforming use may be changed to any other
nonconforming use.
(4) Any nonconforming use which shall have ceased for any reason for
a continuous period of six months or more shall be presumed to be
discontinued. Any nonconforming use which shall be reduced in
size or scope for any reason for a continuous period of six months
or more, regardless of intent, shall be presumed to be discontinued
to the extent of such reduction. No such discontinued use, or part
thereof, may thereafter be resumed, nor shall it be replaced by any
other nonconforming use.
§ 230-61 WATER § 230-61
225:635
(5) Notwithstanding anything in this subsection to the contrary, if a
building or structure in which a nonconforming use is conducted is
damaged by fire, explosion, force majeure or act of public enemy, or
any other cause (other than action by or on behalf of the property
owner), to an extent not more than 50% of its value, such building
or structure may be restored or reconstructed, and the use
continued, only as provided in this Code.
B. Nonconforming buildings or structures. Any nonconforming building or
structure lawfully existing on the effective date of the original Building
Zone Ordinance on February 23, 1926, or lawfully existing at any time
thereafter, but which does not conform to the requirements of this Code
adopted or amended thereafter and currently in effect, may be
continued. No such nonconforming building or structure may thereafter
be repaired, reconstructed or structurally altered, enlarged or
expanded, except in conformity to the Code provisions applicable at the
time of such repair, reconstruction, alteration, enlargement or
expansion, provided that:
(1) No nonconforming building or structure shall be altered,
structurally changed, or enlarged in any manner which would
exacerbate or increase the degree or type of nonconformity.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this subsection to the contrary, if a
nonconforming building or structure, is damaged by fire, explosion,
force majeure or act of public enemy, or any other cause (other
than action by or on behalf of the property owner), to an extent not
more than 50% of its value, such building or structure may be
restored or reconstructed in its previously nonconforming location
and condition only as provided in this Code.
(3) Any nonconforming building which shall not have been used for any
lawful purpose for a continuous period of six months or more, for
any reason and regardless of intent, shall be presumed to be
abandoned as a nonconforming building.
C. Nonconforming premises. Any nonconforming premises lawfully
existing on the effective date of the original Building Zone Ordinance on
February 23, 1926, or lawfully existing at any time thereafter, but which
does not conform to the requirements of this Code adopted or amended
thereafter and currently in effect, may be continued. No such
nonconforming premises may thereafter be altered or changed in any
manner except in a manner which reduces or eliminates the
nonconformity. Any building, structure or use existing or proposed to be
located on a nonconforming premises shall conform to all requirements
of this chapter other than those area or dimensional requirements
applicable to the lot upon which such building or structure is located or
proposed to be located.
D. Maintenance and repairs not restricted. Nothing in this section shall be
deemed to prevent ordinary maintenance and repairs intended to keep
§ 230-61 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-61
225:636
§ 230-62. Restoration or reconstruction of nonconforming buildings
or structures; continuation of nonconforming uses in such cases.
[Amended 2-5-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
an existing nonconforming building or structure, or an existing building
or structure in which a lawful nonconforming use is conducted, in good
repair.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration or reconstruction,
within two years, of a lawfully nonconforming building or structure
destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, force majeure or act of public
enemy, or any other cause (other than action by or on behalf of the
property owner), to an extent not more than 50% of its value (as
determined by the Code Official), nor prevent the continuance of any
nonconforming use of such restored or reconstructed building or
structure or part thereof, provided that such restoration or
reconstruction does not violate the provisions of this chapter to any
greater extent or in any manner other than that which lawfully existed
at the time of such destruction or damage.
B. If any such building or structure is so destroyed or damaged to an
extent exceeding 50% of its value, as determined by the Code Official, it
shall not be reconstructed or restored, and shall not be used, except in
conformity to the regulations then applicable in the zoning district in
which it is located.
C. Any building or structure destroyed or damaged by any cause
enumerated in this section to an extent exceeding 50% of its value,
exclusive of foundation, at the time of such destruction or damage may
be reconstructed or restored, and thereafter used, only in such a
manner as to conform to all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, any such residential
building or structure may be reconstructed within one year with a floor
area ratio, building area and height no greater and setbacks from
property lines no less than that which existed prior to such destruction,
provided that the same otherwise conforms to all applicable zoning and
building codes.
D. Nothing in this article shall prevent the restoration of a wall or
structure determined to be unsafe, provided that such restoration shall
be determined by the Code Official to be in compliance with all
applicable building codes.
§ 230-61 WATER § 230-62
225:637

ARTICLE VII
Administrative Provisions
§ 230-63. Interpretation and application of provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and as not interfering with, abrogating
or annulling any easements, covenants or other agreements between
parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction or limitation upon the use of buildings, premises or lots or
upon the height and size of buildings or requires larger yards or other
open spaces than are imposed or required by existing provisions of law or
ordinances or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.138
138. Editor's Note: Former §§ 128-56 through 128-70, regarding building permits, certificates
of occupancy and application procedures, which immediately followed this section, were
repealed 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996. See now Ch. 95, Building Construction.
§ 230-63 WATER § 230-63
225:639

ARTICLE VIII
Board of Appeals
§ 230-64. Board continued; organization.139 [Amended 9-11-2000 by
L.L. No. 5-2000]
A. Section 7-712, Subdivisions 2, 4, 5 and 6, of the Village Law of the State
of New York, are hereby superseded and amended in relation to the
Village of Great Neck Estates, and the following provisions of this
Subsection A shall apply in their place and stead: [Amended
6-10-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
(1) The Board of Appeals of the Village of Great Neck Estates shall
consist of five members. The Mayor shall appoint the members and
the Chair of said Board of Appeals, subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees. In the absence of the Chair, the members of the
Board of Appeals present and participating in any meeting may
designate a member to serve as acting Chair. The members of the
Board of Appeals shall serve without compensation, but may be
reimbursed for actual expenses. The Board of Trustees may appoint
counsel for the Board of Appeals, and may provide for
compensation to be paid to counsel, experts, clerks and a secretary
and provide for such other expenses as may be necessary and
proper, not exceeding the appropriation made by the Board of
Trustees for such purpose. [Amended 10-8-2015 by L.L. No.
7-2015]
(2) The members of the Board of Appeals now in office shall continue in
office for the duration of their respective terms, and upon
expiration of such terms their successors shall be appointed and
qualified as provided by law. [Amended 10-8-2015 by L.L. No.
7-2015]
(3) No person who is a member of the Village Board of Trustees shall
be eligible for membership on such Board of Appeals.140
B. Alternate members.
(1) Pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law, Village Law § 7-712,
Subdivision 11, is hereby repealed and superseded in its
application to the Village of Great Neck Estates.
139. Editor's Note: By resolution adopted 4-5-1976, the Board of Trustees abolished the Board
of Appeals as created by and continued in Ord. No. 9, as amended, and created a new
Board of Appeals in conformity with § 7-712 of the Village Law, to consist of five members
and to have the powers and duties prescribed by law as well as those powers and duties
theretofore prescribed. This action was taken as changes in New York State statutes
adopted subsequent to establishment of the Board by the Village required that certain
alterations be made in the format of the Board.
140. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(4), regarding the number of members permitted to
participate in any matter, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
10-8-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015.
§ 230-64 WATER § 230-64
225:641
§ 230-64.1. Decisions. [Added 10-4-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
(2) Subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, the Mayor may
appoint not more than six alternate members of the Board of
Appeals, to serve in order as designated by the Chair of the Board
in place of any members of the Board of Appeals who are unable,
for any reason, to attend any particular meeting of the Board. The
alternate members of the Board shall have all of the powers and
duties of regular members at such times as the alternate members
are serving. Such alternate members shall be appointed for terms
of one official year each. [Amended 6-14-2004 by L.L. No.
4-2004; 5-14-2012 by L.L. No. 8-2012]
A. Section 7-712-a13 of the Village Law is hereby amended, and
superseded in its application to the Village, to read as follows:
"Wherever the vote of a majority of the entire Board is required to make
a determination or adopt a resolution, the affirmative vote of at least
three members or alternate members of the Board shall be required.
Wherever the vote of more than a majority is required, the number of
required votes shall be calculated as if the entire Board consisted of five
members. The failure of the Board to adopt a decision within any
specific period of time shall constitute neither a denial nor an approval.
Where an action is the subject of a referral to the county planning
agency or regional planning council, the voting provisions of § 239-m of
the General Municipal Law shall apply." [Amended 6-10-2013 by L.L.
No. 4-2013]
B. The Board of Appeals may render its decision on any appeal or
application in a short-form format, summarily setting forth the Board's
determination and conditions, if any, without enumerating findings or
conclusions which formed the basis for the determination. Within 30
days after filing of the short-form decision in the office of the Village
Clerk, any appellant, applicant or other person or persons jointly or
severally aggrieved by the decision may file a written demand with the
Village Clerk requesting that the Board of Appeals render its decision in
a format containing the findings and conclusions which formed the
basis for the Board's determination. The Village Clerk shall promptly
deliver such written demand to the Chair, who shall promptly convene a
meeting of the Board to render such long-form decision. Where the
Board renders a short-form decision and no written demand requesting
a long-form decision is filed within the required thirty-day period, the
date of filing of the short-form decision with the Village Clerk shall be
deemed the date of the filing of the Board's decision for all purposes.
Where the Board renders or is required to render a long-form decision,
the date of filing of the long-form decision with the Clerk shall be
deemed the date of filing of the Board's decision for all purposes.
§ 230-64 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-65
225:642
§ 230-65. Rules. [Amended 12-11-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
The Board of Appeals shall have power to adopt and amend rules for its
procedures, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees. Existing rules and
practices are continued until repealed or amended.
§ 230-66. Fees. [Amended 5-5-1969 by Ord. No. 116; 11-3-1975 by
L.L. No. 9-1975; 2-13-1978 by L.L. No. 1-1978; 4-12-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004]
The applicant shall submit with the application a fee to cover the cost of
publication and incidental and related expenses. The application fee shall
be as set forth in Chapter 109, Fees.141
§ 230-67. Special powers. [Amended 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
In addition to the powers granted to the Board of Appeals by the Village
Law, the Board of Appeals shall have the following special powers:
A. Where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street
layout as shown on the Zoning Map, the use and other designations
shown on the map shall be applied to the ground by the Board of
Appeals in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the map
for such particular section.
B. The Board of Appeals may determine and establish the true location of
district boundaries in any disputed case.
C. The Board of Appeals may permit any public utility in a restricted zone
if it shall be satisfied that public convenience and necessity require it.
D. The Board of Appeals may determine, in the case of an irregular lot or
in a disputed case, the identity of the front, rear or side of a building
and the location and size of the front yard, rear yard and side yards
thereof.
E. The Board of Appeals may act upon the extension of an existing
nonconforming building or the erection of a supplementary building on
the same lot, even though said supplementary building extends into a
more restricted district, all under such conditions as will safeguard the
character of the district and of the more restricted district.
F. The Board of Appeals may grant a permit wherever it is provided in this
chapter that the approval of the Board of Appeals is required.
G. The Board of Appeals may exercise any and all of the powers conferred
upon it directly or by implication by this chapter or by any other
ordinance.
141. Editor's Note: Former § 128-74, Standards for variance, as amended, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 8-18-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003.
§ 230-65 WATER § 230-67.1
225:643
§ 230-67.1. Special use permit hearings and procedures. [Added
5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
A. This section shall apply whenever a board or agency of the Village has
authority or jurisdiction to approve a special use permit.
B. Unless otherwise expressly provided by law, no special use permit shall
be issued without a public hearing.
C. Pursuant to the authority granted in Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
the provisions of Village Law § 7-725-b(6) are hereby superseded and
amended in their application to the Village of Great Neck Estates, and
with respect to such Village, said section is amended to read as follows:
6. Public hearing and decision on special use permit. Where a public
hearing is required prior to approval of a special use permit, the board
or agency with authority to approve such permit shall commence a
public hearing with respect to any such special use permit within 62
days from the day a complete application is received with respect
to any matter referred to it or within its jurisdiction. Where review
of such application is required pursuant to the State Environmental
Quality Review Act,142 and the board or agency is the lead agency,
no such application shall be complete until the latest of issuance of
a negative declaration or acceptance of a final environmental impact
statement by the lead agency. Where said board or agency is not
the lead agency, no such application shall be complete until a
determination by the chair of the Board that the application is
complete, or the issuance of a negative declaration or a findings
statement by the lead agency, whichever last occurs. At least 14 days
prior to the commencement of such hearing, the applicant shall mail
notice of said hearing to all persons and in the same manner as
required for notice of a public hearing with respect to a zoning
variance. The Village shall publish and post notice of such hearing
in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing date,
and shall give such other notice as may be required by law and such
additional notice as the Board of Trustees shall determine. The board
or agency with jurisdiction to do so shall make a decision with respect
to such application within 62 days after the conclusion of such public
hearing. No decision with respect to such application shall be made
by operation of law, and all decisions shall require the affirmative
vote of at least a majority of the members of the board or agency
with jurisdiction to determine the application. The time periods to
commence a hearing or to render a decision may be extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and the board or agency. The decision
of the board or agency shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk
within five business days after such decision is rendered, and a copy
thereof shall be mailed to the applicant and to any other person
requesting the same and providing a postage-paid mailing envelope.
Nothing herein shall preclude the holding of a public hearing on any
matter on which a public hearing is not so required.
§ 230-67.1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-68
225:644
§ 230-68. Conditions, limitations and standards governing permits
and approvals.
In granting permits and approvals and exercising the powers conferred
upon the Board of Appeals, the Board shall be governed by the following
conditions, limitations and standards:
A. No person shall be entitled as a matter of right to a variance, permit,
approval or other action by the Board of Appeals. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this chapter or any evidence presented to it, the Board of
Appeals may refuse to exercise the powers conferred upon it, and if it
does so refuse, the applicant shall not be entitled to the relief sought
and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter which control in the
absence of such variance, exception, permit or approval by the Board of
Appeals.
B. For the purpose of §§ 230-67 and 230-68, the objective of the zoning
regulations is to preserve and develop the Village of Great Neck Estates
as a place for fine one-family homes on well-planted and welllandscaped
sites for year-round occupancy.
C. No action shall be taken by the Board of Appeals the effect of which, in
the judgment of the Board, may impair the value or desirability of
properties in the Village for residential purposes of said character or
which may permit the introduction into the Village of a type of
development not established therein at the date of adoption of this
chapter.
D. In granting any relief, the Board of Appeals may impose conditions
which in its judgment will tend to carry out the purpose of this section,
including but not limited to requiring larger size of lot or larger front or
side yards or greater street frontage than required by this chapter for
the district in which said property is situated.
E. In case conditions are imposed, the Board may require the applicant to
furnish the bond of a surety company satisfactory to the Board in an
amount fixed by the Board, to assure the performance of such
conditions.143
F. Amendments of decisions. [Added 7-14-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008]
(1) In any case where the Board of Appeals has imposed a condition
which requires that an applicant obtain permits, complete
construction, or perform any act within a specified period of time,
the Board may consider and determine an application to extend or
enlarge such period of time without a public hearing. Such
applications may be made by letter, signed by the applicant or the
142. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
143. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F regarding granting of variances, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-11-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996 as amended 7-8-1996
by L.L. No. 7-1996.
§ 230-68 WATER § 230-68
225:645
applicant's authorized agent, or in such other written form as may
be required by the Board of Appeals, and may be filed prior to,
or after, the expiration of the period of time which is sought to be
extended or enlarged. In its discretion, the Board of Appeals may
require a public hearing with respect to such an application where
the Board concludes that circumstances may have changed since
the date of the determination in which the condition was imposed
or previously enlarged or extended, or where the Board identifies
other circumstances which would warrant a public hearing.
(2) The Board of Appeals may consider and determine applications to
amend a prior determination, other than with respect to the time in
which to perform or complete an act. Such applications may be
made by letter signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized
agent, or in such other written form as the Board may determine.
No such application shall be determined except after a public
hearing held on such notice as required for an application for a
variance.
(3) The Board of Appeals shall continue to have such other authority to
reconsider and/or amend its determinations as may be provided by
law.144
144. Editor's Note: Former § 230-68.1, Conditions governing variances of off-street parking
requirements, added 1-19-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006, which immediately followed this
section, was amended and renumbered as § 230-60.1 1-13-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020.
§ 230-68 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-68
225:646
ARTICLE IX
Amendments
§ 230-69. Authority to amend.
The Board of Trustees may, from time to time on its own motion and in
accordance with the provisions of the Village Law, amend, supplement,
change, modify or repeal the regulations, restrictions and district
boundaries herein established, or any part thereof.
§ 230-69 WATER § 230-69
225:647

ARTICLE X
Violations and Penalties
§ 230-70. Construction without a building permit prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any building or structure or part
thereof until the application and plans required by this chapter shall have
been submitted to and shall have been approved by the Code Official or
by the person designated for such purpose by the Board of Trustees and a
written permit therefor shall have been issued.
§ 230-71. Certificate of occupancy required.
It shall be unlawful to occupy or use or permit the occupancy or use of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter erected, enlarged or changed
wholly or partly in its use or structure, until certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the Code Official or the person designated by the Board
of Trustees for such purpose, provided that after the issuance of a building
permit authorizing a change or enlargement of an existing building and
prior to the issuance of said certificate of occupancy, the owner of such
building may occupy and use said building in the same manner as formerly
until the change or enlargement has been completed.
§ 230-72. Violations enumerated.
Any owner, lessee, tenant, general agent, architect, builder, contractor,
subcontractor, workman, employee or any other person who commits, takes
part in or assists in any violation of this chapter or any part thereof, or who
maintains any building or premises in which any violation of this chapter
shall exist, or who permits any violation to exist in or upon any building or
premises, or who shall cause or permit any building or part thereof to be
constructed or altered contrary to the plans and specifications theretofore
filed under the provisions of this chapter and for which building permit has
been issued, shall be guilty of a violation of his chapter.
§ 230-73. Penalties for offenses. [Added 4-12-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004]
A. A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense,
punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed six months, or both, for conviction of a first offense; for
conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within a
period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more
than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both; and, upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both.
B. This section shall apply only to violations of this chapter which occur on
or before the effective date of the local law which adds this subsection.
§ 230-70 WATER § 230-73
225:649
§ 230-74. Additional remedies.
In addition to the remedies elsewhere provided, the Mayor, Board of
Trustees or the Code Official, acting in the name of the Village of Great
Neck Estates, or any person aggrieved, acting in his own name, shall have
the right and power to enforce the provisions of this chapter by injunction
or otherwise as provided by law.
Violations of this chapter which occur after that date shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. [Added 5-8-2006 by
L.L. No. 5-2006]
§ 230-73 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § 230-74
225:650
ARTICLE XI
Applicability
§ 230-75. Effect on other ordinances.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to amend, modify or repeal
any of the provisions of any other ordinance, but the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed to be in addition to and not in substitution for the
provisions of such other ordinance.
§ 230-76. Effective date.
The Building Zone Ordinance of the Village of Great Neck Estates shall
be deemed effective as of its adoption on February 23, 1926, except as to
amendments thereafter made, which amendments shall be deemed effective
as of their respective dates of adoption.
A. Any work for which a building permit has been lawfully issued prior to
the effective date of this chapter may be continued and completed and a
certificate of occupancy issued therefor, in the same manner as if this
chapter had not been adopted.
B. All building permits lawfully issued prior to the adoption of this chapter
for work which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter
and which has not been actually commenced on the ground are hereby
revoked, but the applicant for such building permit may amend the
application so as to conform to such chapter as so amended, without the
payment of an additional fee.
§ 230-75 WATER § 230-76
225:651
Appendix
Chapter A235
RULES OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Prerequisites to applications — See Ch. 8.
Voting requirements for Village boards — See
Ch. 72.
Zoning — See Ch. 230, Art. VIII, Zoning Board
of Appeals.
§ A235-1. Location of office.
The office of the Board of Appeals shall be at the Village Hall for the Village
of Great Neck Estates and shall be open during regular business hours for
the Village office.
§ A235-2. Meetings.
The regular meeting date for the Board shall be the third Thursday of each
month; provided, however, that meetings may be held on other dates when
deemed necessary by the Chair of the Board or a majority of the members
of the Board.
§ A235-3. Applications for relief.
Applications for relief may be made to the Board directly, without prior
application to the Building Department of the Village, only where expressly
permitted by law. If a building permit is required to effect such purpose,
no application for relief may be filed with the Board unless the Building
Department has issued a prior determination with respect to such building
permit and such application for relief is filed within the time required by
law. No application for interpretation of the zoning regulations of the Village
may be filed with the Board except as an appeal from a determination of the
Building Official.
§ A235-4. Persons who may make applications.
Applications or appeals to the Board may be made only by a real party
in interest, such as an owner, lessee or other person having a contractual
interest in the subject property. Where such real party in interest is a legal
entity, such application may be made in its name by any member or officer
having the authority to do so by law. Where the applicant is not the owner of
the property, or an authorized member or officer of the owner with authority
to act on behalf of an owner which is a legal entity, the application must
include the written and acknowledged authorization of the owner.
§ 230-76 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § A235-5
225:652
§ A235-5. Content of applications.
All applications to the Board shall be made in writing, and shall contain
sufficient documentation to demonstrate that the applicant is authorized to
make the application and to establish the nature of and reason for the relief
being requested. Where the Village has available an official application
form, that form shall be used and shall be submitted with such other
documentation as may be required by such form. All applications shall
include a disclosure affidavit in compliance with the General Municipal Law,
as supplied by the Village.
§ A235-6. Environmental review.
All applications with respect to single-family residential property shall
include a short-form environmental assessment form (EAF). All other
applications shall include a long-form EAF.
§ A235-7. Scheduling of public hearing.
In the case of any application which requires a public hearing, upon a
determination that an application is in proper form, the Chair or Clerk of
the Board shall schedule a public hearing for the application for the next
meeting of the Board to be held at least 21 days after such determination,
except that for good cause the Chair may direct that such hearing date
be advanced to a date at least 10 days after such determination, provided
that sufficient time is permitted for publication and other distribution of
required notices.
§ A235-8. Applications to be complete.
Each application filed with the Board shall be accompanied by the fee
required by law. No application shall be deemed complete until it has been
reviewed by the Village Attorney and determined to be complete, and unless
it is accompanied by the fee required by law.
§ A235-9. Withdrawal.
Any application filed with the Board may be withdrawn by the applicant
at any time prior to determination, upon written application or by an oral
statement of withdrawal by an applicant or an applicant's attorney made
on the record at a public hearing on the application, and only with the
permission of the Chair or Board. In such event, any request for refund of
the fee, in whole or in part, shall be made to, and determined by, the Board
of Trustees. No withdrawn application may be filed seeking the same, or
substantially the same, relief for at least six months after the date on which
such withdrawal is approved except where that six-month period is waived
by the Board for good cause, shown on the record of a public hearing on the
new application, and accepted by the Board.
§ A235-5 WATER § A235-10
225:653
§ A235-10. Refiling.
An application which has been dismissed or denied shall not be refiled for at
least six months after the date of dismissal or denial, unless substantial new
facts are alleged and established to exist to the satisfaction of the Board.
§ A235-11. Amendments.
An applicant may amend, modify or revise an application or appeal at any
time within 10 days after filing the same, without permission of the Board.
Thereafter, any amendment, modification or revision may be made only with
the permission of the Board, which may include a requirement that a new
notice be given with respect to any public hearing on such application.
§ A235-12. Public hearing notices.
The form of notice of public hearing shall be prepared by, and provided
to the applicant, by the Board, through the Village Attorney. The Village
shall be responsible for publication and posting of said notice. The applicant
shall be responsible for mailing of such notice to the owners of all property
located within 200 feet of the subject property, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and for providing the Clerk with proof of such mailing
by filing with the Clerk at least two business days prior to the date for
such public hearing an affidavit or affirmation of the date and place of
such mailing accompanied by a copy of the notice so mailed, a list of the
addressees and addresses to which such notice was mailed and the certified
mail return receipts signed by the recipient of each such mailing or the
United States Postal Service certified mail receipt (PS Form 3800 or its
replacement) duly stamped by the United States Postal Service facility at
which such mail was deposited. Such notice to said owners shall be so
mailed at least 10 business days prior to the date of the public hearing
specified in the notice.
§ A235-13. Decisions and minutes.
All decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be set forth in full in the minutes
of the meetings of the Board. Minutes of the meetings shall be filed with the
Village Clerk upon the approval by the Chair, after reasonable opportunity
for other members of the Board to review draft minutes of such meetings.
§ A235-14. Reopening.
In addition to any other instance permitted by law where hearings may
be reopened, the Board, upon its own motion, may reopen and reconsider
any determination where the Board has reasonable cause to believe that
an applicant or other person has failed to comply with the conditions
or requirements of such determination. Notice of such reopened
reconsideration shall be given by the Board, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, sent to the applicant at least 10 days prior to the meeting or
public hearing at which such reopened determination will be considered.
Notice of such meeting or public hearing shall also be published in the
§ A235-10 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § A235-14
225:654
official newspaper of the Village, and posted, in the same manner as
required by law for notices of the public hearing with respect to the
underlying application.145
Chapter A236
WATER AUTHORITY FRANCHISE
§ A236-1. Legislative findings.
§ A236-2. Franchise granted.
A. The Water Authority of Great Neck North (hereinafter referred to as the
"Authority") has been established as a public benefit corporation, under
Title 8-B of the Public Authorities Law, to provide potable water to the
area within Union Free School District No. 7, Great Neck, lying
northerly of the north line of the Manhasset-Lakeville Water District,
which includes part of the Village of Great Neck Estates (hereinafter
referred to as the "Village").
B. The state legislature found, in establishing the Authority, that the
groundwater supply system presently operated by Citizens Water
Supply Company of Newton, a private utility in the northern portion of
the Great Neck peninsula, is fragile and subject to episodic deficiencies
of varying magnitude; and it was hoped that the Authority would
protect, preserve and enhance the quality and quantity of the water
supply area.
C. The Authority has applied to the Village for a nonexclusive franchise to
transmit and distribute potable water on, in, under and through all
streets within the Village in order to carry out the purposes for which it
was created and the duties with which it has been charged. The Village
believes that it is in the best interests of the Village and that it will
promote the health, safety and welfare of its inhabitants to grant the
franchise applied for.
A. In consideration for the benefits to be provided to the Village and its
inhabitants from the proposed distribution of potable water by the
Authority, the Authority is hereby granted the nonexclusive franchise to
lay, install, construct, maintain, use, repair, remove, extend, operate
and replace water pipes, mains, valves, hydrants, standpipes and
fixtures appurtenant thereto (hereinafter collectively referred to as the
"Authority's equipment") on, in, under and through all streets within
the Village, as "street" is defined in § 6-600 of the Village Law of the
State of New York, and other easements and rights-of-way owned by the
Village (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "public areas"),
subject to the conditions and regulations hereinafter set forth.
145. Editor's Note: Former § A235-15, Amendments to decisions, added 11-19-2001, was
repealed 7-14-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008. See now § 230-68F.
§ A235-14 WATER AUTHORITY FRANCHISE § A236-2
A236:655
§ A236-3. Construction and maintenance of equipment.
§ A236-4. Liability.
The Authority shall indemnify the Village and hold it harmless from all
claims, demands, actions or causes of action arising from the locating,
laying, installing, constructing, maintaining, using, repairing, removing,
extending, operating or replacing the Authority's equipment by the
Authority pursuant to this local law or from any cause or thing whatsoever
arising out of or by reason of the occupancy or use of the public areas by the
Authority pursuant to this local law, including any expenses and attorneys'
fees incurred by the Village in defending itself against any such claims,
demands, actions or causes of action.
§ A236-5. Grade change.
When any public areas on, in, under or through which the Authority has
Authority's equipment shall be graded, curbed, paved, resurfaced, widened
or otherwise changed so as to make the resetting or reconstruction of the
Authority's equipment necessary, the Authority shall make such necessary
changes as required in preparation for said construction and in a reasonable
time after receiving written notice from the Village. The Village agrees to
include in the cost of such improvements and to pay all necessary costs
to raising water and sewer mains, services, manhole covers and other
changes required and necessary to the operation and maintenance of the
Authority's equipment and to have the work done under the terms of the
general contract for the street improvements. If such improvements are
constructed by any contractor engaged by the Village for the purpose
B. The Authority is hereby granted a perpetual and nonexclusive
franchise.
C. No action shall be taken by the Authority pursuant to this local law until
it has filed with the Village, in a form approved by the Village Attorney,
a written acceptance of the franchise granted herein and all of the
terms and conditions specified in this local law.
A. The Authority's equipment shall be located so as not to interfere
unnecessarily with the use of the public areas; and all of the work
performed by the Authority pursuant to this local law shall be
performed in accordance with the provisions of any and all general
laws, ordinances and regulations of the Village governing the
excavation in and repair of the public areas of the Village.
B. The Authority's equipment shall be located, laid, installed, constructed,
maintained, used, repaired, removed, extended, operated and replaced
so as not to damage unnecessarily any of the public areas, drains, storm
sewers, catch basins or other Village improvements, but should any
such improvements be damaged by the Authority, the Authority shall
forthwith repair the damage and restore the improvement to as good
condition as existed prior to such damage.
§ A236-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § A236-5
A236:656
of making such street improvements, then the required changes in the
Authority's equipment shall be performed under the supervision of a duly
authorized representative of the Authority.
§ A236-6. Fees.
During the term of this local law, no fees, charges or assessments shall be
made by the Village to the Authority for the Authority's exercise of its rights
under this local law.
§ A236-7. Easements.
Nothing contained in this local law shall be construed as preventing,
diminishing or restricting the Authority from using for water transmission
and distribution purposes any easement on any plat or plats of any portion
of the Village heretofore or hereafter platted or recorded or any easement
which has been or may hereafter be created, granted or dedicated for water
transmission and distribution purposes.
§ A236-8. Title to equipment
Title to all of the Authority's equipment wherever situated on, in, under or
through all public areas shall be and remain in the Authority.
Chapter A237
ANNEXATIONS
§ A236-5 ANNEXATIONS § A236-8
A237:657

ARTICLE I
Annexation from Village of Kensington and Town of North
Hempstead
[Adopted 4-13-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992 (Ch. A133, Art. I, of the 1981
Code)]
§ A237-1. Purpose.
The Town of North Hempstead, the Village of Great Neck Estates and the
Village of Kensington have heretofore conducted the process described and
provided in Article 17 of the General Municipal Law for the annexation
of property from one municipality to another. Said process has culminated
in the adoption of resolutions, orders and findings by each of said
municipalities approving the proposed annexation, and finding the same
to be in the public interest. In order to effectuate that annexation and to
comply with the requirements of General Municipal Law § 714, this law is
adopted.
§ A237-2. Annexation from Village of Kensington.
The following described property in the Town of North Hempstead, County
of Nassau, State of New York, heretofore located within the Incorporated
Village of Kensington, is hereby annexed to and made part of the Village of
Great Neck Estates:
Beginning at a point on the westerly boundary line of the Incorporated
Village of Kensington 113.89 feet northerly from the intersection of the
northerly side of Beverly Road with said westerly boundary line of the
Incorporated Village of Kensington and running thence the following two
courses and distances along the westerly boundary line of the Incorporated
Village of Kensington:
1. North 24º 33' 06" West 36.46 feet
2. North 21º 53' 06" West 467.49 feet
running thence South 22º 04' 27" East 500.91 feet;
thence South 22º 41' 52" East 3.01 feet to the point or place of beginning.
§ A237-3. Annexation from Town of North Hempstead.
The following described property in the Town of North Hempstead, County
of Nassau, State of New York, heretofore located within the unincorporated
portion of the Town of North Hempstead, is hereby annexed to and made
part of the Village of Great Neck Estates:
§ A237-1 ANNEXATIONS § A237-3
A237:659
Beginning at a point on the easterly boundary line of the Incorporated
Village of Great Neck Estates said point being near the westerly right-ofway
line of Middle Neck Road and 8.33 feet northerly from the northerly
end of a curve connecting the easterly boundary line of the incorporated
Village of Great Neck Estates with the northerly side of Cedar Drive and
running thence the following 14 courses and distances along said easterly
boundary line of the Village of Great Neck Estates:
1. North 25º 38' 50" West 222.81 feet;
2. North 24º 36' 50" West 389.04 feet;
3. North 22º 17' 10" West 245.87 feet;
4. North 22º 10' 30" West 381.00 feet;
5. North 17º 26' 30" West 68.86 feet;
6. North 19º 54' 00" West 100.10 feet;
7. North 15º 24' 10" West 100.30 feet;
8. North 14º 24' 50" West 100.01 feet;
9. North 15º 05' 00" West 31.22 feet;
10. North 13º 33' 30" West 68.80 feet;
11. North 13º 10' 20" West 101.32 feet;
12. North 10º 25' 50" West 20.05 feet;
13. North 07º 06' 10" West 60.03 feet;
14. North 05º 47' 10" West 50.34 feet;
running thence North 86º 21' 25" East 66.28 feet to the easterly curbline
of Middle Neck Road as in place on October 3, 1991, running thence the
following 12 courses and distances along said curbline:
1. South 04º 14' 15" East 94.36 feet;
2. South 14º 00' 32" East 221.61 feet;
3. South 18º 00' 32" East 273.0 feet;
4. South 22º 48' 37" East 61.34 feet;
5. South 22º 04' 27" East 44.52 feet;
6. South 21º 53' 06" East 467.49 feet;
7. South 24º 33' 06" East 36.46 feet;
8. South 22º 41' 52" East 150.55 feet;
9. South 22º 16' 07" East 92.56 feet;
10. South 24º 45' 52" East 90.00 feet;
11. South 24º 19' 27" East 78.90 feet;
12. South 26º 15' 12" East 42.47 feet;
13. South 25º 38' 17" East 140.33 feet;
14. South 26º 30' 22" East 44.30 feet;
§ A237-3 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § A237-3
A237:660
running thence westerly across Middle Neck Road South 84º 18' 54" West
62.91 fast to a point on the easterly boundary line of the Incorporated
Village of Great Neck Estates at the point or place of beginning.
§ A237-4. Official Map amended.
The Official Map of the Village of Great Neck Estates is hereby amended
to include the foregoing properties within the boundaries of the Village of
Great Neck Estates.
§ A237-5. Repealer.
Any local law, ordinance or resolution of the Village of Great Neck Estates
in conflict with this local law is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict, except that such repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
such local law, ordinance or resolution prior to the effective date of this local
law.
§ A237-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this local
law shall be adjudged to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate any other part of this
local law or the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ A237-7. Effective date.
This local law shall take effect on May 1, 1992.
§ A237-3 ANNEXATIONS § A237-7
A237:661
Chapter A238
USE OF VILLAGE HALL
§ A238-1. Public forum status.
The Village Hall of the Village of Great Neck Estates is not open to public
use as a public forum nor for any other use except as provided in this
chapter.
§ A238-2. Permitted uses of Village Hall.
In addition to use for the governmental purposes of the Village of Great
Neck Estates, use of the Village Hall shall be restricted to entities consisting
primarily of residents of the Village of Great Neck Estates, and such use
shall be solely for purposes relating to Village governance, issues relating
to the government of the Village of Great Neck Estates and issues relating
to activities conducted on property of the Village of Great Neck Estates.
§ A238-3. Fees for use.
The Board of Trustees may establish, and from time to time amend, a
schedule of fees for permitted use of the Village Hall by any qualified entity,
which fees shall be sufficient to reimburse the Village for the cost of use of
the premises by any such entity.
§ A238-4. Permits.
A. Permits for the use of Village Hall pursuant to this chapter may be
granted by the Village Clerk, upon written application, subject to
reasonable conditions imposed by the Clerk consistent with the
purposes of this chapter.
B. No permit shall be granted to any entity when an officer, board or
agency of the Village requires the use of the premises in connection
with the purposes of the Village, nor where the use of any part of the
premises by any authorized entity would interfere with the use of any
part of the premises by any such officer, board or agency.
C. Where the Village Clerk grants or denies a permit for use of the Village
Hall, or any part thereof, or imposes conditions upon such use, an
appeal may be taken in writing to the Mayor by any aggrieved person or
entity, and the Mayor may upon such appeal deny the permit, authorize
the permit or authorize the permit subject to reasonable conditions.
D. Where the Village Mayor grants or denies a permit for use of the Village
Hall, or any part thereof, or imposes conditions upon such use, an
appeal may be taken in writing to the Board of Trustees by any
aggrieved person, and the Board of Trustees may deny the permit,
authorize the permit or authorize the permit subject to reasonable
conditions.
§ A237-7 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § A238-4
A238:662
Chapter A239
CYBER SECURITY CITIZENS' NOTIFICATION POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Internet policy — See Ch. 36. Records — See Ch. 62.
§ A239-1. Statement of policy.
This policy is consistent with State Technology Law § 208, as added by
Chapters 442 and 491 of the Laws of 2005. This policy requires notification
to affected New York residents and nonresidents. New York State law values
the protection of private information of individuals. The Village of Great
Neck Estates (Village) is required to notify an individual when there has
been or is reasonably believed to have been a compromise of the individual's
private information in compliance with the Information Security Breach and
Notification Act and this policy,
§ A239-2. Notification requirements; applicability.
A. The Village, after consulting with the state's Office of Cyber Security
and Critical Infrastructure Coordination (CSCIC) to determine the
scope of the breach and restoration measures, is required to notify an
individual when it has been determined that there has been, or is
reasonably believed to have been, a compromise of the individual's
private information through unauthorized disclosure.
B. A compromise of private information means the unauthorized
acquisition of unencrypted computerized data with private information.
C. If encrypted data is compromised along with the corresponding
encryption key, the data is considered unencrypted and thus falls under
the notification requirements.
D. Notification may be delayed if a law enforcement agency determines
that the notification impedes a criminal investigation. In such case,
notification will be delayed only as long as needed to determine that
notification no longer compromises any investigation.
E. The Village will notify the affected individual directly by one or more of
the following methods:
(1) Written notice;
(2) Electronic notice, provided that the person to whom notice is
required has expressly consented to receiving notice in electronic
form and a log of each notification is kept by the Village that
notifies affected persons in such form;
§ A238-4 CYBER SECURITY CITIZENS' NOTIFICATION § A239-2
A239:663
§ A239-3. Definitions.
As used in this policy, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY — Any person or entity which, for
monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages
in whole or in part in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer
credit information or other information on consumers for the purpose of
furnishing consumer reports to third parties, and which uses any means or
facility of interstate commerce for the purpose of preparing or furnishing
(3) Telephone notification, provided that a log of each notification is
kept by the Village that notifies affected persons; or
(4) Substitute notice, if the Village demonstrates to the State Attorney
General that the cost of providing notice would exceed $250,000,
that the affected class of persons to be notified exceeds 500,000, or
that the Village does not have sufficient contact information. The
following constitute sufficient substitute notice:
(a) E-mail notice when the Village has an e-mail address for the
subject persons;
(b) Conspicuous posting of the notice on the Village's web site
page, if the Village maintains one; and
(5) Notification to major statewide media.
F. The Village will notify the CSCIC as to the timing, content and
distribution of the notices and approximate number of affected persons.
G. The Village will notify the Attorney General and the Consumer
Protection Board, whenever notification to a New York resident is
necessary, as to the timing, content and distribution of the notices and
approximate number of affected persons.
H. Regardless of the method by which notice is provided, the notice shall
include contact information for the Village and a description of the
categories of information that were, or are reasonably believed to have
been, acquired by a person without valid authorization, including
specification of which of the elements of personal information and
private information were, or are reasonably believed to have been, so
acquired.
I. This Policy also applies to information maintained on behalf of the
Village by a third party.
J. When more that 5,000 New York residents must be notified at one time,
then the Village must notify the consumer reporting agencies as to the
timing, content and distribution of the notices and the approximate
number of affected individuals. This notice, however, will be made
without delaying notice to the individuals.
§ A239-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § A239-3
A239:664
consumer reports. The State Attorney General is responsible for compiling
a list of consumer reporting agencies and furnishing the list upon request
to the Village.
DATA — Any information created, stored (in temporary or permanent form),
filed, produced or reproduced, regardless of the form or media. Data may
include, but is not limited to personally identifying information, reports,
files, folders, memoranda, statements, examinations, transcripts, images,
communications, electronic or hard copy.
INFORMATION — The representation of facts, concepts, or instructions
in a formalized manner suitable for communication, interpretation, or
processing by human or automated means.
PERSONAL INFORMATION — Any information concerning a natural person
which, because of name, number, personal mark or other identifier, can be
used to identify such natural person.
PRIVATE INFORMATION — Personal information in combination with any
one or more of the following data elements, when either the personal
information or the data element is not encrypted or encrypted with an
encryption key that has also been acquired: Social Security number; or
driver's license number or nondriver identification card number; or account
number, credit or debit card number, in combination with any required
security code, access code, or password which would permit access to
an individual's financial account. The term "private information" does not
include publicly available information that is lawfully made available to the
general public from federal, state, or local government records.
THIRD-PARTY — Any person or entity which is not a municipal employee,
such as a contractor, vendor, consultant, volunteer, intern, other
municipality, etc.
Chapter A240
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PLAT REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 194. Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ A240-1. Preliminary plats.
The preliminary plat submitted by an applicant shall contain the following:
A. Plat size/material. The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on
commercially acceptable reproducible material. The size of the plat
sheets shall be not greater than 36 inches by 48 inches.
B. Scale. The plat shall be scaled at not more than 100 feet to the inch, and
the scale shall be indicated on the plat.
§ A239-3 CYBER SECURITY CITIZENS' NOTIFICATION § A240-1
A239:665
C. Dimensions and lot configurations.
(1) The length and bearing of all straight lines and the radius, length
and central angle of all curves.
(2) All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot.
(3) Dimensions shall be provided for all lots and parcels, including any
reserved areas.
(4) The area, in square feet, of every lot and the area of the entire
proposed subdivision.
(5) The number of lots and each lot shall be identified by lot number.
D. Topography. Topographic character of the land by means of contours of
existing and proposed ground surface, with intervals not to exceed two
feet. Where the terrain is unusually flat or unusually steep, the Planning
Board may require a smaller contour interval or permit a greater
contour interval. The existing topography shall be drawn from an actual
field survey certified by a licensed land surveyor. Contours for existing
surfaces shall be extended to cover an area 200 feet beyond the
boundaries of the parcel to be subdivided.
E. Subdivision name. Proposed subdivision name. The name shall not
duplicate or be too closely approximate of that of any other subdivision
in the Village. Applicant shall reserve the name with the County Clerk
prior to filing the preliminary plat with the Village.
F. Owner's name. Name and address of record owner and applicant.
G. Licensed surveyor. Name, license number and seal of licensed land
surveyor.
H. Nassau County Map reference. Nassau County Land and Tax Map
designation for the property.
I. North arrow. The true north direction shall be located at the top of the
plat.
J. Zoning District lines. The applicable use districts as shown by the
Official Zoning District Map of the Village and the boundaries of such
districts, if such boundaries are within 200 feet of the boundaries of the
proposed subdivision.
K. Municipal/district lines. Location of Village, town, city, fire, school
district and other special district lines within 500 feet of the proposed
subdivision.
L. Adjacent land. The name, layout and dimensions of all adjacent
subdivisions, names of owners of record of adjoining undeveloped
properties and uses and improvements of adjacent lands shall be shown
for an area extending 200 feet beyond the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision.
§ A240-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § A240-1
A239:666
M. Existing features. Location of existing buildings, structures,
watercourses, streams, ponds, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water
mains, gas mains, utilities, nearest fire hydrants, parks and other
essential existing features, as well as easements or rights-of-way
impacting the plat.
N. Elevations. Key elevations with arrow indicating the direction of flow
and rate of grade on street surfaces, with key elevations shown for all
plot corners and first floor of any existing building or dwelling within
the confines of the plat, or adjoining the property within a distance of
300 feet of any boundary line.
O. Setback lines: Minimum front, side and rear setback lines of each
parcel.
P. Streets.
(1) The location and names of proposed streets and courses, distances,
and widths thereof. If the street is a continuation of an existing
street, the name shall be the same as the name of the street of
which the proposed street is continuing.
(2) The location, names and widths of existing streets and location of
connecting streets and streets extending 200 feet beyond the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision. Type of pavement, curbs
and sidewalks on existing streets.
(3) Existing street elevations.
(4) Streets shall comply with Village Code Chapter 194, Article V.
Q. Storm drains. Proposed provisions for collecting and disposing of
stormwater.
R. Utilities. Location of proposed utility connections.
S. Dedicated areas. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated for public
use, including parks, playgrounds, recharge basins and streets.
T. Proposed easements. Boundaries of proposed easements over, under or
through private property, including easements for any public utilities.
Permanent easements shall be not less than 10 feet in width and shall
provide satisfactory access to an existing public highway or other
public open space shown on the plat.
U. Test hole data. Date, location, elevation and graphic representation of
findings for all test holes, including groundwater level. Locations shall
include critical areas where drainage structures requiring seepage are
to be constructed. The Planning Board reserves the right to determine
the location of proposed test holes, and if so determined, shall be
provided by applicant.
§ A240-1 CYBER SECURITY CITIZENS' NOTIFICATION § A240-1
A239:667
§ A240-2. Final plats.
In addition to the information required to be included on the preliminary
plat, the final plat shall include the following:
V. Drainage structures. Existing and proposed drainage structures with
elevation of all pipe inverts, pipe size and surface elevation of grate on
catch basins.
W. Water mains. Locations and size of all existing and proposed water
mains within and abutting the site.
X. Schools and firehouses. Distances to nearest school and firehouse
serving the proposed subdivision.
Y. Conformity to Zoning Code and subdivision regulations. Representation
that all lots conform to the minimum requirements of the applicable
Village zoning use district and the plat conforms to the requirements
contained in these regulations and Chapter 194 of the Village Code. Any
variances required shall be noted on the preliminary plat.
Z. Key map and location diagram. Key map at a scale of 400 feet to the
inch, and location diagram at a scale of 3,000 feet to the inch.
AA. Additional information. Any additional information as may be required
by the Planning Board.
A. Preliminary plat approval date. Date of approval of the preliminary plat.
B. Preliminary plat approval conditions. All information required as a
condition of the preliminary plat approval.
C. Variances. If any variances were granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, those variances, the approval date and any conditions of
approval should be noted on the final plat.
D. Lienor authorization. Authorization by any lienors, including
mortgagees, of the submission of the final plat approval application.
E. Monuments.
(1) Existing reference monuments shall be shown with their symbol.
(2) Additional monuments shall be set at all points required by the
Board.
(3) The applicant shall propose locations for such monuments to be
approved by the Board.
F. Covenants and restrictions. Draft declarations of any required
covenants and restrictions shall be included with the final plat
submission.
§ A240-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § A240-2
A239:668
G. Private maintenance agreements. For any open space or roadways to be
reserved by the developer or an entity created by the developer,
together with the final plat, the developer shall submit copies of
agreements or other documents showing the manner in which such
areas are to be used and maintained and the provisions made therefore.
H. Street grade and drainage. Approval of street grades and drainage by
the Nassau County Commissioner of Public Works and Village of Great
Neck Estates, as required.
I. Water and sewage. Approval of water supply and sewage disposal by
the State of New York or County of Nassau Health Department, as
required.
J. Street cross section. Typical cross section of the proposed streets
showing general specifications for the public.
K. Intention of dedication. If any streets are proposed for dedication, the
plat shall include, and the owner shall sign, a statement stating "The
lands shown on this plat as roads are irrevocably dedicated to the
Village of Great Neck Estates.
L. Village boundary certification. A note signed by the applicant's surveyor
stating that "The land shown on this plat lies wholly within the
geographical limits of the Village of Great Neck Estates and not within
300 feet of the boundary of the Village." The note shall be amended
appropriately when the foregoing statement does not accurately
describe the location of the plat. If so modified, the plat shall include an
endorsement of approval from other planning agencies having
jurisdiction.
M. Surveyor Certification. A certification signed by the surveyor stating "I
hereby certify that this plat was made from actual surveys made and
completed by me on __________, 20 _____ and that monuments will be set
as shown."
N. Grading and drainage plan. As part of the application for final
subdivision approval, applicant shall submit a separate grading and
drainage plan for each proposed lot, which plan shall be sufficiently
large to provide the following:
(1) Identification of each lot;
(2) Existing and proposed finish grade elevations at each corner of the
lot;
(3) Existing and proposed finish grade elevations at each principal
corner of a structure;
(4) Proposed finish grades at both sides of abrupt changes of grade
such as retaining walls and slopes; and
§ A240-2 CYBER SECURITY CITIZENS' NOTIFICATION § A240-2
A239:669
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2004
4-12-2004 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
L.L. No.
2-2004
4-12-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 167
L.L. No.
3-2004
4-12-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
4-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
Res. 4-12-2004 Fees amendment (parking
permits)
Ch. 109
L.L. No.
4-2004
6-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
(5) Other elevations that may be necessary to show grading and
drainage.
O. Certifications. The following certifications:
(1) Nassau County Treasurer as to payment of taxes;
(2) Town Receiver of Taxes as to payment of taxes;
(3) Village of Great Neck Estates Treasurer as to payment of taxes.
P. Filing legend. A legend in substantially the following form:
(1) Plat filed with Village Clerk on __________;
(2) Final plat approval resolution filed with Village Clerk on __________;
(3) Endorsed plat filed with County Clerk on __________; and
(4) Endorsed plat, as filed with County Clerk, filed with Village Clerk
on__________.
§ A240-2 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § DL-1
DT:670
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
5-2004
6-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
6-2004
11-3-2004 Maintenance of sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 191, Art. III
Res. 11-3-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 109
L.L. No.
7-2004
12-13-2004 Moratorium on certain building,
zoning and planning approvals
NCM
Res. 12-13-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 109
Traffic
Order No.
1-2004
12-16-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
1-2005
1-10-2005 Building construction and
plumbing amendment
Ch. 95
L.L. No.
2-2005
2-14-2005 Building construction and
plumbing amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 95 and
230
L.L. No.
3-2005
2-14-2005 Parades and gatherings Ch. 148
Res. 3-14-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 109
Res. 3-14-2005 Amendment to moratorium on
certain building, zoning and
planning approvals
NCM
L.L. No.
4-2005
4-11-2005 General penalty amendment Ch. 1, Art. I
L.L. No.
5-2005
4-11-2005 Building construction and
plumbing amendment
Ch. 95
L.L. No.
6-2005
6-13-2005 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 154
L.L. No.
7-2005
7-11-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
8-2005
8-11-2005 Officers and employees: Village
Administrator; Deputy Village
Clerk; Deputy Village Treasurer
amendment
Ch. 53, Art. IV
L.L. No.
9-2005
10-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
Res. 10-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
Res. 11-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
Res. 11-12-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 109
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:671
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2006
1-19-2006 Officers and employees: Village
Justices amendment
Ch. 53, Art. III
L.L. No.
2-2006
1-19-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
3-2006
1-19-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 167
L.L. No.
4-2006
5-8-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
5-2006
5-8-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
5-8-2006 Cyber Security Citizens'
Notification Policy
Ch. A239
L.L. No.
6-2006
6-12-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
7-2006
7-10-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
8-2006
9-6-2006 Architectural Review Board
amendment
Ch. 12
L.L. No.
9-2006
10-12-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
10-2006
11-14-2006 Officers and employees: Mayor
repealer
Ch. 53, Art. II
(reference
only)
L.L. No.
11-2006
11-14-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
2-22-2007 Workplace violence policy Ch. 75
L.L. No.
1-2007
2-22-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
2-2007
2-22-2007 Streets, sidewalks and public
property: private streets and
rights-of-way
Ch. 191, Art. VI
L.L. No.
3-2007
3-12-2007 Building construction and
plumbing amendment
Ch. 95
Order No.
1-2007
4-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
4-2007
4-9-2007 Stormwater management Ch. 190
L.L. No.
5-2007
4-9-2007 Erosion and sediment control Ch. 107
§ DL-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § DL-1
DT:672
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Order No.
2-2007
7-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
1-2008
1-17-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
2-2008
2-19-2008 Social hosts Ch. 187
Order No.
1-2008
6-13-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
Order No.
2-2008
6-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
3-2008
7-14-2008 Peddling, soliciting and
canvassing: unwanted
deliveries or deposits of printed
or other matter
Ch. 157, Art. II
L.L. No.
4-2008
7-14-2008 Building construction and
plumbing amendment
Ch. 95
L.L. No.
5-2008
7-14-2008 Zoning amendment; rules of
Zoning Board of Appeals
amendment
Chs. 230;
A235, footnote
only
Res. 8-14-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 109
L.L. No.
6-2008
12-8-2008 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 201
5-11-2009 Family and medical leave policy Ch. 34
L.L. No.
1-2009
6-8-2009 Parks and playgrounds; pool:
rules and regulations
amendment
Superseded by
L.L. No.
11-2012
Order No.
1-2009
6-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
2-2009
8-10-2009 Flood damage prevention Ch. 126
Res. 10-5-2009 Appearance tickets amendment Ch. 5
L.L. No.
1-2010
4-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
Order No.
1-2010
7-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
2-2010
8-9-2010 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 167
L.L. No.
3-2010
10-4-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:673
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Order No.
2-2010
10-21-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
4-2010
12-13-2010 Peddling, soliciting and
canvassing
Ch. 157
L.L. No.
5-2010
12-13-2010 Suspension of permits, licenses
and approvals
Ch. 160, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-2011
4-11-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
2-2011
4-11-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 167
L.L. No.
3-2011
5-9-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
4-2011
10-5-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
5-2011
11-14-2011 Peddling, soliciting and
canvassing amendment
Ch. 157
Res. 12-1-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 109
L.L. No.
1-2012
1-9-2012 Building construction and
plumbing amendment
Ch. 95
L.L. No.
2-2012
2-13-2012 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No.
3-2012
2-13-2012 Building construction and
plumbing amendment
Ch. 95
L.L. No.
4-2012
5-14-2012 Parades and gatherings
amendment
Ch. 148
L.L. No.
5-2012
5-14-2012 Procurement policy amendment Ch. 58
L.L. No.
6-2012
5-14-2012 Parks and playgrounds; pool:
rules and regulations
amendment
Superseded by
L.L. No.
11-2012
L.L. No.
7-2012
5-14-2012 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 82
L.L. No.
8-2012
5-14-2012 Board of Assessors amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 16; 230
L.L. No.
9-2012
5-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
Order No.
1-2012
5-18-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
§ DL-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § DL-1
DT:674
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
10-2012
10-9-2012 Property maintenance
amendment; sewers
amendment
Ch. 167; 184
L.L. No.
11-2012
11-12-2012 Parks and playgrounds; pool Ch. 150
L.L. No.
12-2012
11-12-2012 Animals: wild or exotic animals
amendment; keeping of certain
species
Ch. 86, Arts. III
and IV
L.L. No.
1-2013
1-14-2013 Taxation: veterans' exemptions
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. III
L.L. No.
2-2013
1-14-2013 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No.
3-2013
4-8-2013 Parades and gatherings
amendment
Ch. 148
Res. 4-8-2013 Accounting policy: general
guidelines
Ch. 3, Art. I
Res. 4-8-2013 Accounting policy: fraud, theft
or questionable practices
Ch. 3, Art. II
Res. 5-6-2013 Parks and playgrounds; pool
amendment
Ch. 150
L.L. No.
4-2013
6-10-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
5-2013
6-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
Res. 6-10-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 109
L.L. No.
1-2014
1-6-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 167
L.L. No.
2-2014
1-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
Res. 1-6-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 109
L.L. No.
3-2014
2-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
4-2014
2-5-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
5-2014
2-5-2014 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No.
6-2014
5-12-2014 Subdivision of land amendment Ch. 194
L.L. No.
7-2014
5-12-2014 Building construction and
plumbing amendment
Ch. 95
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:675
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
8-2014
5-12-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
9-2014
8-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
10-2014
10-13-2014 Emergency preparedness
practices amendment
Ch. 105
L.L. No.
11-2014
12-8-2014 Suspension of permits, licenses
and approvals amendment
Ch. 160, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-2015
4-13-2015 Subdivision of land amendment Ch. 194
L.L. No.
2-2015
4-13-2015 Property maintenance
amendment; vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 167; Ch.
217
L.L. No.
3-2015
4-13-2015 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 82
L.L. No.
4-2015
4-30-2015 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No.
5-2015
5-11-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 109
Res. 5-11-2015 General subdivision plat
requirements
A240
Order No.
2-2015
7-29-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
6-2015
8-10-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 167
L.L. No.
7-2015
10-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
1-2016
1-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
2-2016
3-14-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
3-2016
3-14-2016 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 154
L.L. No.
4-2016
4-11-2016 Architectural Review Board
amendment
Ch. 12
L.L. No.
5-2016
4-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
6-2016
4-11-2016 Tax levy limit override NCM
§ DL-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § DL-1
DT:676
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
7-2016
7-11-2016 Building construction and
plumbing amendment
Ch. 95
Res. 7-11-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 109
L.L. No.
8-2016
10-10-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
9-2016
10-10-2016 Erosion and sediment control
amendment; zoning amendment
Ch. 107; Ch.
230
L.L. No.
1-2017
6-12-2017 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 154
Res. 8-21-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 109
L.L. No.
2-2017
9-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 217
1-2018 2-12-2018 Officers and Employees: Village
Administrator; Deputy Village
Clerk; Deputy Village Treasurer
Amendment
Ch. 53, Art. IV
2-2018 4-9-2018 Trees Ch. 213
Res. 5-14-2018 Fees amendment Ch. 109
Order No.
1-2018
8-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 217
Res. 7-9-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 109
10-8-2018 Fund Balance Policy Ch. 35
10-8-2018 Sexual Harassment Policy Ch. 67
L.L. No.
3-2018
11-12-2018 Officers and Employees: Mayor,
Trustees, Village Justices
Ch. 53, Art. II
L.L. No.
4-2018
12-10-2018 Sexual Harassment Policy
Repealer
Ch. 67,
reference only
Order No.
2-2018
12-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 217
L.L. No.
1-2019
1-14-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
2-2019
4-8-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
3-2019
5-13-2019 Streets, Sidewalks and Public
Property: Street Openings and
Excavations Amendment
Ch. 191, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2019
6-10-2019 Streets, Sidewalks and Public
Property: Damage to Streets
and Public Property
Amendment
Ch. 191, Art. IV
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:677
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
5-2019
8-12-2019 Building Construction and
Plumbing Amendment;
Subdivision of Land Amendment
Ch. 95; Ch. 194
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
L.L. No.
1-2020
1-13-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230 66
L.L. No.
2-2020
1-13-2020 Streets, Sidewalks
and Public Property:
Regulations Relating
to Vehicles; Use of
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 191,
Art. V
66
§ DL-1 GREAT NECK ESTATES CODE § DL-1
DT:678