Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Penalties
[Adopted 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
§ 1-1. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any provision of
this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-28-1992 as L.L. No. 4-1992]
§ 1-2. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the previous Code, adopted on September 14, 1970, and subsequent
local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the City of Hornell, as
codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Charter
and Chapters 1 through 315, shall be known collectively as the "Code of
the City of Hornell," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is
made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the
"Code of the City of Hornell" to any other local law, ordinance or resolution
appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate
chapter title, chapter number, Article number or section number where
such legislation appears in the Code, as if such local law, ordinance or
resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-3. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of the previous Code and subsequent local laws, ordinances and
resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this
local law, are intended as a continuation of such local laws, ordinances
and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such
provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior local law,
ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full
force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
City Council of the City of Hornell, and it is the intention of said Council
that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed
as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former local laws and
ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or
abrogated by the provisions of § 1-4 below.
§ 1-4. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City
of Hornell in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local
law.
§ 1-5. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-4 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5
§ 1-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Hornell prior to the effective date of
this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
A.
An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Hornell
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
B.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Hornell.
C.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City of Hornell.
D.
Any local law or ordinance of the City of Hornell providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the City of Hornell or any portion thereof.
E.
Any local law or ordinance of the City of Hornell appropriating money
or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of
Hornell or other instruments or evidence of the city's indebtedness.
F.
Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract or obligation.
G.
H. The levy or imposition of fees, special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries or employee benefits.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation pertaining to signs.
M. Any legislation adopted subsequent to June 10, 1992.
§ 1-5 HORNELL CODE § 1-7
1:6
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Hornell and shall remain there for use and examination
by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local
law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City Clerk of the
City of Hornell by impressing thereon the Seal of the City of Hornell, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law,
coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the City of Hornell" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
City Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the City Council deems desirable.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code of the City of Hornell required to be filed in
the office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code
and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate the
intention of said City Council to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes,
local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the City Clerk of the City of
Hornell upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the City
Council, which Council may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
§ 1-11. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
City of Hornell or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Hornell to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-12. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the City of Hornell, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsections B and C hereof. In
addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
A.
The following changes are made throughout the Code:
The terms "Alderman" and "Aldermen" are changed to "Council
member" and "Council members," respectively.
(1)
Specific penalty provisions have been removed from the following
sections and replaced with language indicating that violations shall
be "punishable as provided in § 1-1 of this Code": § 90-6 (former
Sec. 16-90), § 107-10 (former Sec. 7-11), § 100-16 (former Sec.
6-18), § 115-3 (former Sec. 13-16), § 135-20 (former Sec. 5-28),
§ 154-9 (L.L. No. 1-1989, Sec. 3.5), § 178-68 (former Subpart O,
Sec. C-205), § 198-17 (former Sec. 16-42), § 205-5 (former Sec.
17-5, second sentence), § 215-31 (former Sec. 14-22), § 222-5
(former Sec. 13-35), § 228-10D [former Sec. 19-20(d)], § 290-5
[former Subpart T, Sec. 1(e)], § 296-4 [former Sec. 15-9(e)] and
315-41 (former Sec. 25-17).
(2)
Specific fee amounts have been removed from the following
sections and replaced with language indicating that the fee shall
be "as provided in Chapter 142, Fees": § 95-2 [former Sec. 4-1(b)],
§ 95-7C [former Sec. 4-13(c)], § 95-8B [former Sec. 4-14(b)],
§ 95-10A [former Sec. 4-16(a)], § 100-5 (former Sec. 6-5), § 107-4
(former Sec. 7-4), § 128-3 (11-3-1990, Subd. 3), § 135-6C (former
Sec. 5-11III), § 135-9 (former Sec. 5-15.5), 135-15D [former Sec.
5-22(d)], § 215-4 (former Sec. 12-4), § 215-25 (former Sec. 14-16),
§ 228-8 (former Sec. 19-18), § 228-10C [former Sec. 19-20(c)],
§ 275-5 [former Subpart N, § 3(D)], § 275-13A [former Subpart N,
§ 4(G)(1)], § 285-4 (former Sec. 23-20), § 306-4 (former Sec. 24-4),
(3)
B.
§ 1-11 HORNELL CODE § 1-12
1:8
§ 1-13. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article II of Chapter 1
of the Code of the City of Hornell, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article II, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-2 to 1-14, inclusive.
§ 1-14. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 306-5 (former Sec. 24-5), § 306-14B [former Sec. 24-14(b)],
§ 306-16 (former Sec. 24-17) and § 315-37C [former Sec. 25-13(3)].
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local
law. (Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.)1
C.
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-12C, the following sections were amended or added: §§ C-1,
C-11, C-12, C-13, C-14, C-15, C-17, C-33, C-51, C-55, C-55a, C-70, C-77, C-80, C-81, C-82,
C-85, C-88, C-93, C-98, C-99, C-102, C-104, C-105a, C-109, C-115, C-121, C-123, C-171,
C-190, C-196, C-197a, C-210, C-213, C-320, Art. I of Ch. 1, Ch. 17, § 25-7A, Ch. 41, § 44-3I,
Ch. 77, §§ 95-4, 107-1, 107-10, Ch. 110, §§ 135-3, 135-6A, 135-6B(5), 135-6C, 135-8A,
135-10, Art. I of Ch. 148, Art. I of Ch. 160, §§ 167-3, 172-7, 178-5, 178-45B, 190-2, 205-1,
205-2, 210-9, 222-7, 228-3, 228-14, 235-2A, 235-6C, 240-2, Ch. 252, §§ 267-4B, 267-5B,
267-22, 267-25, 267-32, 275-17A(9), 280-1, 296-2, Ch. 300, §§ 306-7, 315-18 and 315-36.
The following original sections were deleted: former Charter Secs. 52, 97, 120, 122, 161,
162, 193, 212, 221, 228, 229 and 236 and Titles VII and XVIII; former code sections 4-20,
4-21, 4-22, 6-10, 8-34, 8-35, 8-36, 8-37, 8-39, 8-40, 8-41, 8-42, 12-12, 12-13, 12-14,
15-9(b), 17.3, 17.4, 22-17.1(e), 23-37, 25-5 and 95-6. A complete description of each
change may be found in L.L. No. 4-1992, on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
Chapter 7
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public records — See Ch. 235.
§ 7-1. Applicability.
This plan covers all departments under the jurisdiction of the Mayor of the
City of Hornell and also applies to any contractors and subcontractors who
are awarded bids for which the City of Hornell is responsible.
§ 7-2. Statement of policy.
§ 7-3. Communication of policy.
Our equal opportunity policy has been and will continue to be
communicated to all relevant audiences within and outside the City of
Hornell. These include nondiscrimination policy statements in our
personnel manuals; the posting of equal employment opportunity posters
on bulletin boards; recruitment advertisements in our local paper; personal
contact with the office of SCEOP; contact with Project Reach to encourage
The policy of the City of Hornell has always been to provide equal
employment opportunity to all persons without regard to their race,
color, religion, sex or national origin and to promote the full realization
of equal employment opportunity through a positive continuing
program.
A.
The City of Hornell will continue to assure that applicants are recruited
and hired and that employees are treated during employment without
regard to their race, religion, sex, color or national origin. Equal
opportunity and equal consideration will be afforded to all applicants
and employees in personnel actions, which include recruiting and
hiring, selection for training, promotion, fixing rates of pay, and if
federal or state assistance is involved, such rates of pay will be
according to the prevailing wage rates, transfers and layoffs or
termination. It is our intention, in the implementation of this policy, to
assure full employment opportunities for members of minority groups
and to provide a framework for minority group recruiting, hiring and
upgrading at all job levels.
B.
Furthermore, it is our policy to coordinate the affirmative action
program directed at seeking personnel from minority groups for
employment with the City of Hornell and/or its contractors and
subcontractors and to provide encouragement and direction to all
employees to advance within the limits of each individual's capabilities.
C.
§ 1-14 HORNELL CODE § 7-3
7:10
the employment of migrant workers, whereby they can upgrade their level
of earning; letters to the Seneca Nations Housing Authority of Salamanca,
New York, advising them of contracts to be awarded that may afford
employment to the Indian race they serve; and also close contact with union
leaders to encourage their cooperation in apprentice hiring.
§ 7-4. Responsibility for implementation.
The Mayor of the City of Hornell has appointed a Personnel Officer who will
be responsible for implementation of our affirmative action policy and will
direct our equal employment opportunity program. His responsibilities will
include:
§ 7-5. Records and evaluation.
To assure progress and adherence to the stated objectives, the following
recordkeeping has been established:
A. Developing affirmative action programs.
B. Assisting in the identification of problem areas.
C. Assisting staff personnel in arriving at solutions to problems.
Auditing payrolls of all contractors to ensure correct payments to all
employees.
D.
Determining the degree to which the goals of the City of Hornell's
program have been attained.
E.
Serving as liaison between the city and minority organizations and
community action groups.
F.
Keeping the Mayor of the City of Hornell informed of all developments
in the entire area of equal employment opportunity.
G.
Job openings. A list of applicants will be kept for each job opening. An
informal record, solely for statistical purposes, will be maintained to
identify minority applicants where practical. If the minority applicant is
not hired, the reason will be recorded.
A.
Separation. A record of separations and the reasons for separation
will be maintained, and minority group employees will be specifically
identified. A thorough check will be made to ensure that discrimination
did not enter into the separation.
B.
Promotion. A record of promotions by employee name and category will
be maintained, with minority employees specifically identified.
C.
§ 7-3 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 7-5
7:11
Chapter 12
AMBULANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 300.
§ 12-1. Rules and regulations governing service.
The Board of Public Safety shall have the authority to promulgate rules and
regulations governing the use of the city ambulance. A copy of all such rules
and regulations shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and the Board of
Public Safety.
§ 12-2. Rates for service.
The Board of Public Safety shall have the authority to establish rates to be
charged for use of the city ambulance. A copy of such rates shall be filed
with said Board, and a copy shall be filed with the City Clerk.
Chapter 17
APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 120.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 135.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 315.
§ 17-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEARANCE TICKET — Written notice issued and subscribed by a public
servant authorized by local law enacted pursuant to the provisions of the
Municipal Home Rule Law to issue the same.
PUBLIC SERVANT — Those city officials who, by virtue of their office,
title or position, are authorized or required to enforce statutes, local laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations relating to fire prevention, safety, health,
sanitation, building, zoning and planning. These city officials are to include
§ 7-5 HORNELL CODE § 17-1
12:12
but not be limited to the Fire Chief, the Code Enforcement Officer or their
designee.
§ 17-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize certain public servants of the
City of Hornell to issue and serve appearance tickets in connection with
violations of state statutes, local laws, ordinances or rules and regulations
of the city which the public servants are authorized or required to enforce.
§ 17-3. Authorization of public servants to issue and serve.
The Code Enforcement Officer, the Fire Chief, the Health Officer, the Dog
Control Officers, as designated by the Common Council, and any designee
of the Board of Public Safety or the Board of Public Works of the City
of Hornell are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets
with respect to violation of any state statute, local law, ordinance, rule
or regulation of the City of Hornell that said public servant has been
heretofore required or authorized to enforce.
§ 17-4. Form and content.
The appearance ticket hereby authorized shall substantially conform to the
specimen described in Appendix 1 hereto annexed.2
Chapter 25
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 44.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 120.
Building construction — See Ch. 148.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
§ 25-1. Establishment; head of Department.
There is hereby established a department to be designated as the Building
Department for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and orders applicable to buildings and
structures and their appurtenances. The Building Department shall be
headed by the Building Official, who shall have such powers and perform
such duties as herein specified.
2. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 17-1 BUILDING DEPARTMENT § 25-2
25:13
§ 25-2. Building Official.
There is hereby designated in the city a public official to be known as the
"Building Official," who shall be appointed by the Common Council at a
compensation to be fixed by such Council.
§ 25-3. Acting Building Official.
In the absence of the Building Official or in the case of his inability to act for
any reason, the Common Council shall have the power to designate a person
to act in behalf of the Building Official and to exercise all of the powers
conferred upon him by this chapter.
§ 25-4. Building inspectors.
The Common Council may appoint one or more Building Inspectors, as the
need may appear, to act under the supervision of the Building Official and
to exercise any portion of his powers and duties. The compensation of such
Building Inspectors shall be fixed by the Common Council.
§ 25-5. Conflicts of interest.
No officer or employee of the Building Department shall engage in any
activity inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the Building
Department; nor shall he, during the term of his employment, be engaged
directly or indirectly in any building business, in the furnishing of labor,
materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a
building or in the preparation of plans or specifications thereof within the
city, excepting only that this provision shall not prohibit any employee from
such activities in connection with the construction of a building or structure
owned by him and not constructed for sale.
§ 25-6. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Building Official is hereby granted the authority to promulgate and
enforce rules and regulations for the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, removal, improvement, demolition, conversion or change in the
nature of the occupancy of any building or structure within the city.
§ 25-7. Powers and duties of Building Official.
Administration and enforcement authority generally. Except as
otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance or rules and
regulations or except as herein otherwise provided, the Building
Official shall administer and enforce all of the provisions of laws,
ordinances and rules and regulations promulgated by him and
applicable to the construction, alteration, repair, removal and
demolition of buildings and structures and the installation and use of
materials and equipment therein and the location, use, occupancy and
maintenance thereof. 3
A.
§ 25-2 HORNELL CODE § 25-7
25:14
§ 25-8. Records and reports.
§ 25-9. Cooperation of other departments.
The Building Official may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation
of the Police, Fire and Health Departments or officers and of all other
Applications and permits; examination of premises. The Building
Official shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection,
alteration, removal and demolition of buildings or structures or parts
thereof and shall examine the premises for which such applications
have been received or such permits have been issued for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations governing
building construction.
B.
Issuance of notices and orders. The Building Official shall issue all
appropriate notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions,
to require the necessary safeguards during construction and to ensure
compliance during the entire course of construction with the
requirements of such laws, ordinances or regulations.
C.
Inspections. The Building Official shall make all inspections which are
necessary or proper for the carrying out of his duties, except that
he may accept written reports of inspection from Building Inspectors
or other employees of the Department of Buildings or from generally
recognized and authoritative service and inspection bureaus, provided
that the same are certified by a responsible official thereof.
D.
Tests. Whenever the same may be necessary or appropriate to assure
compliance with the provisions of applicable laws, ordinances or
regulations covering building construction, the Building Official may
require the performance of tests in the field by experienced,
professional persons or by accredited and authoritative testing
laboratories or service bureaus or agencies.
E.
Duty of Building Official. The Building Official shall keep permanent
official records of all transactions and activities conducted by him,
including all applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees
charged and collected, inspection reports, and notices and orders
issued. All such records shall be public records open to public
inspection during business hours.
A.
Submission of annual report to Council. The Building Official shall,
annually, submit to the Common Council a written report and summary
of all business conducted by the Department of Buildings, including
permits and certificates issued, fees collected, orders and notices
promulgated, inspections and tests made and appeals or litigation
pending.
B.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 25-7 BUILDING DEPARTMENT § 25-9
25:15
municipal officials exercising any jurisdiction over the construction, use or
occupancy of buildings or the installation of equipment therein.
Chapter 27
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
§ 25-9 HORNELL CODE § 25-9
27:16
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994]
§ 27-1. Statutory provisions for establishment or extension.
The provisions of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law are hereby
applicable to the establishment or extension of Business Improvement
Districts in the City of Hornell.
§ 27-1 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 27-1
27:17

ARTICLE II
Hornell Business Improvement District
[Adopted 6-24-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
§ 27-2. Establishment; boundaries.
The Hornell Business Improvement District shall be and is hereby
established in the City of Hornell, the Common Council having found that
the establishment of the district is in the public interest, that all notice,
mailing and hearing requirements have been complied with, that all
properties within the district will benefit from the establishment and that
all property benefitted is included in the boundaries of the district. The
boundaries of said district are contained in the District Plan adopted by this
body on November 13, 1995, and as set forth below:
All businesses on both sides of the center line of the streets as described
beginning at intersection of Cedar Street and Park Drive; thence northwest
along Park Drive to Mill Street; thence west on Mill Street to Canisteo
Street; thence north along Canisteo Street to Pleasant Street; thence west
along Pleasant Street to Grand Street; thence northerly along Grand Street
and a line extending to Franklin Street; thence east along Franklin Street
to property owned by Conrail; thence northwesterly to West Street; thence
northeast along West Street to Buffalo Street; thence northwest along west
boundary of Conrail-Buffalo Division Track to the westerly boundary of
West Main Street; thence Northwest along West Main Street to the city's
northwest boundary; thence follow city boundary to intersection with Rt.
21; thence east along Route 21 to intersection with Old Almond Road;
thence east on Old Almond Road to intersect with North Main Street;
thence northwest along North Main Street to Steuben Street; thence east
along south boundary of Steuben Street to east boundary of Conrail
property thence southeast along Conrail property to Ransom Street;
thence east on Ransom Street to west boundary of Maple City Drive;
thence north along Maple City Drive to east boundary of Canisteo River;
thence northwest along city property line; thence east along city line to
west boundary of Route 36; thence south along Route 36 to intersection
with Adsit Street; thence east on Adsit Street to Seneca Street; thence
north on Seneca Street to Canisteo River; thence south on Seneca Street
to Maple Street; thence southeast on Maple Street to Church Street;
thence southwest on Church Street to Main Street: thence southeast on
Main Street to Center Street; thence southwest to Center Street to Elm
Street; thence southwest on Elm Street to Jane Street; thence southwest
on Jane Street to Transit Road; thence southeast on Transit Road to east
boundary of Conrail property; thence southeast along Conrail property to a
point opposite Cedar Street intersection with Park Drive; thence southwest
across Conrail property to point of beginning.
§ 27-3. Construction improvements; services.
The construction improvements and provision of services within the district
shall be pursuant to such District Plan of the Hornell Business Improvement
§ 27-2 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 27-3
27:19
District. All said services shall be in addition to and not a substitution for
required municipal services provided by the City of Hornell on a city-wide
basis.
§ 27-4. Statutory provisions governing operation; inconsistencies.
§ 27-5. Amendments.
Any amendments to the BID or to the BID Plan shall be made in accordance
with the provisions set forth in § 980-i of Article 19-A of the General
Municipal Law.
To the extent not otherwise explicitly provided herein, the provisions
set forth in Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law shall govern the
operation of the BID and the District Management Association in the
City of Hornell.
A.
Insofar as the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the
provisions of any other local law or act, the provisions of this article
shall be controlling.
B.
§ 27-3 HORNELL CODE § 27-5
27:20
Chapter 31
CHECKS, FRAUDULENT
§ 31-1. Service charge imposed.
A service charge of $15 shall be imposed for checks which are dishonored
and returned for insufficient funds, and thereafter future payments shall be
required to be tendered in cash or by certified or cashier's check.
§ 31-2. Collection of service charge.
This service charge shall be collected in the same manner prescribed by law
for the collection of the account for which the check was tendered.
Chapter 33
CITY OF HORNELL 911 MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulances — See Ch. 12. Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 124.
§ 33-1. Adoption of map.
The Common Council hereby approves the proposed City of Hornell 911
Map, as submitted by Steuben Council.
Chapter 38
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 44.
§ 38-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the defense and indemnification
of city officers and employees pursuant to § 18 of the Public Officers Law.
§ 38-2. Defense.
The City of Hornell hereby confers the benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers
Law upon its officers and employees, subject to the limitations set forth in
said § 18.
§ 27-5 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 38-3
31:21
§ 38-3. Indemnification.
The City of Hornell hereby agrees to be held liable for the costs incurred
under § 18 of the Public Officers Law, subject to the limitations set forth in
said § 18.
Chapter 41
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY
§ 41-1. Establishment.
As a condition of receiving federal funds under the CDBG - Small Cities
Grant Program, the City of Hornell has established a policy of maintaining a
drug-free workplace. The following statement specifies the city's drug-free
workplace policy and the responsibilities of city employees.
§ 41-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A controlled substance in Schedules I
through V of Section 202 of the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. § 812),
and as further defined by regulation at 21 CFR 1300.11 through 1300.15.
CONVICTION — A finding of guilt, including a plea of nolo contendere,
or imposition of sentence, or both, by any judicial body charged with the
responsibility to determine violations of the federal or state criminal drug
statutes.
CRIMINAL DRUG STATUTE — A federal or nonfederal criminal statute
involving the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, use or possession of
any controlled substance.
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE — A site for the performance of work done in
connection with the Housing and Urban Development funded Community
Development Program at which employees of the City of Hornell are
prohibited from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution,
dispensing, possession or use of a controlled substance.
§ 41-3. Possession and use of controlled substances.
All employees are hereby notified that the unlawful manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, possession or use of a controlled substance is
prohibited in the City of Hornell's workplace(s).
§ 41-4. Conditions of employment.
As a condition of employment under the Small Cities Grant Program, each
employee engaged in the performance of the grant will:
A. Abide by the terms of this statement.
§ 38-3 HORNELL CODE § 41-4
41:22
§ 41-5. Penalties for offenses.
The city may impose penalties on employees for drug abuse violations
occurring in the workplace, including:
§ 41-6. Action upon notification of conviction.
The city shall, within 30 days of receiving notice that an employee has
been convicted of a violation of a criminal drug statute occurring in the
workplace, take one of the actions against the employee as provided in
§ 41-5 above.
§ 41-7. Information availability.
Employees seeking information about the dangers of drug abuse in the
workplace and/or the availability of drug counseling, rehabilitation and
employee assistance programs are directed to contact the city's Personnel
Director.
Chapter 43
EMPIRE ZONE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business Improvement Districts — See Ch.
27.
Planning Board — See Ch. 63.
Urban Renewal Agency — See Ch. 80 and Ch.
A345.
Zoning — See Ch. 315.
§ 43-1. Statutory authority; purpose.
Article 18B of the General Municipal Law has authorized applications by
municipalities for designation as empire zones within the meaning of said
statute and such designation could greatly benefit the City of Hornell and
other municipalities within Steuben County in that new businesses would
be encouraged to locate in the Zone area, existing businesses would be
Notify the city of any criminal drug statute conviction for a violation
occurring in the workplace no later than five days after such conviction.
B.
Personnel actions as allowed under any applicable collective bargaining
agreements or personnel policies of the City of Hornell up to and
including termination.
A.
Requiring such employee to participate satisfactorily in a drug-abuse
assistance or rehabilitation program approved for such purposes by
a federal, state or local health, law enforcement or other appropriate
agency.
B.
§ 41-4 EMPIRE ZONE § 43-1
43:23
encouraged to expand in the Zone area, and new and expanded businesses
would generate new jobs for City and county residents.
§ 43-2. Boundaries.
The Mayor of the City of Hornell is hereby authorized to submit an
application for designation of certain areas within the City of Hornell and
Steuben County as an empire zone, the boundaries of which zone are as set
forth in Schedule A which is attached hereto and made a part hereof.4
§ 43-3. Certification Officer.
Pursuant to the requirements of the aforesaid statute, the City Chamberlain
shall serve as Certification Officer of the City of Hornell / Steuben County
empire zone areas and shall perform the following duty, to wit: certify,
jointly with the New York State Commissioner of Economic Development
and the New York State Commissioner of Labor, those business enterprises
which are eligible to receive benefits referred to in § 966 of Article 18B of
the General Municipal Law.
§ 43-4. Empire Zone Administration Board membership and duties.
Pursuant to the requirements of the aforesaid statute, a local empire zone
administration board is hereby established to consist of seven members,
none of whom shall be the Certification Officer. All members shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the City of Hornell. The appointments shall
be for terms of three years, except that four of the original appointees
shall be appointed to two-year terms. All subsequent new appointments
and reappointments shall be for a term of three years and shall be filled
for duration of unexpired tern). The members shall be representatives
of local business, organized labor, community organizations, financial and
educational institutions, at least one of whom shall be a zone resident. The
local empire zone administrative board shall perform the following duties:
Submit an annual report to the New York State Commissioner of
Economic Development regarding empire zone activities, including
analysis of the extent to which the goals set forth in the Empire Zone
application have been met.
A.
Undertake efforts to ensure meaningful participation by minority and
women businesses in empire zone activities.
B.
Provide within the Zone, by contract with the City of Hornell Industrial
Development Agency (HIDA), strategic economic development planning
for the Zone, marketing and promotion of the Zone, assistance to
companies in applying for available benefits, preparation of application
for financing assistance and other technical assistance services,
coordination of the delivery of state and local economic development
C.
4. Editor's Note: Schedule A, containing a description of Empire Zone boundaries and
subsequent amendments thereto, is on file in the City offices.
§ 43-1 HORNELL CODE § 43-4
43:24
Chapter 44
assistance programs in furtherance of the Empire Zone plan as shall
be determined by the designee. Provided, however, within the amount
appropriated therefor and allocated by the HIDA, the Commissioner
shall, to the maximum extent feasible, make equally available financial
support, through contracts or other means, to assist with the
administrative expenses of the Zone activity operations. No funds shall
be made available for this purpose unless the amount to be provided
has been matched by private and governmental sources, other then
state sources, in amounts at least equaling that to be provided by the
state.
Enter into an agreement with the office of business permits and
regulatory assistance to participate in a business permit assistance
program to be provided to applicants for business permits required by
a county, city, town or village for a business undertaking project or
activity in the Empire Zone.
D.
Enter into agreements with the commissioners of economic
development, labor and social services, local education agencies as
defined in paragraph (b) of subdivision one of § 3032 of the Education
Law, local community-based organizations, private employers, labor
unions, the administrative entity and private industry council for the
service delivery area established under the job training partnership act
(P.L. 97-300) that includes the Empire Zone, and any other person or
state or federal agency for the purpose of establishing, implementing
and coordinating job training programs for employees and businesses
to be located in the Empire Zone, provided, however, that:
Any agreement to establish a job training program designed to
meet the needs of private employers shall require such employer to
retain in his employ for not less than six months an employee who
has satisfactorily completed a course of training for a particular job
opening;
(1)
Any job training program established pursuant to this subdivision
shall make use of the job service division of the labor department
as well as other sources for the purpose of recruitment;
(2)
E.
In cooperation with local service officials establish a job training
opportunities program sponsored by private employers in accordance
with the provisions of § 164b of § 351 of the Social Service Law.
F.
Enter into agreements with the local departments of social services and
community-based organizations to facilitate the provisions of ancillary
or enhanced social services in the Zone.
G.
Ensure that the job training programs meet standards of instructional
quality established in regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of
Education.
H.
§ 43-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 43-4
44:25
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification of officers and
employees — See Ch. 38.
Standards of conduct for procurement — See
Ch. 65, § 65-2.
§ 44-1. Findings; purpose; conflicts with other provisions.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the
Common Council of the City of Hornell recognizes that there are rules of
ethical conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed
if a high degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence
is to be maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of
this chapter to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers
and employees of the City of Hornell. These rules shall serve as a guide
for official conduct of the officers and employees of the City of Hornell.
The rules of ethical conduct of this chapter, as adopted, shall not conflict
with but shall be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law or any other general or special law relating to ethical
conduct and interest in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
§ 44-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
City of Hornell, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a "municipal officer or employee" solely by reason of being
a volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a chief engineer or an
assistant chief engineer.
INTEREST — A pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal officer
or employee, unless the context otherwise requires.
§ 44-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the City of Hornell shall be subject to and abide
by the following standards of conduct:
Gifts. He shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $25 or more, whether in the form
of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him or
could reasonably be expected to influence him in the performance of his
official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his
part.
A.
§ 43-4 HORNELL CODE § 44-3
44:26
Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
B.
Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive or enter
into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency
over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to appoint
any member, officer or employee.
C.
Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his municipality whereby his compensation is
to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
D.
Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Council and any officer or employee of the City of
Hornell, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the discussion
or gives official opinion to the Council on any legislation before the
Council shall publicly disclose on the official record the nature and
extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest he has
in such legislation.
E.
Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial business or
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
F.
Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
G.
Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the City of Hornell in relation to any case, proceeding or application
in which he personally participated during the period of his service or
employment or which was under his active consideration.
H.
Response to superiors. He shall provide full and honest responses to
reasonable requests from superiors.5
I.
5. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 44-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 44-4
44:27
§ 44-4. Claims against city by employees.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the City of Hornell or any agency thereof on behalf
of himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal injury or
property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted by law.
§ 44-5. Distribution of code.
The Mayor of the City of Hornell shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics
to be distributed to every officer and employee of the city within 60 days
after the effective date of this chapter. Each officer and employee elected
or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the
duties of his office or employment.
§ 44-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 52
INVESTMENT POLICIES
§ 52-1. Objectives.
The objectives of the investment policy of the City of Hornell are to minimize
risk; to ensure that investments mature as the cash is required to finance
operations; and to ensure a competitive rate of return.
§ 52-2. Authorized investments.
In accordance with this policy, the Chief Fiscal Officer is hereby
authorized to invest all funds, including proceeds of obligations and
reserve funds, in:
Certificates of deposit issued by a bank or trust company
authorized to do business in New York State.
(1)
Time deposit accounts in a bank or trust company authorized to do
business in New York State.
(2)
(3) Obligations of New York State.
(4) Obligations of the United States Government.
Repurchase agreements involving the purchase and sale of direct
obligations of the United States.
(5)
A.
§ 44-4 HORNELL CODE § 52-2
52:28
§ 52-3. Conditions of investments.
Investments made pursuant to this investment policy shall comply with the
following conditions:
Funds, except reserve funds, may be invested in:
Obligations of agencies of the federal government if the principal
and interest are guaranteed by the United States.
(1)
With the approval of the State Comptroller, revenue anticipation
notes or tax anticipation notes or other local governments.
(2)
B.
C. Reserve funds may be invested in obligations of the local government.
Other local government officials receiving money in their official
capacity must deposit such funds in negotiable order withdrawal
accounts.
D.
Collateral.
Certificates of deposit shall be fully secured by insurance of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or by obligations of New
York State or obligations of the United States or obligations of
federal agencies, the principal and interest of which are
guaranteed by the United States, or obligations of New York State
local governments. Collateral shall be delivered to the local
government or a custodial bank with which the local government
has entered into a custodial agreement. The market value of
collateral shall at all times equal or exceed the principal amount of
the certificate of deposit.
(1)
Securities purchased through a repurchase agreement shall be
valued to market at least weekly.
(2)
Collateral shall not be required with respect to the direct purchase
of obligations of New York State, obligations of the United States
and obligations of federal agencies, the principal and interest of
which are guaranteed by the United States Government.
(3)
A.
Delivery of securities.
Repurchase agreements. Every repurchase agreement shall
provide for payment to the seller only upon the seller's delivery of
obligations of the United States to the custodial bank designated
by the local government or, in the case of a book-entry transaction,
when the obligations of the United States are credited to the
custodian's Federal Reserve bank account. The seller shall not be
entitled to substitute securities. Repurchase agreements shall be
for periods of 30 days or less. The custodial bank shall confirm
all transactions, in writing, to ensure that the local government's
ownership of the securities is properly reflected on the records of
the custodial bank.
(1)
B.
§ 52-2 INVESTMENT POLICIES § 52-3
52:29
Payment shall be made by or on behalf of the local government
for obligations of New York State, obligations the principal and
interest of which are guaranteed by the United States, United
States obligations, certificates of deposit and other purchased
securities upon delivery thereof to the custodial bank or, in the
case of a book-entry transaction, when the purchased securities are
credited to the custodial bank's Federal Reserve System account.
All transactions shall be confirmed in writing.
(2)
Written contracts.
Written contracts are required for repurchase agreements and
custodial undertakings. With respect to the purchase of obligations
of the United States, New York State or other governmental
entities, etc., in which moneys may be invested, the interests of
the local government will be adequately protected by conditioning
payment on the physical delivery of purchased securities to the
local government or custodian or, in the case of book-entry
transactions, on the crediting of purchased securities to the
custodian's Federal Reserve System account. All purchases will be
confirmed, in writing, to the City of Hornell.
(1)
It is therefore the policy of the City of Hornell to require written
contracts as follows:
Written contracts shall be required for all repurchase
agreements. Only credit-worthy banks and primary reporting
dealers shall be qualified to enter into a repurchase agreement
with the local government. The written contract shall provide
that only obligations of the United States may be purchased,
and the local government shall make payment upon delivery
of the securities or appropriate book-entry of the purchased
securities. No specific repurchase agreement shall be entered
into unless a master repurchase agreement has been executed
between the local government and the trading partners. While
the term of the master repurchase agreement may be for a
reasonable length of time, a specific repurchase agreement
shall not exceed 30 days.
(a)
(b) A written contract shall be required with the custodial bank.
(2)
C.
Designation of custodial bank. Only banks chartered by the State of
New York are designated to act as custodial banks of the City of
Hornell's investments. However, securities may not be purchased
through a repurchase agreement with the custodial bank.
D.
Financial strength of institutions.
Investments in time deposits and certificates of deposit are to be
made with banks or trust companies.
(1)
E.
§ 52-3 HORNELL CODE § 52-3
52:30
§ 52-4. Operations, audit and reporting.
When purchasing eligible securities, the seller shall be required to
deliver the securities to the custodial bank.
(2)
Repurchase agreements shall be entered into only with banks or
trust companies or registered and primary reporting dealers in
government securities. Sound credit judgments must be made with
respect to trading partners in repurchase agreements. It is not
assumed that inclusion on a list of the Federal Reserve is
automatically adequate evidence of credit-worthiness.
(3)
Repurchase agreements should not be entered into with
undercapitalized repurchase trading firms.
(4)
A margin of 5% or higher of the market value of purchased
securities in repurchase agreements must be maintained.
(5)
The Chief Fiscal Officer or, in the absence of the Chief Fiscal Officer,
the Deputy Fiscal Officer shall authorize the purchase and sale of
all securities and execute contracts for repurchase agreements and
certificates of deposit on behalf of the city. The city shall pay for
repurchased securities upon the delivery or book-entry thereof.
A.
The city shall require the purchase and sale of securities and
certificates of deposit through a competitive or negotiated program
involving telephone solicitation of at least two bids for each transaction.
B.
At the time independent auditors conduct the annual audit of the
accounts and financial affairs of the city, the independent auditors shall
audit the investments of the city for compliance with the provisions of
these investment guidelines.
C.
Within 60 days of the end of each of the first three quarters of the fiscal
year, the Chief Fiscal Officer shall prepare and submit to the Finance
Committee of the city a quarterly investment report which indicates
new investments, the inventory of existing investments and such other
matters as the Chief Fiscal Officer deems appropriate.
D.
Within 120 days of the end of the fiscal year, the Chief Fiscal Officer
shall prepare and submit to the Finance Committee an annual
investment report; recommendations for change in these investment
guidelines; the result of the annual independent audit; the investment
income record; a list of total fees, commissions or other charges, if any,
paid to the custodial bank; and such other matters as the Chief Fiscal
Officer deems appropriate.
E.
The Common Council of the City of Hornell shall review and approve
the annual investment report, if practicable, at its second meeting in
September.
F.
§ 52-3 INVESTMENT POLICIES § 52-4
52:31
Chapter 63
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of Land — See Ch. 275.
§ 63-1. Organization; training; other public offices or positions.
The Planning Board shall consist of seven members. The Mayor shall
nominate and, by and with the consent of a majority of the Common Council
in office, appoint members of the Planning Board. The members of the
Planning Board shall annually designate a member to serve as Chairperson.
The Mayor may require Planning Board members to complete training
and continuing education courses in accordance with any local law
requirements to be set up for the training of Planning Board members. Such
training costs will be a charge against the City budget. Not more than a
minority of the members of such Board shall hold any other public office or
position in the City of Hornell.
§ 63-2. Appropriation.
The Common Council is authorized and empowered to make such
appropriation as it may see fit for Planning Board expenses. They may
provide for the compensation of Planning Board members by amendment
to this chapter. The Planning Board shall have the power and authority
to employ experts, clerks and a secretary and to pay for their services
and to provide for such other expenses as may be necessary and proper,
not exceeding in all the appropriation that may be made therefore by the
Common Council.
§ 63-3. Common Council members ineligible.
No person who is a member of the City of Hornell Common Council shall be
eligible for membership on the Planning Board.
At least annually and, if practicable, at the second meeting in October
of the Common Council, the members shall review and amend, if
necessary these investment guidelines.
G.
The provisions of these investment guidelines and any amendments
hereto shall take effect prospectively and shall not invalidate the prior
selection of any custodial bank or prior investment.
H.
§ 52-4 HORNELL CODE § 63-4
63:32
§ 63-4. Terms of members.
Terms of members of the Planning Board shall be based on a calendar year.
At the expiration of the term of each member, his or her successor shall be
appointed for a seven-year term.
§ 63-5. Terms of members now in office.
The members of the Planning Board active at the adoption of this chapter
shall be appointed to the terms as follows: Members now holding office for
terms which do not expire at the end of the official year shall, upon the
expiration of their term, hold office until the end of the official year; and
their successors shall be appointed for terms which shall be equal in years
to the number of members of the Planning Board.
§ 63-6. Decreasing membership.
The Common Council may, by local law, decrease the membership of the
Planning Board to five members, to take effect upon the next two
expirations of terms. However, no incumbent shall be removed from office
except upon the expiration of his or her term, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 63-7. Vacancy in office.
If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, the Mayor
shall appoint the new member for the unexpired term.
§ 63-8. Removal of members. [Amended 7-28-2003]
The Mayor shall have the power to remove, after public hearing, any
member of the Planning Board for cause. Any Planning Board member may
be removed for noncompliance with minimum standards relating to meeting
attendance and/or training as established by the Common Council by local
law. Failure to attend at least one scheduled meeting in three consecutive
calendar months may be cause for removal from office.
§ 63-9. Compatibility of office.
The City officials or employees on the Planning Board shall not, by reason
of membership therein, forfeit their right to exercise the powers, perform
the duties or receive the compensation of the City office or position held
by them during such membership. No City officer or employee shall be
appointed to the Planning Board in the event that such officer or employee
cannot carry out the duties of his or her position without a conflict in the
performance of his or her duties as a member of the Planning Board.
§ 63-10. Chairperson duties.
All meetings of the Planning Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
§ 63-4 PLANNING BOARD § 63-10
63:33
Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
§ 63-11. Service on other Planning Boards.
No person shall be disqualified from serving as a member of the City
Planning Board by reason of serving as a member of a County Planning
Board.
§ 63-12. Rules and regulations.
The Planning Board may recommend to the Common Council regulations
relating to any subject matter over which the Planning Board has
jurisdiction under state statute or under local law or ordinance of the City.
Adoption of any such recommendations by the Common Council shall be by
local law or ordinance.
§ 63-13. Report on referred matters; general reports.
Chapter 65
PROCUREMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 44. Investment policies — See Ch. 52.
§ 65-1. Adoption; applicability.
The City of Hornell does hereby adopt the following procurement policy,
which is intended to apply to all goods and services which are not required
by law to be publicly bid.
The Common Council may, by general or special rule, provide for the
reference of any matter or class of matters, other than those referred
to in § 63-12 above, to the Planning Board before final action is taken
thereon by the Common Council or other office or officer of the City
having final authority over said matter. The Common Council may
further stipulate that final action thereon shall not take place until the
Planning Board has submitted its report thereon or has had reasonable
time, to be fixed by the Common Council body in said rule, to submit
the report.
A.
In addition, the Planning Board shall have the full power and authority
to make such investigation, maps, reports and recommendations in
connection therewith relating to the planning and development of the
City as it deems desirable, provided that the total expenditures of said
board shall not exceed the appropriation therefor.
B.
§ 63-10 HORNELL CODE § 65-2
63:34
§ 65-2. Determination of type of purchase.
§ 65-3. Methods of purchase.
Every purchase to be made must be initially reviewed to determine
whether it is a purchase contract or a public works contract. Once that
determination is made, a good faith effort will be made to determine
whether it is known or can reasonably be expected that the aggregate
amount to be spent on the item of supply or service is not subject
to competitive bidding, taking into account past purchases and the
aggregate amount to be spent in a year. The following items are not
subject to competitive bidding pursuant to § 103 of the General
Municipal Law: purchase contracts and public works contracts under
the threshold established by § 103 of the General Municipal Law;
emergency purchases; certain municipal hospital purchases; goods
purchased from agencies for the blind or severely handicapped; goods
purchased from correctional institutions; purchases under state and
county contracts; and surplus and secondhand purchases from another
governmental entity. [Amended 8-15-2016]
A.
The decision that a purchase is not subject to competitive bidding will
be documented in writing by the individual making the purchase. This
documentation may include written or verbal quotes from vendors, a
memo from the purchaser indicating how the decision was arrived at,
a copy of the contract indicating the source which makes the item
or service exempt, a memo from the purchaser detailing the
circumstances which led to an emergency purchase or any other
written documentation that is appropriate.
B.
All goods and services will be secured by use of written requests for
proposals, written quotations, verbal quotations or any other method
that assures that goods will be purchased at the lowest price and
that favoritism will be avoided, except in the following circumstances:
purchase contracts and public works contracts under the threshold
established by § 103 of the General Municipal Law; goods purchased
from agencies for the blind or severely handicapped pursuant to § 175-b
of the State Finance Law; goods purchased from correctional
institutions pursuant to § 186 of the Correction Law; purchases under
state contracts pursuant to § 104 of the General Municipal Law;
purchases under county contracts pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 3, of
the General Municipal Law; or purchases pursuant to § 65-5 of this
chapter. [Amended 8-15-2016]
A.
The following method of purchase will be used when required by this
chapter in order to achieve the highest savings:
B.
§ 65-2 PLANNING BOARD § 65-3
63:35
§ 65-4. Documentation of actions.
§ 65-5. Exceptions.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 104-b, Subdivision 2f, the
procurement policy may contain circumstances when, or types of
procurements for which, in the sole discretion of the governing body, the
solicitation of alternative proposals or quotations will not be in the best
interest of the municipality. In the following circumstances it may not be in
the best interests of the City of Hornell, New York, to solicit quotations or
document the basis for not accepting the lowest bid:
Estimated Amount of Purchase
Contract Method
$250 to $2,999 2 verbal quotations and approval
by the Mayor and/or his designee
$3,000 to $9,999 3 written/fax quotations or written
request for proposals and
approval by the Mayor and/or his
designee
Estimated Amount of Public
Works Contract Method
$1,000 to $2,999 2 verbal quotations and approval
by the Mayor and/or his designee
$3,000 to $4,999 2 written/fax quotations and
approval by the Mayor and/or his
designee
$5,000 to $19,999 3 written/fax quotations or written
request for proposal and approval
by the Mayor and/or his designee
A good faith effort shall be made to obtain the required number of
proposals or quotations. If the purchaser is unable to obtain the
required number of proposals or quotations, the purchaser will
document the attempt made at obtaining the proposals. In no event
shall the failure to obtain the proposals to be a bar to the procurement.
C.
Documentation is required of each action taken in connection with each
procurement.
A.
Documentation and an explanation is required whenever a contract
is awarded to other than the lowest responsible offeror. This
documentation will include an explanation of how the award will
achieve savings or how the offeror was not responsible. A
determination that the offeror is not responsible shall be made by the
purchaser and may not be challenged under any circumstances.
B.
§ 65-3 HORNELL CODE § 65-5
63:36
Professional services or services requiring special or technical skill,
training or expertise.
The individual or company must be chosen based on accountability,
reliability, responsibility, skill, education and training, judgment,
integrity and moral worth. These qualifications are not necessarily
found in the individual or company that offers the lowest price, and
the nature of these services are such that they do not readily lend
themselves to competitive procurement procedures.
(1)
In determining whether a service fits into this category the
Common Council of Hornell, New York, shall take into
consideration the following guidelines:
Whether the services are subject to state licensing or testing
requirements.
(a)
Whether substantial formal education or training is a
necessary prerequisite to the performance of the services.
(b)
Whether the services require a personal relationship between
the individual and municipal officials.
(c)
(2)
Professional or technical services shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
(a) Services of an attorney.
(b) Services of a physician.
Technical services of an engineer engaged to prepare plans,
maps and estimates.
(c)
Securing insurance coverage and/or services of an insurance
broker.
(d)
(e) Services of a certified public accountant.
(f) Investment management services.
Printing services involving extensive writing, editing or art
work.
(g)
(h) Management of municipally owned property.
Computer software or programming services for customized
programs or services involved in substantial modification and
customizing of prepackaged software.
(i)
(3)
A.
Emergency purchases pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 4, of the General
Municipal Law. Due to the nature of this exception, these goods or
services must be purchased immediately, and a delay in order to seek
alternate proposals may threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of
B.
§ 65-5 PLANNING BOARD § 65-5
63:37
§ 65-6. Implementation to be pursuant to Charter.
This policy guideline shall be implemented pursuant to § C-55a of the
Hornell City Charter.
§ 65-7. When effective; annual review.
This chapter shall go into effect January 1, 1992, and will be reviewed
annually by the Finance Committee of the Common Council of the City of
Hornell.
Chapter 72
RECREATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
§ 72-1. Commission abolished.
The Hornell Recreation Commission, established by a resolution of the
Common Council of the City of Hornell, New York, passed February 19,
1923, is hereby abolished, from and after the first day of April 1930.
§ 72-2. Powers vested in Common Council.
All of the powers vested in said Recreation Commission by said resolution
shall, after said Commission is abolished as aforesaid, be vested in the
Common Council of said city, and said Common Council shall have full
control and supervision of the existing playgrounds and recreation centers
in said city with authority to maintain, equip and operate the same and
to establish, maintain and operate additional playgrounds and recreation
the residents. This subsection does not preclude alternate proposals if
time permits.
Purchases of surplus and secondhand goods. If alternate proposals are
required, the City of Hornell is precluded from purchasing surplus and
secondhand goods at auctions or through specific advertised sources
where the best prices are usually obtained. It is also difficult to try to
compare prices of used goods, and a lower price may indicate an older
product.
C.
Goods or services under $1,000. The time and documentation required
to purchase through this policy may be more costly than the item
itself and would, therefore, not be in the best interests of the taxpayer.
In addition, it is not likely that such de minimus contracts would be
awarded based on favoritism. [Amended 8-15-2016]
D.
§ 65-5 HORNELL CODE § 72-2
72:38
centers and employ play leaders, playground directors and such other
officers and employees as said Council shall deem proper. Said Council shall
have all the powers set forth in Article 13 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 72-3. Delivery of property and equipment; transfer of funds.
Said Recreation Commission, before the first day of April 1930, shall deliver
to said Council or such officer or employee as it shall designate all property
and equipment, real and personal, now in the possession of said
Commission, and the funds now held by the City Chamberlain shall be
transferred to the control of the Common Council to the same extent as they
were controlled by said Commission, and funds hereafter appropriated or
property acquired for recreation purposes shall be under the supervision
and control of said Common Council.
§ 72-4. Report.
Said Commission, before the first day of April 1930, shall render a report to
the city setting forth its receipts and disbursements with property acquired
or disposed of since the last annual report of said Commission, with an
inventory of the property on hand.
Chapter 74
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 74-1. Residency required; legislative determination.
The Common Council recognizes that emergency situations arise which
require employees of the City of Hornell to be near their place of
employment and to assume the continuation of public services to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the people. Through adoption of this
chapter, the Common Council makes a legislative determination that those
who are residents of the city take greater interest in promoting the public
safety and health in the future of this community than do nonresidents
who reside in areas unaffected by city services. The city further declares
that such a quality is desirable for its employees. The legislative body
considers that residency by its employees within the community will assure
continuation of essential public services. The Common Council determines
that the public need is sufficient to require that employees hired or
promoted after the effective date of this chapter be residents of the city.
§ 74-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESIDENCY — For the purpose of this chapter, the actual principal domicile
of an individual, where he or she normally sleeps and maintains usual
personal and household effects.
§ 72-2 RECREATION COMMISSION § 74-3
72:39
§ 74-3. Residency for new municipal employees; continuation.
[Amended 3-19-2018]
Every person initially employed on a full-time basis by the City of Hornell
on or after the effective date of this chapter shall, as a qualification of
employment, become a resident of the City of Hornell within six months of
the date of initial service for the City. During the time of service of such
employee, no individual shall cease to be a resident of the City of Hornell
except for seasonal or part-time workers.
§ 74-4. Notice and posting.6
A copy of this chapter shall be provided to each employee upon his or her
initial appointment or promotion. However, a failure to do so shall not affect
the application of this chapter to any employee appointed or promoted after
its effective date. A copy of this chapter shall also be posted on all notice
boards normally used for employee communications.
§ 74-5. Investigation of residency; hearing; voluntary resignation.
[Amended 3-19-2018]
Should it be alleged that an employee is not in compliance with § 74-3
of this chapter as the case may be, the Law and Ordinance Committee
for the Common Council for the City of Hornell may initiate a hearing
by providing the employee with written notice of his or her alleged
violation and shall allow the employee seven calendar days in which to
respond. If there is a failure to respond or if in the judgment of the
Law and Ordinance Committee for the Common Council for the City of
Hornell, the response is not sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this
chapter, the Law and Ordinance Committee for the Common Council for
the City of Hornell shall set a date to hear the charge of nonresidence.
The employee shall be sent a notice of the hearing date at least 15
calendar days prior to the hearing. A record of the hearing shall be
made. Should an employee establish residence to the satisfaction of the
Law and Ordinance Committee for the Common Council for the City of
Hornell prior to the hearing date, it shall result in a cancellation of the
hearing authorized by this section.
A.
To conduct the hearing, the Law and Ordinance Committee for the
Common Council for the City of Hornell may, in writing, designate an
individual who, for the purpose of the hearing, shall be vested with
all the powers of the Law and Ordinance Committee and who shall
refer the hearing record and his or her recommendations to the Law
and Ordinance Committee for review and decision. Should the Law and
Ordinance Committee determine that an employee is a nonresident,
in violation of this chapter, the employee shall be notified, in writing,
that he or she has been deemed to have voluntarily resigned from
B.
6. Editor’s Note: Former § 74-4, Residency upon promotion, was repealed 3-19-2018. This
resolution also renumbered former §§ 74-5 through 74-7 as §§ 74-4 through 74-6,
respectively.
§ 74-3 HORNELL CODE § 74-5
72:40
§ 74-6. Waiver of requirements. [Amended 3-19-2018]
Chapter 77
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Storage of vehicles and parts — See Ch. 296. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 300.
§ 77-1. Authorization to establish Bureau.
The City Court of the City of Hornell, New York, is hereby authorized to
establish a Traffic Violations Bureau to assist the Court in the disposition
of offenses in relation to traffic violations, pursuant to Article 14-B of the
General Municipal Law.
§ 77-2. Persons in charge; hours.
The City Court shall designate the person or persons who shall be in charge
of the Traffic Violations Bureau and the days and hours that the Bureau shall
be open for the transaction of its official business.
§ 77-3. Jurisdiction.
The Traffic Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to dispose of violations
of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Hornell, New
York, except for speeding offenses, or misdemeanors or felonies, within 10
employment as of the date of the determination. Upon reestablishing
residence, an individual having so resigned may apply for reinstatement
to his or her former position and shall be reinstated if the position is
vacant.
In the event that the Common Council for the City of Hornell
determines that it is in the best interest of the City of Hornell to do so,
the provisions of § 74-3 may be waived with respect to an incumbent
or incumbents of a particular title to titles according to the following
standards:
Lack of applicants. The requirement of residency may be waived in
those instances where the City has difficulty hiring or promoting
the most qualified person because of its residency requirement.
(1)
Necessity for nonresidents. The requirement of residents may be
waived in those instances where it is determined that residency is
not in the best interest of the municipality.
(2)
A.
Such waiver shall not in any way affect the application of § 74-3 of this
chapter with respect to any other title or titles.
B.
§ 74-5 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU § 77-3
77:41
days after a person has been notified of a violation or such other period as
is authorized by the traffic citation by the affixing of a notice of violation
on a vehicle parked in violation of Chapter 300, or any traffic law, rule or
regulation, or within three days after personal service of a uniform traffic
summons. Days that the Bureau shall not be open for official business shall
not be computed in the three-day period.
§ 77-4. Procedure.
§ 77-5. Form of waiver and power of attorney.
The waiver and power of attorney referred to in § 371 of the General
Municipal Law shall be in substantially the following form:
Date ________
I, the undersigned, for good and valuable consideration hereby waive a
hearing in court and plead guilty to the traffic violation as charged on
the reverse side hereof, and duly constitute the Clerk of the City Court of
Hornell my attorney and authorize him to appear in Court, enter my plea
and pay my fine which is enclosed herewith.
This is my offense for this violation within the current calendar year.
Name Motor Vehicle License No. ________
Address Operator's License No. ________
A person may appear in person or by a written power of attorney
in such form as shall be prescribed by the City Court by paying a
fine established by the City Court and, in writing, waiving a hearing
in Court, pleading guilty of the charge and authorizing the person in
charge of the Bureau to make such a plea and pay such a fine in Court.
A.
The Bureau shall accept such designated fines and issue receipts
therefor.
B.
The Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered against each person
who does not answer within the designated time and a warrant to be
issued for his arrest and appearance before the Court.
C.
Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty
of a number of parking violations in excess of such maximum number
as may be designated by the Court, or of three or more violations other
than parking violations, shall not be permitted to appear and answer to
a subsequent violation at the Traffic Violations Bureau, but must appear
in Court at a time specified by the Bureau.
D.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall authorize the Traffic Violations
Bureau to deprive a person of his right to counsel or to prevent him
from exercising his right to appear in Court to answer to, explain or
defend any charge of a violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or
regulation.
E.
§ 77-3 HORNELL CODE § 77-6
77:42
§ 77-6. Records and reports.
The Bureau shall keep records and submit detailed monthly reports to the
City Court of all notices or summons issued and disposed of by said Bureau
and such other information as may be prescribed by the City Court of
Hornell by law.
Chapter 80
URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Urban Renewal Agency — See Ch. A345.
§ 77-6 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY § 77-6
80:43

ARTICLE I
Relocation Plan
[Adopted 6-12-1978]
§ 80-1. Relocation Office established.
The Department of Development and the Hornell Urban Renewal Agency
have a Relocation Office in the Department of Development, City Hall, to
administer all relocation activities in the City of Hornell. The office is staffed
by trained, competent personnel, sensitive to human relationships, with the
necessary skills to assist individuals, families and business concerns that
are to be displaced.
§ 80-2. Responsibilities.
The Department of Development and the Relocation Office will be
responsible for administering the relocation program as follows:
Information will be provided at the earliest possible date as to the
availability of relocation payments and assistance and the eligibility
requirements therefor, as well as the procedures for obtaining such
payments and assistance.
A.
A direct personal interview will be arranged to determine the extent of
the need of each eligible person for relocation assistance.
B.
Current and continuing information on the availability, prices and
rentals of comparable sales and rental housing and of comparable
commercial and industrial properties and locations will be made
available.
C.
Assurances will be provided that, within a reasonable period of time
prior to displacement, there will be comparable, decent, safe and
sanitary replacement housing available to eligible persons who will be
displaced.
D.
Assistance will be provided to eligible persons displaced from a
business in obtaining and becoming established in a suitable
replacement location.
E.
Displaced persons will be furnished information concerning federal
and state housing programs, disaster loans and other programs
administered by the Small Business Administration and other federal or
state programs offering assistance to displaced persons.
F.
Advisory services will be provided to eligible persons, such as
counseling and referrals with regard to housing, financing,
employment, training, health, welfare and other relocation-related
matters in order to minimize hardships.
G.
Assistance will be provided in completing any required applications and
forms.
H.
§ 80-1 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY § 80-2
80:45
§ 80-3. Coordination of activities.
The city/agency relocation staff will coordinate local relocation activities
with other federal, state or governmental agencies to determine the extent
of any present or proposed actions that may affect the availability of
appropriate housing resources. All necessary steps will be taken to
effectuate complete coordination and cooperation with other agencies to
assure that relocation assistance and relocation payments are administered
uniformly to persons displaced by all programs within the city. The steps
will include contact, informational meetings and discussions with other
governmental agencies.
§ 80-4. Relocation review and process.
Information will be provided to persons expected to be displaced by
acquisition regarding agency eviction policies and temporary rental
agreements.
I.
All relocation housing resources to be utilized by displaced persons
prior to and subsequent to occupancy by such persons will be inspected
by city personnel.
J.
Assurances will be provided that the relocation process does not result
in different or separate treatment on account of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex or source of income.
K.
All displaced persons, prior to their relocation, will be furnished an
informational statement as early as practicable containing all
information required in the Department of Housing and Urban
Development Relocation Handbook, Chapter 2, Section 2, pages 2
through 14.
L.
The city/agency grievance procedure for use by displaced persons
seeking administrative review of city/agency determinations in
connection with relocation payments and/or the adequacy of
replacement housing shall be furnished to each displaced person.
M.
The staging of all relocation activities will assure the availability of
comparable, decent, safe and sanitary replacement housing adequate
in size and cost at the time that displacement occurs. To accomplish
this, the city/agency will determine the needs and resources of all
families, individuals and business concerns to be displaced by personal
interview, counseling and referral to other service agencies. The city/
agency will also provide assistance to persons occupying property
adjacent to any area that may suffer economic injury as a result of
activities to be undertaken even though they will not be replaced.
A.
The city/agency will review and process all payments for relocation
benefits to eligible persons within a period of 10 days after submission
of a proper claim.
B.
§ 80-2 HORNELL CODE § 80-4
80:46
§ 80-5. Review of program.
The city/agency will evaluate its Relocation Program periodically, assessing
both the quality and quantity of services provided. It will also keep the
Department of Housing and Urban Development fully informed of the steps
it is taking or has taken to improve relocation operations.
§ 80-6. Compliance with other provisions.
The city/agency will comply with the Uniform Relocation Act in all
Department of Housing and Urban Development assisted activities
involving displacement and will make available to interested persons a copy
of the latest Department of Housing and Urban Development relocation
policies and procedures.
§ 80-7. Relocation expenses.
§ 80-8. Costs of changes at replacement site.
The City Council may, at its discretion, exercise its option to make payments
for physical changes at a replacement site, provided that the costs are
reasonable and can be documented and that the replacement site is located
within the corporate limits of the City of Hornell.
During the relocation process, all persons displaced or otherwise
affected by displacement causing activities will be given an opportunity
to participate in the development of a relocation plan for that specific
area.
C.
Equal opportunity actions, including the affirmative action programs
adopted by local realtors and other social, civic and religious groups
interested in facilitating freedom of residence, will be fully
implemented and monitored during the relocation process.
D.
Businesses which (prior to April 25, 1977) declared their intent to
move, purchased or entered into an agreement to purchase a
replacement site and obtained bids for eligible relocation expenses
under the provisions of the Uniform Relocation Act will be compensated
for physical changes at the replacement site in accordance with the
regulations in effect as of the April 25, 1977, date, provided that
expenses are reasonable and can be documented.
A.
Any business displaced from a Community Development Block Grant
activity after April 25, 1977, shall be provided relocation expenses in
accordance with the Uniform Relocation Act, as amended, provided
that:
(1) Said expenses are reasonable and can be documented.
The claim was prepared and submitted in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Relocation Act, as amended.
(2)
B.
§ 80-4 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY § 80-8
80:47
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 87
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 95.
§ 87-1. Purpose.
It is recognized that buildings and establishments operated as adult uses
have serious objectionable operational characteristics. In order to promote
the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of Hornell,
this chapter is intended to restrict adult uses to nonresidential and
nonbusiness areas of the city. The Common Council hereby finds that the
operational characteristics of adult uses are concentrated; therefore, this
chapter is intended to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City of Hornell by regulating the concentration of such uses.
§ 87-2. Definitions.
General. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
A.
Specific terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment or business, whether retail
or wholesale, having, as a substantial or significant portion of its stockin-
trade, books, magazines and other periodicals, films and viewing
materials for sale or viewing on the premises, by use of motion-picture
devices or any coin-operated means, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or
an establishment or business containing a segment or section devoted
to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private
establishment which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic
beverages, which features topless dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators or similar entertainers.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building
with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
B.
§ 80-8 HORNELL CODE § 87-2
87:48
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed or unenclosed
building or structure or portion of a building or structure or drive
theater used for presenting materials having as a dominant theme
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT USE — Any establishment or business involved in the
dissemination of material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, including but not limited to
adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters and adult
entertainment cabarets.
BUSINESS — Any commercial enterprise, association or arrangement
for profit.
DISSEMINATION — The transfer of possession, custody, control or
ownership of or the exhibition or presentation of any performance to
a customer, member of the public or business invitee of any material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
legal representative, acting individually or jointly.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
SUBSTANTIAL CONNECTION —
Less than the completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
(3)
In a sole partnership, an individual who owns, operates, controls or
conducts, directly or indirectly, any premises, building or location
upon which any adult use takes place.
(1)
§ 87-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 87-2
87:49
§ 87-3. Restrictions; applicability.
In addition to the requirement of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Hornell,7 adult uses shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:
§ 87-4. Observation from public way prohibited.
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation
of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any
property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, show window, screen or other opening.
§ 87-5. Certificate of registration; fee.
In a partnership, limited or general, an individual who shares in
any potential profits or losses of the business or who shares in the
ownership of any of the assets of the partnership business.
(2)
In a corporation, an individual who is an officer, director or a
holder, either directly, indirectly or beneficially, of more than 20%
of any class of stock.
(3)
Any person who furnishes more than 20% of the capital financing
or assets of such business, whether in cash, goods or services.
(4)
No adult use shall be allowed within 500 feet of another existing adult
use.
A.
No adult use shall be located within 500 feet of the boundaries of any
zoning district which is zoned for residential use or commercial district.
B.
No adult use shall be located within 2,000 feet of a preexisting school
or place of worship.
C.
No adult use shall be located in any zoning district, except those
districts zoned for special industrial district.
D.
This chapter shall not apply to any establishments existing on the
effective date of said ordinance.
E.
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall lease, rent, maintain,
operate, use or allow to be operated or used any business or
establishment or any part thereof which contains an adult use, without
first complying with the provisions of this section as set forth below.
A.
In addition to any and all other necessary licenses and permits, no form
of adult use shall be allowed to operate nor be allowed to continue to
operate, until a certificate of registration is filed with the City Clerk
containing:
B.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Zoning.
§ 87-2 HORNELL CODE § 87-5
87:50
(1) The address of the premises.
The name and address of the owner(s) of the premises and the
name and address of the beneficial owner(s) if the property is in a
land trust.
(2)
The name of the business or the establishment subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(3)
The name, the business and home address and the business or
home phone number of all owners of the business or establishment
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(4)
The names, the business and home addresses and the business
or home phone number of all those persons having a substantial
connection with the business or establishment subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(5)
(6) The date of the initiation of the adult use.
(7) The exact nature of the adult use.
If the premises or the building in which the business containing the
adult use is located is leased, a copy of the lease.
(8)
If there occurs any change in the information required for the
certificate of registration, the City Clerk shall be notified of such
change and a new or amended certificate filed within 30 days of such
change.
C.
The processing fee for each certificate of registration or amendment
thereto shall be $1,000. Such certificate of registration shall be
effective concurrently with the special use permit issued annually as
provided in § 87-6, and the processing fee provided in this section shall
be an annual charge.
D.
No certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this section
shall be transferable to any person other than the registrant, nor shall
a certificate of registration be transferable for use at any premises,
building or location other than that stated in the certificate of
registration.
E.
The owner, manager or agent of any adult use shall cause a copy of
the certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this section
to be prominently displayed on the premises, building or location for
which it is issued.
F.
Any knowingly false statement, or any statement which the registrant
or applicant should reasonably have known to be false, which is
provided in the certificate of registration or any document or
information supplied therewith shall be grounds for rejection,
suspension or revocation of the certificate of registration.
G.
§ 87-5 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 87-5
87:51
§ 87-6. Special use permit.
Chapter 90
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 205. Peace and good order — See. Ch. 210.
It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or person in control of
any property to establish or operate thereon or to permit any person to
establish or operate an adult use without having in force a certificate of
registration complying with this section.
H.
No use as described in this chapter shall be established until the
issuance of an annual special use permit by the City Clerk. Application
for such a special use permit shall be in conformity with this chapter
and as provided for herein. The application shall be in writing, to the
City Clerk, and shall consist of a description of the premises for which
the permit is sought, a plain and concise statement of the use which is
proposed and such additional information as shall be required by the
City Clerk. The City Clerk shall call a public hearing for the purpose of
considering the request for each and every special use permit. At least
10 days' notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given
by the publication of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City of Hornell, indicating the general nature of the public hearing
and the fact that those persons interested therein may be heard at the
time and place of such hearing.
A.
A special use permit issued under the provisions of this section shall not
be transferable.
B.
§ 87-5 HORNELL CODE § 87-6
90:52
ARTICLE I
Public Consumption and Open Containers
[Adopted 8-26-1985 (Art. V. of Ch. 16 of the 1970 Municipal Code)]
§ 90-1. Intent.
It is the intent of the city, as an exercise of its police power, to promote the
general health, safety and welfare of the residents and inhabitants of the
city by enacting this Article, since it is the finding of the Common Council
that the possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages by persons
on certain public lands, except under controlled conditions, is detrimental
to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, in that such
possession contributes to the development of unsanitary conditions and the
creation of nuisances, including but not limited to littering and raucous or
other disorderly behavior. It is further the intent of the Common Council
that this Article not be considered as a traffic regulation insofar as it relates
to motor vehicles or the operation thereof.
§ 90-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them. All other words shall have the meanings normally
ascribed to them in regular usage.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer,
cider and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CITY — The City of Hornell.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or
used to hold any liquid.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any highway, street, alley, sidewalk or parking lot.
§ 90-3. Prohibitions.
It shall be a violation of this Article for any person to:
§ 90-4. Exceptions.
A. Consume any alcoholic beverage on any public lands within the city.
Have in his possession any open container containing any alcoholic
beverage on any public lands within the city.
B.
Have within his possession for the purposes of consumption on public
lands by either himself or another person any open container
containing an alcoholic beverage on any public lands within the city.
C.
The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to the event of a fair, picnic
or other community gathering for which special permission has been
granted by the city.
A.
§ 90-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 90-4
90:53
§ 90-5. Application.
This Article shall apply to all persons on public lands in the city except
as provided in § 90-4 above and shall not apply to any person drinking
an alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle upon any public
highway within the city in violation of § 1227 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
of the State of New York.
§ 90-6. Penalties for offenses. 8
Each violation of this Article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of this
Code.
The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to the transportation of an
unsealed but not open container across lands of the city from one
point to another with no intent to consume the contents of such open
container while upon public lands.
B.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 90-4 HORNELL CODE § 90-6
90:54
Chapter 95
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 110.
Fees — See Ch. 142.
Games of chance — See Ch. 157.
§ 90-6 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 90-6
95:55

ARTICLE I
Public Entertainment
[Adopted as Art. I of Ch. 4 of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 95-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct for gain and profit any circus
or theatrical or musical, exhibition of natural or artificial curiosities or
any other performance similar to those enumerated herein without first
obtaining a license from the City Clerk.
§ 95-2. License fee. [Amended 8-26-19859]
Any person to whom a license has been issued under the provisions of
this Article shall pay for each day such entertainment shall be continued a
license fee as provided in Chapter 142, Fees.
§ 95-3. Applicability.
The foregoing provisions of this Article shall not apply to amateur
performances, concerts or exhibitions or those given for benevolent
purposes.
§ 95-4. Insurance.10
Any person obtaining a permit under these provisions shall obtain
appropriate insurance, as determined by the City Clerk.
§ 95-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be punished as
provided in § 1-1 of this Code; and any person owning or controlling any
structure where any unlicensed entertainment shall take place or be
conducted shall be subject to the same punishment as the person
conducting such entertainment.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
10.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions. Art. II.
§ 95-1 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 95-5
95:57

ARTICLE II
Amusement Centers and Games
[Adopted as Art. II of Ch. 4 of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 95-6. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following words shall have the following
respective meanings:
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any place or enclosure where or in which is
maintained or operated for the amusement, patronage or recreation of
the public any coin-controlled amusement devices of any description not
prohibited by law, and particularly, but not by way of limitation, the types
commonly known as "iron claw," "bagatelle," "baseball," "football," "pinball
amusement games" and record players commonly known as "jukeboxes."
"Amusement centers" are subject to all of the provisions of this Article.
AMUSEMENT CENTER GAME — Any coin-controlled amusement device of
any description not prohibited by law, and particularly bagetelle, baseball,
football, pinball amusement games and record players commonly known as
"jukeboxes."11
OWNER OR OPERATOR OF AN AMUSEMENT CENTER GAME — Any
person who owns, places, distributes or locates an amusement center game
in any place in which it is operated for the amusement, patronage or
recreation of the public.
§ 95-7. Amusement center licenses.
§ 95-8. Amusement center game licenses.
Required. No person shall maintain or operate an amusement center
without first having obtained a license to do so.
A.
Character of applicant. Any person seeking a license to maintain or
operate an amusement center shall be of good moral character.
B.
Fee. The fee for an amusement center license shall be as provided in
Chapter 142, Fees.12
C.
Issuance. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a license for the
maintenance and operation of an amusement center.
D.
Expiration. Amusement center licenses shall expire on the 31st day of
March next succeeding the date of issuance thereof.
E.
Revocation. Any license issued to operate or maintain an amusement
center may be revoked by the Mayor for violation of any of the
provisions of this Article.
F.
11.Editor's Note: The former definition of "gambling device," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 95-6 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 95-8
95:59
§ 95-9. Restriction on issuance of licenses.
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this Article to any person
who has been convicted of a felony or any gambling offense against the laws
of the State of New York or the City of Hornell; and in the event of any such
conviction subsequent to the issuance of said license, said license shall be
immediately revoked.
§ 95-10. Identification of games.
§ 95-11. Transferability of identification tag or seal.
The tag or seal provided for § 95-10 may be removed from one game and
affixed to another owned by the same licensed owner or operator, provided
that notice is filed with the City Clerk within 24 hours of each transfer by
giving the serial number of the tag or seal and the serial number and name
Required; character of license. Every owner or operator of an
amusement center game shall be required first to obtain a license, and
the licensee shall be of good moral character.
A.
Fee. The license fee for an owner or operator of amusement center
games shall be as provided in Chapter 142, Fees. Such fee shall be
payable in advance.13
B.
Issuance. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a license for
owners or operators of amusement center games upon payment of the
license fee provided in Subsection B.
C.
Expiration. Licenses for owners or operators of amusement center
games shall expire on the 31st day of March next succeeding the date
of issuance thereof.
D.
Revocation. A license issued to an owner or operator of amusement
center games may be revoked by the Mayor for violation of any of the
provisions of this Article.
E.
Tags and seals; fee therefor. Owners or operators of amusement center
games shall be required to purchase a tag or seal for each game in
operation in any amusement center and shall pay the sum as provided
in Chapter 142, Fees, for each tag or seal purchased.14
A.
Attachment of tag to game; contents of tag. Said tag or seal shall be
affixed to the game in a prominent place and shall bear a serial number
and the owner's or operator's name or license number.
B.
Expiration of tags and seals. All tags and seals issued pursuant to the
provisions of this Article shall expire on the 31st day of March next
succeeding the date of issuance thereof.
C.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 95-8 HORNELL CODE § 95-11
95:60
of the game from which the tag or seal has been removed, as well as the
serial number and name of the game to which the tag or seal has been
affixed.
§ 95-12. Notification of placement of game; information required.
Every owner or operator of an amusement center game shall, within 24
hours of the placement of any such game in the city, notify the City Clerk
of said placement and give the serial number of the tag or seal attached to
said game as well as the serial number and name of the game and the name
of the holder of the license for the amusement center in which said game is
placed.
§ 95-13. Maintenance of order in amusement centers.
Any person licensed to maintain or operate an amusement center under the
provisions of this Article shall maintain good order therein.15
§ 95-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any coin-controlled amusement device operated in violation of the terms of
this Article may be seized and destroyed in compliance with the terms and
provisions of the statutes of the State of New York, and any person who
shall operate any coin-controlled amusement device without first obtaining
a license as provided by this Article or any person who shall violate any
provisions of this Article shall be punished as provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
15.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 4-20, Gambling devices prohibited; Sec. 4-21, Cash awards, use
of games as gambling devices prohibited; and Sec. 4-22, Operation of amusement center
games by minors, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of
adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 95-11 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 95-14
95:61
Chapter 100
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 142. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
§ 100-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
GOODS, WARES AND CHATTELS — All commodities, compounds, chattels,
merchandise, watches, clocks, jewelry and other personal property, but
shall not include used household furniture and real property.
SALE AT PUBLIC AUCTION — Shall not include any sale pursuant to the
judgment, decree or order of any court or any sale made by any executor
or administrator or any sale of unredeemed goods made by or in behalf of
a licensed pawnbroker or sales by public officers in the manner prescribed
by law or sales pursuant to statute to satisfy any lien upon the property sold
or resales pursuant to statute of property taken under a conditional sales
contract.
§ 100-2. Scope of provisions.
No auctioneer and no person acting directly or indirectly through an
auctioneer within the city shall sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public
auction or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at
public auction any goods, wares and chattels except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 100-3. Auctioneer to conduct auction.
No sale at public auction of any goods, wares and chattels, as defined in this
chapter, shall be held within the city unless such sale is directly conducted
by a duly licensed auctioneer.
§ 100-4. License required for auctioneers.
No person shall act as an auctioneer within the city unless such person is
duly licensed as an auctioneer pursuant to law.
§ 95-14 HORNELL CODE § 100-5
100:62
§ 100-5. License fee. [Amended 3-28-198816]
The fee for a license required by this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter
142, Fees, for each day such auction sale shall be held within the city, to be
paid each day in advance.
§ 100-6. Permit required to conduct auction.
Any person intending to sell at public auction any goods, wares and chattels,
as defined in this chapter, within the city shall make applications to the City
Clerk for a permit to hold such sale at public auction; and if such permit is
granted, the sale may be conducted as provided in this chapter.
§ 100-7. Permit application; written inventory.
§ 100-8. Examination of items inventoried.
The City Clerk, before issuing a permit to conduct an auction, shall have the
right, either personally or by a person duly authorized, in writing, by him,
to examine the goods, wares and chattels specified in the inventory to be
offered for sale to determine whether said inventory correctly sets forth the
items to be sold.17
The application for a permit to hold or conduct a public auction shall
be in writing and shall be verified and must be filed not more than 15
days nor less than 10 days before the commencement of such sale. Such
application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the auctioneer.
The street and number of the premises in which it is proposed to
conduct such sale.
(3)
The place or places at which, for the two years next preceding the
date fixed for said sale, the applicant has continuously conducted
his business.
(4)
A.
There shall be attached to the application for a permit to conduct
a public auction a written verified inventory showing, in detail, the
quality, quantity, kind or grade of the goods, wares and chattels
proposed to be sold and stating that no items or articles belonging
to any other person other than the applicant are included in said
inventory. The affidavit to such inventory shall be made by the
applicant, if he is an individual, or if the applicant is a partnership,
by one of the partners, or if such applicant is a corporation, by the
president, secretary, treasurer or general manager thereof.
B.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
17.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 6-10, Bond required, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 100-5 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS § 100-9
100:63
§ 100-9. Qualification of auctioneer.
No permit shall be issued to any person to conduct a sale at public auction
unless he shall have been for a period of at least two years preceding the
date of such sale continuously engaged in business in the city in dealing in
the same kinds of goods, wares and chattels as are to be offered for sale at
such public auction.
§ 100-10. Duration of permit.
No permit shall be issued to conduct a sale at public auction for a longer
period than 15 consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, at
any one place in the city, and a period of at least one year must have
elapsed after the conclusion of such auction sale before another permit shall
be issued to the same applicant or to any other person for a sale to be
conducted at the same place, except that the Mayor, in his discretion, may
extend such period of 15 days, which shall run consecutively from the date
of the expiration of the first fifteen-day period, Sundays and legal holidays
excepted, which extension shall be endorsed, in writing, on the original
permit.
§ 100-11. Revocation of licenses and permits.
The Mayor may revoke any permit or license granted to an auctioneer or
any permit issued for the conduct of any sale at public auction for a violation
of the provisions of this chapter or for a violation of any law or ordinance
relating to auctions and auctioneers. If it appears to the Mayor that any
sale at public auction does in fact defraud or may defraud bidders thereat,
the permit to conduct such sale at public auction may in like manner be
revoked, notwithstanding that any such violation be not specifically shown
or proven to the Mayor.
§ 100-12. Hours of sale restricted.
No permit shall be issued to conduct a public auction and it shall be
unlawful for any auctioneer or other person to conduct a sale at public
auction in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 100-13. Sale limited to inventoried items.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer or any other person, through such
auctioneer or otherwise, to sell, dispose of or offer to sell or dispose of any
goods, wares and chattels, as defined in this chapter, at a sale at public
auction which have not been included and described in the inventory filed
with the application for a permit or license to hold such sale.
§ 100-14. Misrepresentations prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer or any other person to make a printed
or oral statement concerning the goods, wares and chattels, as defined
in this chapter, which are the subject of a sale at public auction if such
§ 100-9 HORNELL CODE § 100-14
100:64
statement is false in any particular or if such statement has a tendency
to mislead any person present or to misrepresent the quality, quantity,
character, condition, value or cost of any such goods, wares and chattels
which are the subject of such sale at public auction.
§ 100-15. Fictitious bids prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer or any other person to act or to cause
any other person to act as a by-bidder or what is commonly known as a
"capper" or "booster" at any sale at public auction or any place where any
such sale shall take place or to offer or to make any false bid or to pretend to
bid for or buy any article sold or offered for sale at any such public auction
or for anyone, directly or indirectly, in the employ of an auctioneer or the
person to whom a permit to conduct a public auction has been issued under
this chapter to bid for or buy any such article so offered or exposed for sale.
§ 100-16. Penalties for offenses.18
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of the Code.
Chapter 107
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 300.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 100-14 BICYCLES § 100-16
107:65

ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted as Art. I of Ch. 7 of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 107-1. Applicability. 19
The regulations set forth in this Article shall apply whenever a bicycle is
operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
§ 107-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is over 20 inches in
diameter.
§ 107-3. License and license plate required.
No person who resides within the city shall ride a bicycle upon any street or
upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless such
bicycle has been licensed by the city and a license plate has been obtained
for such bicycle as hereinafter provided.
§ 107-4. Application; fee. [Amended 12-12-1983 20]
Application for a bicycle license and license plate shall be made upon a form
provided by the city and shall be made to the City Clerk. A one-time fee
as set forth in Ch. 142, Fees, shall be paid before each license or renewal
thereof is granted.
§ 107-5. Issuance; period effective.
§ 107-6. Display and maintenance of license plate.
The license plate issued pursuant to § 107-5 shall be attached to the rear
mudguard or frame of the bicycle in such position as to be plainly visible
The City Clerk, upon receiving a proper application therefor, is
authorized to issue a one-time bicycle license, together with a license
plate or tag, which shall be effective so long as the person securing the
application owns the bicycle. [Amended 12-12-1983]
A.
The City Clerk shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows
or has reasonable ground to believe that the applicant is not the owner
of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.
B.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 107-1 BICYCLES § 107-6
107:67
from the rear, and it shall be the duty of each licensee to keep such license
plate in a clear and legible condition.
§ 107-7. Records.
The City Clerk shall keep a record of the number of each license issued
under the provisions of this Article, the date issued, the name and address
of the person to whom issued and the number on the frame of the bicycle
for which issued and a record of all bicycle license fees collected by him.
§ 107-8. Transferability.
The bicycle license provided for in this Article is not transferable. Upon
the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove
the license plate therefrom. Upon proper application to the City Clerk
made upon blanks furnished by the city and without fee, said plate may be
assigned to another bicycle owned by the applicant.
§ 107-9. Renewal.
Upon the expiration of any bicycle license, the same may be renewed upon
application and payment of the same fee as upon an original application.
§ 107-10. Rental agencies.21
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle
is licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided herein.
§ 107-11. Penalties for offenses.22
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Article shall be
punished as provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
§ 107-12. Bicycles prohibited in Broadway Mall. [Added 4-26-1976]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a bicycle within the
confines of the area commonly known as the "Broadway Mall" in the City of
Hornell.
§ 107-13. Areas where bicycles to be walked. [Added 6-27-1977]
Bicycles may be walked through the Canisteo Street Underpass, the
Steuben Street Underpass and the Broadway Mall.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 107-6 HORNELL CODE § 107-13
107:68
Chapter 110
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 157.
§ 110-1. Authorization for conduct of games.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476
of the General Municipal Law, to conduct the game of bingo within the
territorial limits of the City of Hornell, subject to the licensing procedures
and regulations set forth in Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and
the provisions of the Bingo Control Law, Article 19-B of the Executive Law,
and any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to either Article.
§ 110-2. Conduct of games on Sundays.
Pursuant to § 185 of the General Municipal Law and in accordance with
the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, the conduct of
games of bingo on Sundays is hereby authorized.
Chapter 115
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 160.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
§ 115-1. Cutting and removal required. [Amended 6-18-1973;
5-9-1988]
Every occupant of real property or owner of unoccupied real property,
whether the same is improved or unimproved, shall, on or before the 15th
day of April and through the 15th day of October, both inclusive, of each
calendar year, cut, mow, remove or cause such property to be cut, mowed
or removed of all weeds, brush, briar or grass located thereon, except
ornamental trees, shrubs, cultivated flowers, herbs or plants. The cutting
of said weeds, brush, briar or grass shall be promptly disposed of by some
safe and proper manner. The aforesaid property shall be maintained as not
to create a public health nuisance.
§ 107-13 BINGO § 115-2
110:69
§ 115-2. Removal by city; notice to remove; liability for cost.
[Amended 5-26-1992]
Upon receiving complaints or by viewing uncut brush, grass and weeds,
the City of Hornell Codes Department, the City of Hornell Superintendent
of Public Works or his designee can order the cutting or removal of brush,
grass and weeds. The owner or occupant of said property shall be notified
in a written, hand-delivered notice, or verbally, that the brush, grass and/
or weeds must be cut within 24 hours of receiving said notice. If the
grass, brush and/or weeds are not cut or removed within that time frame,
the Department of Public Works shall enter onto said property and cut
or remove same. The owner or occupant will then be billed at a rate to
be determined by the Superintendent of Public Works. If this bill remains
unpaid after 60 days, the bill will then be forwarded to the city's collection
agency.
§ 115-3. Penalties for offenses.23
Any person, persons, firm or association, partnership or corporation who
himself or itself or by his or its agent or employee shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as
provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
Chapter 120
BUILDING CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Pest control — See Ch. 222.
§ 120-1. Residential occupancy permits. [Amended 7-28-1975;
6-27-1977; 5-26-1987; 8-27-2001; 7-25-2005]
Title. This section shall be known as the "Residential Occupancy Permit
Provisions" and is supplementary to applicable provisions of the City
Code for the City of Hornell.
A.
Purpose and scope. The purpose and scope is to provide uniform
administration and compliance with residential occupancy permits and
to establish the responsibilities of parties concerned therewith.
B.
Inspection and certification of premises.
(1) General.
C.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 115-2 HORNELL CODE § 120-1
120:70
All residential rental dwelling units and commercial rental
units shall be inspected and certified by the Code Enforcement
Office of the City of Hornell (hereinafter "the Department"),
which shall determine compliance with, administer and
enforce all applicable provisions of this code. On and after
September 1, 2005, residential occupancy permits shall be
valid for 30 months from the date of issuance. The vacancy of
any unit shall invalidate said permit even if said vacancy shall
occur within said 30 months.
(a)
Nothing contained herein shall be construed or operate to
invalidate an otherwise legally effective permit or certificate
issued prior to September 1, 2005, except that such permit or
certificate shall be valid only until March 31, 2008, or a change
in the tenancy of the residential rental dwelling unit to which
the permit or certificate relates, whichever first occurs.
(b)
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful and a
violation of this chapter to rent, lease, sell on a land contract
or otherwise allow the occupancy of any residential or
commercial rental unit without the inspection and certification
as required herein.
(c)
If, upon inspection, said premises do not comply with all
applicable provisions of this code or the Uniform Code, the
specific reasons for noncompliance shall be specified in writing
in a notice and order, as provided. The notice and order shall
be provided to the owner or the owner's agent. Occupants or
proposed occupants of dwellings shall have the right to inspect
the certificate of occupancy of the residential rental dwelling
unit, apartment or multiple residence in which they have an
interest at no cost.
(d)
On or after September 1, 2005, the Department shall have the
right to inspect all or any part of the rental dwelling, including any
unit or apartment, or entire multiple residence as required herein
and/or upon complaint, except that the owner, agent or person in
charge thereof shall have the right to insist upon the procurement
of a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction by
the Chief of the Department, or his or her designee, in order to
enable such inspection. The officials charged with conducting the
inspection shall be required to obtain a search warrant whenever
an owner, agent or person in charge refuses to permit a
warrantless inspection of the premises after having been advised
that he or she has a constitutional right to refuse entry of the
officials without a search warrant.
(2)
The officials charged with conducting the inspection shall make
such inspection, access and circumstances permitting, within three
business days of receipt of a request from the owner, agent or
occupant.
(3)
§ 120-1 BUILDING CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY § 120-1
120:71
An owner, agent or occupant may file with the Department a
request for such inspection and the issuance of a residential
occupancy permit by regular mail or in person at the office of the
Chief of the Department.
(4)
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the
Department to inspect any property at any time. If, after issuing a
residential occupancy permit, the Department received a complaint
alleging a violation of this chapter, other than a violation that
creates an imminent hazard to the public health or to the physical
or mental health of the occupants of the rental property, the
Department shall make a good-faith effort to notify the owner or
agent of the complaint by either telephone or regular mail, before
conducting an inspection under this chapter, and shall provide to
the owner or agent one working day to explain what steps the
owner or agent is taking to correct the violation. The Department
may take steps necessary, by inspection or other means, to assure
that the violation is corrected.
(5)
No occupancy permit shall be issued unless and until the fee(s)
required are paid in full to the Department.
(6)
No occupancy permit shall be issued unless the rental dwelling
unit is an authorized use pursuant to zoning, and until all other
applicable provisions and requirement of the Code of the City of
Hornell are complied with and met.
(7)
No owner, agent or person in charge shall collect rents during
any period of noncompliance with the provisions of this part which
would otherwise be due and owing for the rental of premises
unless and until he or she shall have complied with the provisions
herein. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a landlord,
upon receipt of an occupancy permit, from receiving the equitable
value of the occupancy of the premises from the earliest date of
occupancy, but in no event shall a landlord recover in excess of the
agreed rent.
(8)
These provisions shall not apply to dwellings designed and used
exclusively for occupancy as hotels, motels, transient homes or
establishments of like nature.
(9)
Temporary occupancy permit. The Department may cause to be issued
at its discretion a temporary occupancy permit following an initial
inspection, which temporary occupancy permit shall be subject to
review and revocable at the discretion of the Department. No
temporary occupancy permit may be issued in cases where fire safety
is involved, such as defective electrical wiring, the absence of either
an operating smoke detector or, after September 1, 2005, a carbon
monoxide detector where required, or improper or inadequate means
of egress and other conditions of like nature.
D.
§ 120-1 HORNELL CODE § 120-1
120:72
§ 120-2. Unsafe structures illegal; abatement required.
All unsafe buildings or structures, or portions thereof, are hereby declared
to be illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by
demolition in accordance with the procedures of this chapter.24
As a precondition to the issuance of an occupancy permit, the landlord/
owner of said rental property must supply the City of Hornell with
a property insurance binder indicating that there is fire and liability
insurance coverage for the property, which is subject to the occupancy
permit. Said insurance binder shall list the City of Hornell for
cancellation purposes. If, during the term of a rental agreement, said
insurance is cancelled and not renewed, then the occupancy permit for
said property shall be deemed null and void for the purposes of this
section of the law. This subsection shall take effect on September 1,
2005.
E.
Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit within the City of Hornell,
any and all landlords/property owners must designate an agent of at
least 21 years of age, who resides in the City of Hornell, to accept legal
service on behalf of the property owner/landlord. Prior to the issuance
of an occupancy permit, the property owner/landlord must provide
such information to the Codes Office for the City of Hornell. Said
information must include the name, address and telephone number of
such designated agent. All service of process in the event that said
property owner/landlord needs to be served or given notice by the City
of Hornell shall be deemed sufficient service for the purpose of the
City Code if the City serves the landlord/property owner or his or her
designated agent. This subsection shall take effect September 1, 2005.
F.
Penalties for offenses. Any person who shall violate or assist in the
violation of these provisions or who fails to comply with a notice and
order issued by the Department under these provisions shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than
$500 each day a violation exists.
G.
H. This section shall be effective on September 1, 2005.
24.Editor's Note: A resolution adopted 5-26-1992 provided that former Sec. 8-34 and former
Sec. 8-35, inclusive, be included in the Code. Accordingly, former Sec. 8-36, Examination
and record of unsafe buildings; Sec. 8-37, Notice to abatement unsafe condition; Sec.
8-38, Vacation of buildings where there is immediate danger of failure or collapse; posting
of notice; Sec. 8-39, Removal of notice; Sec. 8-40, Effect of failure to locate owner; failure
to comply with notice; Sec. 8-41, Abatement of unsafe condition by city in cases of
emergency; building official's right of entry; and Sec. 8-42, Payment and collection of
costs, which immediately followed were deleted at time of adoption of Code 12-28-1992 by
L.L. No. 4-1992. For current provisions regarding abandoned and unsafe buildings, see Ch.
122.
§ 120-1 BUILDING CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY § 120-2
120:73
Chapter 122
BUILDINGS, ABANDONED AND UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building certificates of occupancy — See Ch.
120.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 160.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 168.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Pest control — See Ch. 222.
§ 122-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and preserve the health, safety
and welfare of the public and residents and/or owners of property located
within this city by providing a method for the removal or repair of buildings
that, from any cause, may now be or shall hereafter become dangerous or
unsafe to the public and residents and/or owners of property within the
city. Unsafe buildings serve as an attractive nuisance for young children
who may be injured therein; may be a point of congregation by vagrants
and transients; may attract rodents or insects; and may also attract illegal
drug activity. The powers conferred upon the city by this chapter shall be in
addition to all other powers conferred upon the city in relation to the same
subject by state law.
§ 122-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building, structure or portion thereof used by residential,
business or industry.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the city or such other
person appointed by the Common Council to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
UNSAFE BUILDINGS — Includes all buildings which have any or all of the
following defects:
Those whose interior walls or exterior bearing walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent as to weaken
the structural support they provide.
A.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
to or deterioration of the supporting members or members or 50% of
damage to or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside
walls or covering.
B.
§ 120-2 HORNELL CODE § 122-2
122:74
§ 122-3. Unsafe buildings prohibited.
No person, firm, corporation or association owning, possessing or
controlling a building in this city shall permit, suffer or allow said building
now or hereafter to be or become unsafe to the public and/or residents from
any cause whatsoever.
§ 122-4. Inspections.
The Building Inspector shall make inspections of all unsafe buildings within
the city and report to the Board of Public Safety all unsafe buildings which
from time to time may be found within the limits of the city.
§ 122-5. Determination of unsafe buildings; notice to repair or
demolish.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to
be reasonably safe for the purpose used
C.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare
of the occupants or the people of this city.
D.
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to
cause sickness or disease to those living therein or adjacent thereto.
E.
Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, safety or general welfare of human beings who live
therein with particular reference to the requirements of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code as a determinant.
F.
Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of communication, again referencing the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code as a determinant.
G.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they fall and
injure members of the public or property.
H.
Those which consist of debris, rubble or parts of buildings left on the
ground after demolition, reconstruction fire or other casualty.
I.
Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of this
city.
J.
The Board of Public Safety shall consider the report of the Building
Inspector and, if in its opinion the report so warrants, shall determine
that the building is unsafe and order its demolition or repair, if the same
A.
§ 122-2 BUILDINGS, ABANDONED AND UNSAFE § 122-5
122:75
§ 122-6. Service of notice; copy on file.
can be safety repaired, and further order that a notice shall be given to
the owner as follows.
The notice shall contain the following:
(1) A description of the premises.
(2) A statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe.
(3) An order requiring the building to be repaired or demolished.
That the repairing or demolition of the building shall commence
within 30 days of the serving of the notice, as hereinafter provided,
and shall be completed within 60 days thereafter.
(4)
A date, time and place for a hearing before the Board of Public
Safety in relation to such unsafe building, which hearing shall be
scheduled not less than five business days from the day of service
of the notice.
(5)
A statement that in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with
the order to repair or demolish the building, the Board of Public
Safety is authorized to provide for its repair or demolition, to assess
all expenses thereof against the land on which it is located and
to institute a special proceeding to collect the costs of demolition,
including legal expenses.
(6)
B.
Said notice shall be served in the following manner:
By personal service of a copy thereof upon the owner or some
one of the owners, executors, legal representative, agents, lessees
or any other person having a vested or contingent interest in the
premises as shown by the last preceding completed assessment roll
of the city or of the County Clerk, such service to be complete, and
the thirty-day time period recited in said notice to commence upon
service; or
(1)
By mailing a copy of said notice to such owner as aforesaid, by
registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last
known address of the owner and by affixing a copy of said notice to
the premises, such service to be complete, and the thirty-day time
period recited in said notice to commence 10 days after the filing
of the return receipt.
(2)
A.
A copy of the notice shall also be filed in the office of the County Clerk
of the county within which such building is located, which notice shall
be filed by such Clerk in the same manner as a notice of pendency
pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules and shall have
the same effect as a notice of pendency as therein provided, except as
otherwise hereinafter provided. A notice so filed shall be effective for
a period of one year from the date of filing; provided, however, that it
B.
§ 122-5 HORNELL CODE § 122-6
122:76
§ 122-7. Hearing; determination of public nuisance; repair or
demolition.
§ 122-8. Noncompliance with order; demolition by city.
In the event of neglect or refusal of the persons so notified to comply with
said order of the Board of Public Safety, the Board of Public Safety shall
provide for the demolition and removal of such building by city employees
or by contract. Except in an emergency, any contract in excess of $20,000
shall be awarded by competitive bidding.
§ 122-9. Emergency work.
may be vacated upon the order of a judge or upon the consent of the
City Attorney.
The hearing shall be conducted before the Board of Public Safety. The
Building Inspector shall present his or her report to the Board of Public
Safety in writing. The owner or his or her representative, if present,
shall call such witnesses as he or she deems necessary. The Board of
Public Safety shall make written findings of fact from the testimony
offered as to whether or not the building in question is an unsafe
building.
A.
If such owner shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply and shall fail to
appear at said hearing, then the Board of Public Safety shall direct the
repair or demolition of the building forthwith.
B.
If such owner shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply and after appearing
at said hearing the Board of Public Safety finds the building is a public
nuisance and directs its repair or demolition, the owner shall repair
or demolish said building within the time prescribed by the Board of
Public Safety.
C.
If the owner fails or neglects to repair or demolish said building as
directed by the Board of Public Safety following the hearing, then the
Board of Public Safety shall direct the repair or demolition of same
forthwith.
D.
In case there shall be, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, actual
and immediate danger of the falling of a building so as to endanger
public safety, life or property or actual or immediate menace to health
or public welfare as a result of the conditions present in or about a
building, he or she shall cause the necessary work to be done to render
such a building temporarily safe, whether the procedure prescribed in
this chapter for unsafe buildings has been instituted or not.
A.
When emergency work is to be performed under this section, the
Building Inspector shall cause the owner thereof to be served
personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested, and, if
served by registered mail, shall post on the premises a notice to comply
B.
§ 122-6 BUILDINGS, ABANDONED AND UNSAFE § 122-9
122:77
§ 122-10. Application to Supreme Court for order.
In addition to the remedies provided by this chapter, the Board of Public
Safety may request the City Attorney to make an application to the Supreme
Court for an order determining the building to be a public nuisance and
directing that it shall be repaired and secured or demolished.
§ 122-11. Assessment of costs.
Chapter 124
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Department — See Ch. 25.
Building Certificates of Occupancy — See Ch.
120.
Abandoned and unsafe buildings — See Ch.
122.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 168.
§ 124-1. Numbering of buildings required; duties of owner and city
official.
containing a description of the premises, a statement of the facts in
which the building is unsafe or dangerous and orders and directions to
correct the conditions which constitute an emergency within a specified
period not to exceed three days from actual or constructive receipt of
the notice.
In the event that the emergency does not permit any delay in
correction, the notice shall state that the city has corrected the
emergency condition.
C.
In both cases, the notice shall state that the corrective costs of the
emergency will be assessed against the owner pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
D.
All costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the
administratively and/or judicially substantiated proceedings to remove
or secure, including the cost of actually removing said building, shall be
assessed against the land on which said building is located.
A.
The city may commence a special proceeding pursuant to § 78-b of
the General Municipal Law to collect the cost of demolition, including
reasonable and necessary legal expenses.
B.
§ 122-9 HORNELL CODE § 124-1
124:78
§ 124-2. Failure to comply.
Any person owning any building within the limits of the city who shall
neglect or refuse, for five days after notice from the officer performing
similar duties, to place or cause to be placed the number or numbers on
said building designated by said officer, or who shall refuse or neglect, for
five days after notice from said officer, to remove from such building or
buildings a number which may be thereon which said officer decides to be
inappropriate for such building, shall be punished as provided in § 1-1 of
this Code.
Chapter 126
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM
§ 126-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the intent of the City of Hornell to establish a Community Choice
Aggregation (CCA) Program to aggregate the energy supply needs of
residents (and small commercial customers), and to negotiate and enter
into, or authorize its agent to negotiate and enter into, energy supply
agreements (ESAs) with (energy service companies (ESCOs) on behalf of
eligible citizens to obtain stable, lower-cost energy prices, as well as
environmental benefits and/or a community-based solution to meeting our
collective energy needs. The purpose of this chapter is two-fold: to establish
a CCA program in the City of Hornell and to adopt certain provisions
relating to the creation and implementation of the CCA program.
§ 126-2. Findings.
Duty of owner. It shall be the duty of the owner of any building situated
on any street or alley within the limits of the city to cause each building
to be conspicuously numbered.
A.
Duty of city official. It shall be the duty of the officer performing similar
services to furnish any party or parties applying therefor the number or
numbers appropriate for such building or buildings.
B.
New York State's energy industry is in the midst of a significant
transition; a shift away from the old top-down, utility-centered model
toward a cleaner, more affordable, more resilient system in which
consumers and communities will have a substantial role to play. The
state's ongoing Reforming the Energy Vision (REV) initiative
emphasizes the importance of reliability and grid-resilience, distributed
energy resources, increased renewable generation, and greater
opportunity for citizens to take an active role in helping the state reach
its energy goals and in making more informed energy choices in their
homes, businesses and communities.
A.
§ 124-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 126-2
124:79
§ 126-3. Authority.
The NYSPSC order authorizing CCAs expressly empowers cities, towns
and villages in this state to create CCA programs. Further, the New York
Municipal Home Rule Law, Article 2, Section 10, authorizes a municipality
to adopt general laws relating to its property, affairs and government, the
protection and enhancement of its physical and visual environment, the
protection and well-being of persons within the municipality, and for other
authorized purposes.
§ 126-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATICALLY ELIGIBLE CUSTOMERS — Customers' accounts in those
utility service classes eligible for inclusion in the CCA program on an optout
basis, as set forth in the NYSPSC order authorizing CCAs, Appendix
C, or as otherwise specified by the Commission. Generally, these classes of
customers include those receiving residential electric or gas supply service,
As part of this REV initiative, the New York State Public Service
Commission (NYSPSC), on April 21, 2016, adopted an order authorizing
cities, towns and villages within the state to create Community Choice
Aggregation Programs, by themselves or in concert with other
municipalities (hereinafter "NYSPSC order authorizing CCAs"), and/or
to retain a CCA Administrator to implement the program and negotiate
ESAs.
B.
CCA programs allow communities to take control of their energy supply
through an open, transparent and competitive electric and/or gas
supply procurement process driven by the consumers themselves.
C.
A successful CCA program offers citizens cost savings, more stable
energy prices, deterrence of deceptive marketing practices by
unscrupulous ESCOs, fair contracts negotiated directly with energy
suppliers, and/or the opportunity to pursue goals and initiatives
important to the community, such as reliability, grid resiliency,
supporting renewable energy generation, cutting greenhouse gas
emissions, protecting the State's natural resources, and improving
energy efficiency.
D.
The City of Hornell has explored the CCA policy and background,
and believes it would provide numerous benefits in this community,
enhancing the public welfare and making energy more affordable and
costs more predictable for our residents.
E.
Therefore, the City of Hornell authorizes the creation of an opt-out
CCA program pursuant to rules of the NYSPSC in this community for
the provision of electric supply service, as well as other high priority
energy related value-added services as may be determined to meet the
community's goals.
F.
§ 126-2 HORNELL CODE § 126-4
124:80
including those in multifamily housing, certain types of institutions, and
some small commercial customers covered by "small general service" class
designations. Automatically eligible customers shall not include customers'
accounts that have already been enrolled in service through an ESCO,
enrolled in utility programs which require them to take supply service from
their current utility, or that have a block on their utility account at the time
of CCA formation; those customers' accounts shall be eligible to participate
on an opt-in basis, if they so desire.
CCA ADMINISTRATOR — An agent of the municipality charged with
overseeing creation, implementation and operation of a CCA program, as
well as competitively procuring and negotiating energy supply agreements
with ESCOs. The CCA Administrator shall be retained by the municipality
via a separate CCA administration agreement, adopted by resolution of the
municipality's governing board.
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION/CCA PROGRAM — A program
authorized by the New York State Public Service Commission (NYSPSC)
to aggregate residential and commercial electric and/or natural gas supply
and/or energy related value-added products and services within a given
municipality, and/or among multiple municipalities, in order to leverage that
energy demand to negotiate favorable energy supply agreements directly
with ESCOs. Customers within a CCA program would no longer purchase
their energy supply directly from their utility. However, the utility would
continue to deliver energy to these customers, to charge for that delivery,
and will retain its transmission and distribution network. The energy supply
portion of a customer's energy service is provided by an ESCO or ESCOs,
pursuant to an energy supply agreement competitively procured and
negotiated for the CCA program at large, then delivered to customers via
the local utility.
ELIGIBLE CUSTOMERS — All automatically eligible customers plus those
utility customers eligible for inclusion in the CCA program on an opt-in
basis, as set forth in the NYSPSC order authorizing CCAs or otherwise
authorized by the Commission. Those customers eligible to participate in
the CCA program on an opt-in basis currently include: those customers
already enrolled in service through an ESCO at the time of CCA formation,
customers in large commercial, institutional, or industrial utility service
classes that cannot be automatically enrolled in the CCA on an opt-out basis,
and all other customers not considered "automatically eligible customers."
References to the broader class of "eligible customers" shall signify the
entire pool of customers participating in the aggregation, either because
they have been automatically enrolled on an opt-out basis, or because they
have affirmatively opted in.
ENERGY SERVICES COMPANY (ESCO) — A third-party energy supplier
eligible to sell electricity, natural gas and/or energy related value-added
services to customers in New York State, utilizing the transmission and
distribution systems of existing utilities. ESCOs are regulated by the New
York State Department of Public Service and the New York State Public
Service Commission, and must comply with the New York State Public
Service Law.
§ 126-4 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 126-4
124:81
ENERGY SUPPLY AGREEMENT (ESA) — An agreement between an energy
customer and an energy services company (ESCO) to provide electricity or
gas service to the customer for a fixed or variable price. For purposes of this
chapter, the CCA Administrator would conduct a competitive procurement
on behalf of all eligible customers, and would enter into an energy service
agreement(s) with an ESCO to provide power to all such customers in the
community.
MUNICIPALITY — Reference to these terms throughout this chapter
indicate the City of Hornell, unless otherwise noted.
UTILITY — This term refers to traditional electric and/or natural gas
utilities regulated by the New York State Department of Public Service and
the New York State Public Service Commission and permitted to provide
electric and/or gas supply, transmission and distribution services to all
customers within their designated service territory. For purposes of this
chapter, the term utility will refer to NYSEG.
§ 126-5. Establishing community choice aggregation.
The City of Hornell hereby establishes a CCA program for aggregation
of electric supply to serve all eligible customers in its jurisdiction. All
automatically eligible customers shall be included in the CCA program on
an opt-out basis, and shall be afforded the opportunity to opt-out of the CCA
program, within a specified period, at no cost. All customers who are not
automatically eligible to be included in the CCA program on an opt-out basis
shall be permitted to affirmatively opt into the program in accordance with
the terms of the ESA and/or the NYSPSC order authorizing CCAs.
§ 126-6. Provisions for implementing CCA program.
Implementation plan.
The City of Hornell, with support from its CCA Administrator,
will create and follow a CCA implementation plan which shall
outline the details of how the CCA program will be created and
operated, including how public outreach and education will occur,
what rules will apply to the program, how the procurement process
will be implemented, how energy contracts will be selected, and
how responsibilities will be divided amongst CCA Administrator,
municipality, and eligible customers.
(1)
In accordance with the NYSPSC order authorizing CCAs, the CCA
implementation plan will be reviewed and approved by the Public
Service Commission. Such review may involve NYSPSC approval
of a generic CCA implementation plan, with the understanding
that community-specific appendices would be submitted later and
would outline appropriately tailored local education and outreach
efforts.
(2)
Where a generic CCA implementation plan will be used, the City of
Hornell and the CCA Administrator will make community-specific
(3)
A.
§ 126-4 HORNELL CODE § 126-6
124:82
revisions to the plan's appendices to ensure the plan is properly
tailored to the needs of Hornell's residents. Therefore, prior to or
in conjunction with the enactment of this chapter, and thereafter
from time to time, the City of Hornell, with support from the CCA
Administrator, will create and update a CCA program opt-out letter,
as well as an education and outreach plan, as provided in the
implementation plan appendix for this community.
The City of Hornell opt-out letter and education and outreach plan
shall conform to those requirements for public outreach, education,
and opt-out procedures set forth in the NYSPSC order authorizing
CCAs, and in any other applicable laws or regulations, and shall
ensure that the City of Hornell and its CCA Administrator engage
in a robust effort to educate and inform the community about the
CCA program and their options for participating or opting out.
(4)
Opt-out letters will be provided to all automatically eligible
customers no less than 30 days prior to the time at which those
customers would be automatically enrolled in the CCA program.
The letters will be printed on City of Hornell letterhead, in official
City of Hornell envelopes. The logo of the CCA Administrator and
selected ESCO may also be included on these letters, so long as it
is clear that the letter is official correspondence from the City of
Hornell.
(5)
Public outreach and education.
The City of Hornell, together with its CCA Administrator, will
provide public notices, presentations, information sheets, and
other forms of outreach, as outlined in the appendix of the
implementation plan, to ensure residents are informed about the
CCA program and their options for participating or opting out.
(1)
Once the CCA program is operating, the City of Hornell and its CCA
Administrator will continue to engage in public outreach to keep
CCA customers informed about any changes to the CCA program;
opportunities for new products or services available through the
CCA program, such as renewable energy buying options; important
terms and durations of ESAs; information about the selected
ESCOs; and any other matters related to the CCA program.
(2)
B.
Customers moving into or out of the community after CCA adoption.
Residents (and small commercial customers) who establish utility
accounts in this community after the effective date of this chapter
shall be afforded the opportunity to join the CCA program within
a reasonable time after their utility account is established, in
accordance with contractual agreements between the CCA
Administrator any ESCO(s) providing service to the program.
(1)
C.
D. Customer data protection.
§ 126-6 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 126-6
124:83
§ 126-7. CCA Administrator.
§ 126-8. Compliance with public service law and regulations.
In accordance with the NYSPSC order authorizing CCAs, it shall be the
responsibility of the City of Hornell, supported by any CCA Administrator
that may be under contract, to ensure the CCA program is operated in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the New York State Public
Service Law, regulations of the New York State Public Service Commission
and/or the New York State Department of Public Service, the Uniform
Business Practices (to the extent applicable), the NYSPSC order authorizing
CCAs and any other relevant laws or regulations. This provision applies
regardless of whether a CCA Administrator is retained to organize and
implement the City of Hornell CCA program. This shall include, but not be
limited to, compliance with any reporting requirements related to the CCA
program.
§ 126-9. Review and/or dissolution of the CCA program.
The City of Hornell, or its CCA Administrator, will create and
follow a customer data protection plan which ensures that any
confidential or sensitive personal customer information provided
by the utility to Hornell, its CCA Administrator, and/or the selected
ESCO(s), will be given all privacy protections required by law and
regulation, and protected from unauthorized release or use to the
greatest extent possible. This customer data protection plan will
ensure that the CCA program and any selected ESCO(s) handle all
confidential or sensitive customer data in keeping those customer
data protections already afforded by NYSEG prior to the enactment
of this chapter. This plan will also ensure that CCA customer data,
such as contact information, is not used for inappropriate purposes,
such as solicitation of business unrelated to the CCA program, its
goals and objectives.
(1)
CCA administration agreement.
The City of Hornell will enter into a CCA administration agreement
with its CCA Administrator. Such agreement will set forth the
various rights and responsibilities of the parties, and will govern
the manner in which the CCA program is run. This agreement shall
also authorize the CCA Administrator to act as the City of Hornell's
agent for the purpose of procuring energy supply or other energy
related value-added services for CCA program eligible customers.
(1)
A.
Customer service, complaints.
The CCA Administrator will provide the City of Hornell with clear,
up-to-date contact information for customer questions, concerns or
complaints. The CCA Administrator shall, from time to time, and/or
at the request of the City of Hornell Common Council, report to the
City of Hornell regarding customer service matters.
(1)
B.
§ 126-6 HORNELL CODE § 126-9
124:84
§ 126-10. Conflicts.
In the event the New York State Public Service Commission, the State
Legislature, or other state agency, enacts laws or regulations regarding
the operation of CCAs which are in conflict with this chapter, the state
provisions shall govern.
§ 126-11. Liability.
Nothing in this chapter shall be read to create liability on the part of
the City of Hornell related to the provision of electric and/or natural gas
service to customers. The ESCO selected to provide such service will be
ultimately responsible for compliance with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations governing retail energy services, and will assume any liability
stemming from the provision of such service to retail customers, including
any potential liability associated with the service itself, customer data and
information, and any other matters which would traditionally fall under the
purview of a merchant utility providing the same service to customers prior
to the formation of the CCA. This chapter is meant merely to facilitate the
creation of an aggregation program in this community. The City of Hornell
will not assume the role of ESCO or utility in the sale or delivery of energy
services.
§ 126-12. Severability.
Each provision of this chapter is severable from the others, so that if any
provision is held to be illegal or invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
illegal or invalid provision shall be severed from this Law, which shall
nonetheless remain in full force and effect.
The City of Hornell will, from time to time, review the CCA program
and its progress to determine how the program is faring, confirm it
is affording benefits to the community, and provide information to the
public thereon.
A.
As the expiration of its ESA(s) approaches, or in the event an ESCO
provides notice of its intention to terminate an ESA (where authorized
by the terms of that ESA), the City of Hornell may consider whether
it wishes to discontinue the CCA program. Dissolution of the CCA
Program will require enactment of a Local Law amending or repealing
this chapter, lawful termination of ESAs in accordance with their terms,
lawful termination of the CCA administration agreement, in accordance
with its terms, and at least 60 days' notice to customers that their
energy services will be automatically returned to NYSEG, an effective
date upon which such a change would occur, and information on what
other options may be available to those customers, if applicable.
B.
§ 126-9 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 126-12
124:85
Chapter 128
CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 228.
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTOR — Includes but shall not be limited to any person, firm or
corporation which performs the following work within the City of Hornell:
carpentry, woodworking, cabinetmaking, painting, drywalling, plastering,
stone work, brick work, masonry, cement work, concrete work, electrical
work, roofing, siding, tree surgery, logging, blacktopping, paving,
excavating, demolition, weatherization, heating and air-conditioning work
and wallpaper hanging.
§ 128-2. Permit required.
Any contractor who performs work and/or services or contracts to perform
any work or services within the City of Hornell which has an aggregate
yearly value greater than $1,500 shall obtain a permit from the City Clerk
of the City of Hornell.
§ 128-3. Issuance of permit; insurance; term of permit; applicant
background. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992; 11-22-1999]
The City Clerk of the City of Hornell shall be charged with issuing permits
to all contractors who fall within the purview of this chapter, upon receipt
of a proper application, countersigned and approved by the Chief of Police.
Prior to the City Clerk's issuing said permit, the contractor shall present to
the City Clerk satisfactory proof that the contractor has liability insurance
and has workers' compensation insurance for all employees. Said insurance
limitations shall be listed upon the permit. Said permit shall be effective
from January 1 to December 31 of each calendar year and shall cost an
amount as provided in Chapter 142, Fees, per calendar year (reduced from
$50 a year to $5 a year).
§ 128-4. Records.
The City Clerk of the City of Hornell shall keep a record of each permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter and shall number the same
consecutively.
§ 126-12 HORNELL CODE § 128-5
128:86
§ 128-5. Exhibition of permit.
Any person to whom a permit has been issued under the provisions of
this chapter is hereby required to exhibit said permit upon demand to
any magistrate, peace officer, police officer, citizen or any individual upon
request. The failure of any such licensee to exhibit such permit upon
demand shall be presumptive evidence that said contractor is unlicensed.
§ 128-6. Construal of provisions.
The City of Hornell does not make any representations concerning the
competence, ability, qualifications or quality of work of any contractor who
is issued a permit pursuant to this chapter.
§ 128-7. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for violating any section of this chapter shall be a fine no
greater than $500 and/or 15 days in jail. For the purpose of this chapter, any
day that work is performed while not holding a valid permit shall be deemed
a separate violation of said chapter.
§ 128-8. Refusal to issue; permit revocation. [Added 11-22-1999]
§ 128-9. Appeal. [Added 11-22-1999]
The contractor may appeal said refusal to issue, or such revocation, by
submitting, in writing, to the City Clerk a request for a hearing before the
Department of Public Safety. Subsequent to said hearing, the Department
of Public Safety shall determine whether to sustain the refusal to issue, or
such revocation, or to reinstate the contractor's permit status.
Any permit required by this chapter may be refused or subject to
revocation for good and sufficient reason.
A.
Good and sufficient reason may include, but not be limited to;
(1) A felony conviction.
A conviction for any criminal offense committed in connection with
the operation of the applicant's contracting business.
(2)
(3) A pattern of unethical business practices.
B.
§ 128-5 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 128-9
128:87
Chapter 135
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Noise — See Ch. 198.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
§ 128-9 HORNELL CODE § 128-9
128:88
ARTICLE I
Livestock
§ 135-1. Prohibited animals and fowl. [Amended 5-22-1972;
11-13-1972]
No person shall be permitted to keep within the corporate limits of the
City, including unenclosed or enclosed private grounds, any cattle, beast of
burden, goat, sheep, swine, chicken, goose, duck, or turkey; and no more
than six pigeons shall be harbored per household.
§ 135-2. Fowl at large.
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any chicken, duck,
goose, turkey or other fowl owned or controlled by him to run at large or to
go upon the premises of another person without the consent of such other
person.
§ 135-3. Penalties for offenses. [Added 12-28-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in
§ 1-1 of the Code.
§ 135-1 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-3
128:89

ARTICLE II
Dogs25
§ 135-4. Purpose. [Added 6-9-1980]
The purpose of this article is to provide for the licensing and identification of
dogs, the control and protection of the dog population and the protection of
persons, property and deer from dog attacks and damages pursuant to the
provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, effective January
1, 1980.
§ 135-5. Definitions. [Amended 6-9-1980]
As used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter requires otherwise, the definitions contained
in Article 7, § 108, of the Agriculture and Markets Law are ordained to
have the same meanings herein.
A.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADOPTION — The delivery to any individual 18 years of age or older, for
the purpose of harboring as a pet, of any unredeemed dog impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this article or any local law or ordinance
promulgated pursuant thereto.
AT LARGE — A dog shall be deemed to be "at large" when it is off the
premises of the owner and not restrained by a leash, except if it is on
the premises of another person with the knowledge and consent of such
other person.
CLERK — The Clerk of any town, City or village where licenses are
validated or issued pursuant to this article.
COMMISSIONER — The State Commissioner of Agriculture and
Markets.
DOG — Any member of the species canis familiaris.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by a municipality
to assist in the enforcement of this article or any authorized officer,
agent or employee of an incorporated humane society or similar
incorporated dog-protective association under contract with a
municipality to assist in the enforcement of this article.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any domesticated sheep, horse, cattle, goat,
swine, fowl, duck, goose, swan, turkey, confined domestic hare or
rabbit, pheasant or other bird which is raised in confinement under
license from the State Department of Environmental Conservation
before release from captivity, except that the varieties of fowl
B.
25.Editor's Note: An ordinance adopted 7-27-1987 added provisions to this article regarding
vicious dogs and was repealed 10-26-1987. For current provisions on dangerous dogs, see
§ 135-6.
§ 135-4 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-5
128:91
commonly used for cockfights shall not be considered "domestic
animals" for the purposes of this article.
EUTHANIZE — To bring about death by a humane method.
GUIDE DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid the blind and is actually
used for such purpose or any dog owned by a recognized guide-dog
training center located within the state during the period that such dog
is being trained or bred for such purpose.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any dog.
HEARING DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid the deaf and is actually
used for such purpose or any dog owned by a recognized training
center located within the state during the period that such dog is being
trained or bred for such purpose.
IDENTIFICATION TAG — A tag which sets forth an official identification
number as required by the provisions of this article.
IDENTIFIED DOG — Any dog carrying an identification tag as provided
in § 112 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.26
MUNICIPALITY — Any county, town, City or village.
OFFICIAL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER — A series or combination of
letters, numbers or symbols approved and furnished by the
Commissioner.
OWNER — Any person who harbors or keeps any dog.
OWNER OF RECORD — The person in whose name any dog was
last licensed pursuant to either Subdivision 1 or 2 of § 109 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law, except that if any license is issued on
application of a person under 18 years of age, the "owner of record"
shall be deemed to be the parent or guardian of such person. If it cannot
be determined in whose name any dog was last licensed or if the "owner
of record" has filed a statement pursuant to the provisions of § 113 of
the Agriculture and Markets Law,27 the owner shall be deemed to be
the "owner of record" of such dog, except that if the owner is under 18
years of age, the "owner of record" shall be deemed to be the parent or
guardian of such person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or
other organized group of persons, municipality or other legal entity.
POLICE WORK DOG — Any dog owned or harbored by any State or
Municipal Police Department or any state or federal law enforcement
agency, which has been trained to aid law enforcement officers and is
actually being used for police work purposes.
26.Editor’s Note: Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, was amended by L. 2010, c. 59, Part T,
effective 1-1-2011; see now Art. 7, § 111.
27.Editor’s Note: Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, was amended by L. 2010, c. 59, Part T,
effective 1-1-2011; see now Art. 7, § 112.
§ 135-5 HORNELL CODE § 135-5
128:92
§ 135-6. Dangerous dogs; penalties for offenses. [Added
11-28-1988]
RECOGNIZED REGISTRY ASSOCIATION — Any registry association
that operates on a nationwide basis, issues numbered registration
certificates and keeps such records as may be required by the
Commissioner.
WAR DOG — Any dog which has been honorably discharged from the
United States armed services.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONFINEMENT — Includes placing the dog inside a house, barn or
other building of such material and construction so as to prohibit and
prevent said dog from being outside. Said dog shall only be allowed
outside for the purpose of relieving itself. When said dog is allowed
outside, the owner shall at all times have the dog secured on a leash
not longer than three feet and said dog shall at all times be under the
direct control and supervision of the owner or caretaker.
DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog, which, when unprovoked, inflicts, bites
or attacks a human being or domestic animal, either on public or
private property, or in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any
person in an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks or
any public grounds or places.
DOG OFFICER — The Dog Control Officer or other designee of the
Common Council.[Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
PERSON — A natural person of any legal entity, including but not
limited to a corporation, firm, partnership or trust.
A.
Responsibility of owner. Upon receiving a report from any source that
a dog located within the City of Hornell may be a dangerous dog, as
defined herein, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or
person who has custody and control of said dog to follow the following
procedures:
(1) Confine the dog for 10 days.
Take the dog to a licensed veterinarian within 24 hours and at the
end of the ten-day confinement period.
(2)
(3) Have the dog vaccinated for rabies, if necessary.
(4) License said dog within 72 hours.
Report any changes in the dog's mood, disposition or eating habits
immediately to the Hornell Humane Society or such other agency
as is designated by the City of Hornell. [Amended 12-28-1992 by
L.L. No. 4-1992]
(5)
B.
§ 135-5 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-6
128:93
§ 135-7. Dogs at large.
§ 135-8. Seizure of unleashed dogs; alternative to seizure.
[Amended 5-22-1972; 9-25-1972]
Confinement at animal shelter. Owners of dogs who are unable to
confine said animal as provided for herein shall have their dog confined
at the Hornell Humane Society Animal Shelter or such other place as
is designated by the City of Hornell. The charge for said confinement
shall be as provided in Chapter 142, Fees, per day per dog. [Amended
12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
C.
Penalty for violation of section. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall, for each and every offense, be deemed
guilty of a violation and shall, upon conviction, be imposed a fine of
not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment
of not more than days. Public health laws in New York State require
the approval of the local Health Officer before a confined dog may be
removed from the owner's premises.
D.
No person owning or having the custody and control of a dog shall
permit such dog to be at large in the City elsewhere than on the
premises of the owner, except if it is on the premises of another person
with the knowledge and consent of such other person.
A.
The owner or person having the custody and control of a dog in the
City which is not on the premises of the owner or upon the premises
of another person with the knowledge and consent of such person shall
control and restrain such dog by a leash.
B.
Section 135-7 is to be construed as a strict liability statute, and
knowledge is specifically not an element of this offense. [Amended
6-24-2002]
C.
Dogs which are not restrained by leash and which are off the premises
of the owner and are upon the premises of another person without the
knowledge and consent of such person may be seized as hereinbefore
provided, or, in the alternative, the Dog Control Officer or anyone duly
authorized by the Chief of Police to enforce this article may issue a
summons to the owner alleging a violation of this article and directing
said person to appear before the City Judge at a time and date indicated
thereon to answer said charge. A finding of guilty shall result in a fine of
$25, and failure to appear at the time and date so designated may result
in the issuance of a warrant by the City Judge. [Amended 12-28-1992
by L.L. No. 4-1992]
A.
Ownership of a dog may be proven by its dog tag number. Such
identification shall be presumptive evidence of its ownership.
B.
§ 135-6 HORNELL CODE § 135-9
128:94
§ 135-9. Licensing; fees; violations and penalties. [Amended
9-10-1979; 10-14-1980; 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992; 12-13-2010
by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Licensing of dogs required; rabies vaccination required.
License.
The owner of any dog reaching the age of four months shall
immediately make application for a dog license. No license
shall be required for any dog which is under the age of four
months and which is not at large, or that is residing in a point
of shelter maintained by or under contract or agreement with
the City. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a
license shall be issued or renewed for a period of one year,
provided that no license shall be issued for a period expiring
after the last day of the 11th month following the expiration
date of the current rabies certificate for the dog being licensed.
All licenses shall expire on the last day of the last month of the
period for which they are issued.
(a)
(b) Application for a dog license shall be made to the City Clerk.
The application shall state the sex, actual or approximate age,
breed, color and other identification marks, if any, and the
name, address, telephone number of the residence of the
owner.
(c)
The application shall be accompanied by the license fee
prescribed by § 11028 and a certificate of rabies vaccination.
In the case of a spayed or neutered dog, every application
shall also be accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian showing that the dog has been spayed or
neutered, provided such certificate shall not be required if the
same is already on file with the Clerk. In lieu of the spay or
neuter certificate, an owner may present a statement certified
by a licensed veterinarian stating that he has examined the dog
and found that because of old age or other reason, the life of
the dog would be endangered by spaying or neutering. In such
case, the license fee for the dog shall be the same as for a
spayed or neutered dog as set forth in Subdivision 1 of § 110.29
(d)
Upon validation by the Clerk, the application shall become a
license for the dog described therein.
(e)
The Clerk shall:
[1] Provide a copy of the license to the owner;
(f)
(1)
A.
28.Editor's Note: See Subsection B, License fees (§ 110); see also Agriculture and Markets
Law, Art. 7, § 110.
29.Editor's Note: See Subsection B(1); see also Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, § 110,
Subdivision 1.
§ 135-9 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-9
128:95
[2] Retain a record of the license.
No license shall be transferable. Upon the transfer of
ownership of any dog, the new owner shall immediately make
application for a license for such dog.
(g)
The Clerk, at the time of issuing any license pursuant to this
article, shall require the applicant to present a statement certified
by a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog or dogs have
been vaccinated to prevent rabies or, in lieu thereof, a statement
certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that because of old age
or another reason, the life of the dog or dogs would be endangered
by the administration of vaccine. The Clerk shall make or cause
to be made from such statement a record of such information and
shall file such record with a copy of the license.
(2)
Municipalities may provide for the establishment and issuance of
purebred licenses and, in the event they do so, shall provide for
the assessment of a surcharge of at least $3 for the purposes of
carrying out animal population control efforts.
(3)
License fees. (§ 11030)
(1) Spayed/neutered: $7.50.
(2) Unspayed/unneutered: $15.50.
B.
Identification of dogs. (§ 11131)
Each dog licensed shall be assigned, at the time the dog is first
licensed, a municipal identification number. Such identification
number shall be carried by the dog on an identification tag which
shall be affixed to a collar on the dog at all times, provided that a
municipality may exempt dogs participating in a dog show during
such participation.
(1)
No tag carrying an identification number shall be affixed to the
collar of any dog other than the one to which that number has been
assigned.
(2)
C.
Change of ownership; lost or stolen dog. (§ 11232)
In the event of a change in the ownership of any dog which has
been licensed or in the address of the owner of record of any such
dog, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of such change, file
with the City a written report of such change. Such owner of record
shall be liable for any violation of this section until such filing is
made or until the dog is licensed in the name of the new owner.
(1)
D.
30.Editor's Note: See Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, § 110.
31.Editor's Note: See Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, § 111.
32.Editor's Note: See Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, § 112.
§ 135-9 HORNELL CODE § 135-9
128:96
If any dog which has been licensed pursuant to this section is lost
or stolen, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of the discovery
of such loss or theft, file with the City a written report of such
loss or theft. In the case of a loss or theft, the owner of record of
any such dog shall not be liable for any violation of this section
committed after such report is filed.
(2)
In the case of a dog's death, the owner of record shall so notify the
City prior to renewal of licensure or upon the time of such renewal
as set forth by the City.
(3)
Violations. (§ 11833)
It shall be a violation, punishable as provided in Subsection E(2) of
this section, for:
(a) Any owner to fail to license any dog;
Any owner to fail to have any dog identified as required by this
section.
(b)
Any person to knowingly affix to any dog any false or improper
identification tag, special identification tag for identifying
guide, service or hearing dogs or purebred license tag;
(c)
Any owner or custodian of any dog to fail to confine, restrain
or present such dog for any lawful purpose pursuant to this
section.
(d)
Any person to furnish any false or misleading information on
any form required to be filed with any municipality pursuant
to the provisions of this section or rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto;
(e)
The owner or custodian of any dog to fail to exercise due
diligence in handling his or her dog if the handling results in
harm to another dog that is a guide, hearing or service dog;
(f)
Any owner of a dog to fail to notify the municipality in which his
or her dog is licensed of any change of ownership or address
as required by § 112 of this article.34
(g)
(1)
It shall be the duty of the Dog Control Officer or member of the
City of Hornell to bring an action against any person who has
committed within the City any violation set forth in Subsection
E(1) of this section. The City may elect either to prosecute such
action as a violation under the Penal Law or to commence an
action to recover a civil penalty. A violation of this section shall be
punishable, subject to such an election, either:
(2)
E.
33.Editor's Note: See Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, § 118.
34.Editor's Note: See Subsection D; see also Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, § 112.
§ 135-9 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-9
128:97
Where prosecuted pursuant to the Penal Law, by a fine of not
less than $25, except that:
Where the person was found to have violated this section
of this chapter within the preceding five years, the fine
may be not less than $50; and
[1]
Where the person was found to have committed two or
more such violations within the preceding five years, it
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both; or
[2]
(a)
Where prosecuted as an action to recover a civil penalty, by a
civil penalty of not less than $25, except that:
When the person was found to have violated this section
or this article within the preceding five years, the civil
penalty may be not less than $50; and
[1]
Where the person was found to have committed two or
more such violations within the preceding five years, the
civil penalty may be not less than $100.
[2]
(b)
A defendant charged with a violation of any provision of this section
or any local law or ordinance promulgated pursuant thereto may
plead guilty to the charge in open court.
He or she may also submit to the magistrate having
jurisdiction, in person, by duly authorized agent, or by
registered mail, a statement:
That he or she waives arraignment in open court and the
aid of counsel;
[1]
[2] That he or she pleads guilty to the offense charged;
That he or she elects and requests that the charge be
disposed of and the fine or penalty fixed by the court;
[3]
Of any explanation that he or she desires to make
concerning the offense charged; and
[4]
That he or she makes all statements under penalty of
perjury.
[5]
(a)
Thereupon, the magistrate may proceed as though the
defendant had been convicted upon a plea of guilty in open
court; provided, however, that any imposition of fine or penalty
hereunder shall be deemed tentative until such fine or penalty
shall have been paid and discharged in full.
(b)
If upon receipt of the aforesaid statement the magistrate shall
deny the same, he or she shall thereupon notify the defendant
of this fact, and that he or she is required to appear before
(c)
(3)
§ 135-9 HORNELL CODE § 135-9
128:98
§ 135-10. Seizure of unlicensed dogs [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L.
No. 4-1992]
§ 135-11. Disposition of seized dogs. [Amended 6-9-1980]
Every dog seized as provided in § 135-10 shall be dealt with pursuant to
§ 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York,36 which
provides for the seizure and redemption of dogs so seized.
§ 135-12. Animal Control Board.
said magistrate at a stated time and place to answer the charge
which shall thereafter be disposed or pursuant to the
applicable provisions of law.
Any person who for the purpose of participating in the animal
population control program shall falsify proof of adoption from
a pound, shelter, duly incorporated society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, duly incorporated humane society or duly
incorporated dog or cat protective association or who shall furnish
any licensed veterinarian of this state with inaccurate information
concerning his or her residency or the ownership of an animal
or such person's authority to submit an animal for a spaying or
neutering procedure pursuant to § 117-a of this article,35 and any
veterinarian who shall furnish false information concerning animal
sterilization fees shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine
of not less than $250 where prosecuted pursuant to the Penal Law,
or, where prosecuted as an action to recover a civil penalty of not
more than $250.
(4)
The Dog Control Officer or any of his duly authorized assistants and
the duly authorized agents of any person or corporation enforcing
the Agriculture and Markets Law and the Public Health Law relating
to dogs shall seize any unlicensed dog either on or off the owner's
premises. This will not apply to a dog under the age of six months which
is not at large.
A.
Any Dog Control Officer or such representative shall seize any dog
found at large not wearing a license.
B.
The fact that a dog is without a tag attached to a collar as provided by
law shall be presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed.
C.
An Animal Control Board is hereby established, which shall consist
of the Mayor as the Chairman and two members, one of whom shall
be a member of the Common Council and the other a member of the
A.
35.Editor's Note: See Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, § 117-a.
36.Editor’s Note: Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, was amended by L. 2010, c. 59, Part T,
effective 1-1-2011; see now Art. 7, § 117.
§ 135-9 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-12
128:99
§ 135-13. Agreements with Humane Society.
The Mayor, with the approval of the Common Council, may enter into such
agreement or agreements with the Humane Society of the City pertaining
to dog control and care within the City as may be deemed advisable. This
provision, however, shall not limit the City in any way in enforcing dog
control by its own employees or appointees.
§ 135-14. Penalties for owning or harboring unlicensed dog. [Added
6-9-1980]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law
of the State of New York,37 owning or harboring a dog within the City of
Hornell, New York, unless the dog is licensed as required by the provisions
of the Agriculture and Markets Law, shall be an offense punishable by a fine
as further provided in § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 135-15. Seizure of unrestrained dogs. [Added 6-9-1980]
Humane Society of the City. The Board shall establish its own rules of
procedure.
The purpose and function of such Board shall be for the purpose of
better coordinating the efforts and facilities of the City and the Humane
Society of the City with regard to control of dogs. Such Board may make
recommendations in an effort to bring about a better understanding of
the matters which relate to dog control.
B.
The animal enforcement officer or any peace officer shall seize any
dog which is found at large within the City of Hornell in violation of
this article, as well as any dog or dogs otherwise violating any of the
provisions of this article or any dog or dogs otherwise required to be
seized under and by virtue of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the
State of New York, pursuant to § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law.38 Any dog which is not identified shall be seized, whether on or
off the owner's property, excepting dogs under the age of six months on
the owner's property.
A.
Each dog seized which is not identified, whether or not licensed, shall
be held for a period of five days from the day seized.
B.
Where a dog is identified, the record owner will be promptly notified
personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the facts of
seizure and the procedure for redemption. If notification is personally
given, such dog shall be held for a period of seven days after the day of
notice, during which period the dog may be redeemed by the owner. If
such notification is made by mail, such dog shall be held for a period of
C.
37.Editor’s Note: Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, was amended by L. 2010, c. 59, Part T,
effective 1-1-2011; see now Art. 7, § 118.
38.Editor’s Note: Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, was amended by L. 2010, c. 59, Part T,
effective 1-1-2011; see now Art. 7, §§ 117 and 118.
§ 135-12 HORNELL CODE § 135-15
128:100
§ 135-16. Enforcement; penalties for offenses. [Added 6-9-1980]
nine days from the date of mailing, during which period the dog may be
redeemed by the owner.
Whether the dog seized is identified or not identified, the owner may
redeem his dog by producing to the person seizing the dog a license for
the dog and by paying to the City Clerk the fees provided in Chapter
142, Fees. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
D.
If not so redeemed, the owner shall forfeit all title to the dog seized
at the end of the appropriate redemption period and the dog shall be
sold or euthanized pursuant to the provisions of Part 77 of Title 1 of
the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State
of New York. (Methods of euthanization approved by the American
Veterinary Association shall be used.) In the case of sale, the purchaser
must pay the purchase price to the City Clerk or the animal
enforcement officer.
E.
In addition, no dog shall be sold and delivered by adoption unless is has
first been licensed prior to its release to the purchaser.
F.
Pursuant to provisions of § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law,39
no liability in damages or otherwise shall be incurred on account of
seizure, euthanization of adoption of any dog pursuant to the provisions
of this article.
G.
The City of Hornell elects to prosecute as an action to recover a
civil penalty for any violations noted in the provisions of § 119 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York40 and any
violations of any additional restrictions upon the keeping or running
at large of dogs and the seizure thereof as established by the City of
Hornell pursuant to § 124 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the
State of New York.41
A.
The City also authorizes the issuance of an appearance ticket pursuant
to the Criminal Procedure Law for any violation referred to in
Subsection A of this section. Said appearance ticket may be issued
by any animal enforcement officer, dog control officer or peace officer
authorized by the City of Hornell to assist in the enforcement of this
article for any such violation.
B.
An answer to such appearance ticket may be made, by registered mail
or certified mail, return receipt requested, within five days of any
violation, following the procedure provided in Subsections C and D of
C.
39.Editor’s Note: Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, was amended by L. 2010, c. 59, Part T,
effective 1-1-2011; see now Art. 7, § 117.
40.Editor’s Note: Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, was amended by L. 2010, c. 59, Part T,
effective 1-1-2011; see now Art. 7, § 118.
41.Editor’s Note: Agriculture and Markets Law, Art. 7, was amended by L. 2010, c. 59, Part T,
effective 1-1-2011; see now Art. 7, § 122.
§ 135-15 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-16
128:101
this section. Said answer will be in lieu of a personal appearance at the
time and court specified on the return date on said appearance ticket.
If a person charged with the violation admits to the violation as charged
in the appearance ticket, he may complete the appropriate form
authorized by the municipal regulations and forward such form and
appearance ticket to the office specified on such appearance ticket with
a check or money order in the amount of $100; except that when the
person was found to have violated this article within the preceding five
years, said check or money order shall be in the amount of $150; and
except that where the person was found to have committed two or more
such violations within the preceding five years, the amount of the check
or money order shall be in the amount of $250.
D.
If a person charged with the violation denies any or all parts of the
violation as charged in the appearance ticket, he may complete an
appropriate form and appearance ticket together with security in the
amount of $15 specified on such appearance ticket. Upon receipt, such
answer shall be entered and a new return date established by said
office. Such person shall be notified by return mail of such return date,
and the security shall be returned upon appearance thereof. If such
person shall fail to appear at a return date when such is provided for
pursuant to this section, the security posted to secure the appearance
shall be forfeited, and a summons shall be issued in the City Court of
the City of Hornell or a warrant of arrest will be issued pursuant to the
Criminal Procedure Law.
E.
Any person found guilty of any violation of any of the provisions of
this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $25; except
that when the person was found to have violated this article within
the preceding five years, the penalty may not be for more than $50;
and where the person was found to have committed two or more such
violations within the preceding five years, the penalty may not be for
more than $100.
F.
§ 135-16 HORNELL CODE § 135-16
128:102
ARTICLE III
Trapping
[Added 11-10-1980]
§ 135-17. Findings and intent.
The Common Council of the City of Hornell hereby finds and declares that
a unique problem exists within the City of Hornell in relation to the control
and regulation of trapping therein. The trapping of wildlife is provided for
by state law and is justified and appropriate in many situations; however,
there is no doubt that within the boundaries of this City this activity can
and often does constitute a danger to domestic animals and individuals. For
this reason, it is hereby determined that the City of Hornell, as the unit of
government best able to flexibly regulate and monitor this situation should
be empowered to regulate the trapping of wildlife within this City.
§ 135-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings herein
ascribed to them:
OFFENSE — The setting of one trap.
PROPERTY — All public and private real property in the City of Hornell with
the exception of the area between the flood control dikes or levees along
the river bed and streams within the City.
SET — The setting up, placing, depositing or leaving of any trap on any
property.
TRAP — Any device which is commonly used to snare or kill beaver, otter,
mink, muskrat, skunk or raccoon, including but not limited to conibear and
leghold traps.
§ 135-19. Trapping restricted.
No person shall set a trap on any property within the City of Hornell except
the area between the flood control dikes or levees along the river bed and
streams within the City.
§ 135-20. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
punished as provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
§ 135-17 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-20
128:103

ARTICLE IV
Nuisances
[Added 4-26-1999]
§ 135-21. Purpose; defecation by dogs; disposition.
§ 135-22. Enforcement; complaint.
The City of Hornell Codes Officer, Health Officer, Dog Control Officer and
Hornell Police Department are charged with the enforcement of this
provision of the law and/or ordinance. A complaint must be filed with any of
the above agents or agencies identifying the owner or keeper of said dog.
§ 135-23. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any of the rules
and regulations made pursuant hereto shall be liable for each offense upon
conviction before the City Court Judge to a fine of not more than $250.
Each day's failure to comply with such provision shall constitute a separate
violation.
The Common Council of the City of Hornell has received numerous
complaints regarding the uncontrolled defecation of dogs on public and
private property. In order to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of this City it shall be unlawful for the owner or
person in custody or control of any dog to allow such dog to defecate
upon the public property of the City, the highways of the state and the
private property of another other than the owner or keeper of said dog.
A.
If such dog shall defecate upon property other than that of the owner or
keeper of the dog, the owner or keeper must immediately clean up the
feces and make proper disposition of it so as not to endanger the health
and safety of the public
B.
If any dog shall defecate upon the property of the owner or keeper of
such dog, the owner or keeper must clean up the feces and make proper
disposition of it within three days so as not to endanger the health and
safety of the public.
C.
§ 135-21 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-23
128:105

ARTICLE V
Registration of Dangerous Dogs
[Adopted 2-10-2003]
§ 135-24. Registration required; seizure; hearing.
Any person having custody, ownership or control of a pit bull dog as
defined herein must register said dog before the age of six months
with the City Clerk of the City of Hornell on a form provided by
the City of Hornell. Said form shall require the following information:
name, address and telephone number of the dog's owner; the address
where said dog is harbored, if different from the owner's address;
the dog's sex, color, rabies certificate and tag number and any other
distinguishing characteristics of the dog, as well as proof of liability
insurance of not less than $100,000 for such registration. Said liability
insurance must cover any damage or injury which may be caused by
such dog during the twelve-month period for which the registration
is sought. Said policy shall contain a provision requiring that the City
of Hornell be notified through "certificate of insurance" for the sole
purpose that the City Clerk be notified by the insurance company of any
cancellation, termination, or expiration of a liability insurance policy.
A.
For the purposes of this section, "pit bull" means any pit bull terrier
of the Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier or
American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dog or any mix breed of dog which
contains as an element of its breeding the breed of Staffordshire Bull
Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier or American Pit Bull Terrier as
to be identified as partially of the breed of Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
American Staffordshire Terrier or American Pit Bull Terrier.
B.
Should any Animal Control Officer, City of Hornell police officer,
representative of the Department of Health or their representatives
have probable cause to believe that a dog as defined herein is being
harbored within the City of Hornell without being properly registered,
said dog shall be subject to immediate seizure. The owner or keeper of
the dog shall be entitled to a hearing upon seizure as described herein,
and upon the hearing the owner or keeper of any dog found to be in
violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $250 and/or fifteen days in jail.
C.
Within three days of the seizure of any dog pursuant to Subsection C,
the person seizing said dog shall inform the owner or keeper of the
dog in writing that the person's dog is alleged to be in violation of
this section and subject to the penalties under this article. Unless the
hearing is waived by the owner or keeper of the dog, a hearing shall be
conducted no later than 30 days from the date of the seizure. The time
and place of the hearing shall be fixed by the court.
D.
E. This article shall take effect June 1, 2003.
§ 135-24 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-24
128:107

ARTICLE VI
Cat Control and Nuisance
[Adopted 6-24-2013]
§ 135-25. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article shall be to preserve the public peace
and good order of the City of Hornell and to contribute to the public
welfare and the preservation and protection of the property and the person
of inhabitants of said city by declaring and enforcing certain regulations
and restrictions on activities of cats and owners of cats within the City of
Hornell.
§ 135-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated.
ABANDONED — A cat of any age, which shall be left either without food,
wafer or shelter or unattended for a period of at least 72 hours.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person or persons or company
appointed by the City of Hornell or under contract with the City of Hornell
to the position of animal control officer charged to carry out enforcement
of the provisions of this article. This person shall have the powers of a
constable or other peace officer in the execution of the provisions of this
article.
CAREGIVERS — Any person who provides food, water and shelter to feral
cats.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species.
FERAL CAT — A descendant of a domestic cat that has returned to the wild.
It is distinguished from a stray cat, which is a pet cat that has been lost or
abandoned. Feral cats are born in the wild.
IDENTIFICATION — Registered cats will need a tag which sets forth an
official identification number as required by the provisions of this article. A
microchip also constitutes an identification tag. Feral cats that have gone
through the TNR program will be identified by a "notched" ear, tattoo or any
such marking as designed by a duly designated enforcement officer.
LANDLORD — An owner of real property who leases (rents) that property
to a tenant under a lease agreement or oral tenancy.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, shall include any
person having a right of property or custody in such cat, and any person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat
or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises or vehicle
owned or occupied by that person. If the owner of the cat is a minor, the
owner of the said property shall be deemed to be the parent or guardian of
the minor for the purposes of this section.
§ 135-25 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-26
128:109
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
association of persons commonly recognized as such by law.
STRAY CAT — A pet cat that has been lost or abandoned.
§ 135-27. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all cats harbored within the City of Hornell. Cats
that are found to be feral will be placed in the TNR program and returned
to a feral cat colony within the City. Stray cats that are found are to be sent
to a duly designated shelter and held for five days and, if not claimed, put
up for adoption.
§ 135-28. Licensing.
§ 135-29. Restrictions.
§ 135-30. Prohibited acts.
A. All cat owners are required to register their cat(s) with the City.
Application for a cat license shall be made to the City Clerk at a cost set
by that office.
B.
C. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of rabies.
By definition, the caregiver of a feral cat will be considered its owner
unless such person is acting at the direction and under the supervision
of a designated enforcement officer administering the City of Hornell's
TNR program.
D.
E. Feral cats are not required to be licensed.
All owners shall keep the quarters where cats are kept clean and
sanitary such as to not create a health hazard or nuisance.
A.
No owner shall leave a cat unattended in a vehicle when the conditions
in that vehicle would constitute a health hazard.
B.
Landlords will be held responsible for any abandoned cat(s) found on
their property.
C.
A maximum of no more than five cats who are six months or older shall
be allowed per household. (This provision shall be effective on January
1, 2014.)
D.
Restraint required (for all non-feral cats).
It shall be unlawful for a cat to be on property other than that of
the owner or possessor or on private property without the consent
of the owner or persons in possession of such private property
unless the cat is effectively restrained in the immediate custody
and control of its owner or possessor by a leash, chain or other
(1)
A.
§ 135-26 HORNELL CODE § 135-30
128:110
§ 135-31. Penalties for offenses.
§ 135-32. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or a member of the City
of Hornell Police Department or any other person designated by the City to
bring action against any person, within the City limits, who has committed
any violation as set forth in this article.
restraining device capable of reasonably restraining the animal. A
person owning or possessing a cat that is not so restrained, with
or without the knowledge, consent or fault of such person, shall be
guilty of a violation of this section.
It shall be presumed that a cat on the private property of a person
other than the cat's owner or possessor is without the consent of
the owner or person in possession of such private property.
(2)
Nuisance Prohibited (for all non-feral cats).
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cat to permit such cat to
defecate, urinate or commit a nuisance on private property, other
than the owner's property, or to defecate or commit a nuisance
on public property unless such feces are immediately removed in
accordance with Subsection B(2) of this section. A person owning
or possessing a cat which defecates, urinates or commits any
nuisance as prohibited herein, with or without the knowledge,
consent or fault of such person, shall be guilty of a violation of this
section. It shall be presumed that a cat defecating, urinating or
committing a nuisance on private property of a person other than
the cat's owner or possessor does so without the consent of the
owner or persons in possession of such private property.
(1)
The owner or possessor of any cat shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by said cat by placing such feces in a plastic
bag, which shall be sealed and deposited in a covered garbage
receptacle.
(2)
B.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 and no more than $250 for each offense. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Such fines shall be in
addition to any redemption fees that the animal control may impose as
a result of the enforcement of this article.
A.
Caregivers of feral cats will not be immune from prosecution as
prescribed by this article unless they are acting at the direction and
under the supervision of a designated enforcement officer
administering the City of Hornell's TNR program.
B.
C. Any person abandoning a cat will be subject to a fine of $100.
§ 135-30 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 135-33
128:111
§ 135-33. Agreement with Humane Society.
The Mayor, with the approval of the Common Council, may enter into such
agreement or agreements with the Humane Society of Hornell or other
such organization pertaining to cat control and care within the City as may
be deemed advisable. This includes, but is not limited to, the housing of
abandoned cats and assisting in the TNR program.
§ 135-33 HORNELL CODE § 135-33
128:112
Chapter 142
FEES
Chapter 144
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 315.
§ 144-1. Erection of fences and barricade charged with electric
current prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to erect to construct or cause to be
erected or constructed within the limits of the city any fence, structure or
barricade any part of which fence, structure or barricade is at any time or
at any intervals of time charged with electrical current.
§ 144-2. Erection of fences and barricades consisting of barbed wire
restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct or cause to be
erected or constructed within the limits of the city any fence, structure
or barricade any part or portion of which fence, structure or barricade
shall consist of barbed wire, unless that portion of such fence, structure or
barricade consisting of barbed wire shall be at least six feet above the level
of the ground.
Chapter 148
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building certificates of occupancy — See Ch.
120.
Abandoned and unsafe buildings — See Ch.
122.
Licensing of contractors — See Ch. 128.
Fees — See Ch. 142.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 228.
Sewers — See Ch. 252.
Water — See Ch. 306.
Zoning — See Ch. 315.
§ 135-33 FEES § 144-2
142:113
§ 148-1. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this City. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 148-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 148-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 148-7B of this chapter.
CITY — The City of Hornell.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 148-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — The Code Enforcement Officer and
all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 148-15A of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 148-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 148-10 of this
chapter. The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit
which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this
chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 148-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 148-7D of
this chapter.
§ 144-2 HORNELL CODE § 148-2
144:114
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 148-3. Code Enforcement Officer; inspectors.
The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions
of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(1)
Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
(2)
To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter;
(3)
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
To issue orders pursuant to § 148-15A, Compliance orders, of this
chapter;
(6)
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Common Council of this City;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
In consultation with this City's attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter; and
(10)
A.
§ 148-2 FENCES § 148-3
144:115
§ 148-4. Building permits.
To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
(11)
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Public Safety. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background
experience related to building construction or fire prevention and shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State
of New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the
Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
B.
In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Board
of Public Safety to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The
Acting Code Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her
appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon
the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
C.
One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Mayor to act under
the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer and to
assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the powers and
fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer
by this chapter. Each inspector shall, within the time prescribed by
law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service
training and other training as the State of New York shall require
for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector shall obtain
certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the
Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
D.
The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Common Council of this City.
E.
Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work
which must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code,
including, but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
A.
Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
B.
§ 148-3 HORNELL CODE § 148-4
144:116
Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area is
less than 140 square feet (13.01 square meters);
(1)
Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(2)
Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(3)
Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(4)
Construction of retaining walls, unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(5)
Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(6)
Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of
a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(7)
Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(8)
Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(9)
Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(10)
Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does
not alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(11)
Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(a)
The removal or change of any required means of egress; or
the rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(b)
The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(c)
(12)
§ 148-4 FENCES § 148-4
144:117
The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
(d)
Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
C.
Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by
the owner of the property where the work is to be performed or by
an authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(2)
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(4)
At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(b)
Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(c)
Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(d)
Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
(e)
(5)
D.
Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
E.
§ 148-4 HORNELL CODE § 148-4
144:118
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer
in writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant
to be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
F.
Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
G.
Work to be performed in accordance with construction documents.
All work shall be performed in accordance with the construction
documents which were submitted with and accepted as part of the
application for the building permit. The building permit shall contain
such a directive. The permit holder shall immediately notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of any change occurring during the course of the
work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that such change warrants a new or
amended building permit, such change shall not be made until and
unless a new or amended building permit reflecting such change is
issued.
H.
Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance.
A building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
I.
Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because
of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in compliance with
J.
§ 148-4 FENCES § 148-4
144:119
§ 148-5. Construction inspections.
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code and
all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 148-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at
the time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
K.
Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
A.
Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
(10)
B.
Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
C.
Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 148-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
D.
§ 148-4 HORNELL CODE § 148-6
144:120
§ 148-6. Stop-work orders.
Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(1)
Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(2)
Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
(3)
A.
Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall be in writing, be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, state the reason or
reasons for issuance, and, if applicable, state the conditions which must
be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume.
B.
Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of
the affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the
stop-work order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the stop-work order.
C.
Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
D.
Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not
be the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation
of, the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any
other penalty under § 148-15, Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of
this chapter or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any
E.
§ 148-6 FENCES § 148-6
144:121
§ 148-7. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
such other remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether
prior to, at the time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures,
buildings, or portions thereof which are converted from one use or
occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a
building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
A.
Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the
building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable,
the structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person
or persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the
Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to
the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(1)
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
B.
Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of
the structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance is issued;
(4)
C.
§ 148-6 HORNELL CODE § 148-7
144:122
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(8)
Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(9)
The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
(10)
Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smokedetecting
or fire protection equipment which has been installed is
operational, and that all required means of egress from the building
or structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement Officer may
include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or
she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the
purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall
be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall
be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in the
temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of
the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring
the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
D.
Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified
by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
E.
Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 148-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at
the time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance or for a temporary certificate.
F.
§ 148-7 FENCES § 148-8
144:123
§ 148-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within this City shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement Officer
of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuel-burning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 148-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this City shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Local Law
Number 1 of 1997,42 as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 148-10. Operating permits.
Operating permits required.
Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Table 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(a)
Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited
to commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(b)
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(d)
Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Common Council of this City.
(e)
(1)
Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required
to obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
(2)
A.
Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
B.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Buildings, Abandoned and Unsafe.
§ 148-8 HORNELL CODE § 148-10
144:124
§ 148-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements
of the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
C.
Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
D.
Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions. The effective
period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating
permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the applicable
fee, and approval of such application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
E.
Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
F.
Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 148-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at
the time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
G.
Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(1)
A.
§ 148-10 FENCES § 148-11
144:125
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(2)
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2), and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) shall be performed at least once
every 36 months.
(3)
Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any
time upon: the request of the owner of the property to be inspected or
an authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
B.
OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure which
contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs firesafety
and property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(1)
The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such building or structure at least once
every 12 months;
(2)
The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs
firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such multiple
(3)
C.
§ 148-11 HORNELL CODE § 148-11
144:126
§ 148-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement
of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code Enforcement
Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 148-13. Recordkeeping.
dwelling at intervals not exceeding the interval specified in
Subsection A(3) of this section; and
The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or
(2) of this section if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building, structure,
use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval specified
in Subsection A(3) of this section.
(4)
Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 148-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time each inspection is performed pursuant to this section.
This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
D.
Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
A.
If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 148-15,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this chapter;
B.
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
D.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records
of all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
A.
§ 148-11 FENCES § 148-13
144:127
§ 148-14. Program review and reporting.
§ 148-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
(3)
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 148-4 through 148-12, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(8)
(9) All fees charged and collected.
All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained
for at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
B.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Common
Council of this City a written report and summary of all business
conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the inspectors,
including a report and summary of all transactions and activities
described in § 148-13, Recordkeeping, of this chapter and a report and
summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
A.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary
of State, on behalf of this City, on a form prescribed by the Secretary
of State, a report of the activities of this City relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
B.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this City is required
to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this City in connection with
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C.
Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or activity found to
exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that
any such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall be in writing;
be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; specify the
A.
§ 148-13 HORNELL CODE § 148-15
144:128
condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this chapter; specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the
specified condition or activity; specify the period of time which the
Code Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for
achieving compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within the
specified period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to
compel compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved
within the specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on
the owner of the affected property personally or by certified mail.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required,
to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on
any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work being performed at the affected property personally
or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any person
mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the
compliance order.
Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
B.
Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of
this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200
for each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The
civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of this City.
C.
Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this City, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision
of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or
use of a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any stop-work order,
compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding may be
commenced in the name of this City, in the Supreme Court or in
any other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order
D.
§ 148-15 FENCES § 148-15
144:129
§ 148-16. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Common Council of
this City. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by
like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the
Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this chapter.
Chapter 154
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 315.
directing the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of
the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding
described in this subsection shall be commenced without the
appropriate authorization from the Common Council of this City.
Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section,
in § 148-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of
this chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty
specified in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior
to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or
penalty specified in this section, in § 148-6, Stop-work orders, of this
chapter, in any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable
law. In particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law.
E.
§ 148-15 HORNELL CODE § 148-16
154:130
ARTICLE I
Findings, Purpose and Objectives
§ 154-1. Findings.
The Common Council of the City of Hornell finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the City of Hornell and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 154-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 154-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
A.
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, are protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
B.
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
C.
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
D.
Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
E.
Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
F.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
C.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
§ 154-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-3
154:131
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
E.
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
F.
Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
G.
Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
H.
§ 154-3 HORNELL CODE § 154-3
154:132
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 154-4. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 154-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), with base flood depths
from one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where
velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, V,
VO, VE or V1-30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or
"one-hundred-year floodplain."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for
occupancy or storage.
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — The area subject to high-velocity waters,
including but not limited to hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on
a firm as Zone V1-30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
areas of special flood hazard.
§ 154-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-5
154:133
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of
the community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The "FBFM"
delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the
Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined but
no water surface elevation is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well
as the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the water surface elevations
of the base flood.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including
basement, i.e., the top of slab in concrete slab construction or the top of
wood flooring in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The term
does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest level, including basement or cellar, of the
lowest enclosed area. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 154-5 HORNELL CODE § 154-5
154:134
than a basement, is not considered a building's "lowest floor," provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
and intended to be improved property.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in 1929,
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 154-13B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The initiation, excluding planning and
design, of any phase of a project or physical alteration of the property,
and shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations; or the erection of temporary forms. It also includes
the placement and/or installation on the property of accessory buildings
(garages or sheds), storage trailers and building materials. For
manufactured homes, the "actual start" means the affixing of the
manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
§ 154-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-5
154:135
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to commence when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local building, fire, health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
B.
§ 154-5 HORNELL CODE § 154-5
154:136
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 154-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Hornell.
§ 154-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard have been identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report
entitled "Flood Insurance Study, City of Hornell, New York, Steuben
County," dated September 1979, with Flood Insurance Rate Maps
enumerated on Map Index No. 360776 0001B, dated March 18, 1980, and
with accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps enumerated on
Map Index No. 360776 0001B, dated March 18, 1980. The above documents
are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter and are filed
at the Superintendent's office, City Hall, Hornell, New York.
§ 154-8. Interpretation; conflict with other provisions.
§ 154-9. Penalties for offenses. 43
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted
or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a
violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided
in § 1-1 of the Code. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Hornell
from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy
an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements
of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied
This chapter is adopted in response to revisions to the National Flood
Insurance Program effective October 1, 1986, and shall supersede all
previous laws adopted for the purpose of establishing and maintaining
eligibility for flood insurance.
A.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the higher standards shall govern.
B.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 154-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-9
154:137
for and received an approved variance under Article VI will be declared
noncompliant, and notification will be sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 154-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
City of Hornell, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 154-9 HORNELL CODE § 154-10
154:138
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 154-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 154-12. Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before the start of construction
or any other development within the areas of special flood hazard as
established in § 154-7. Application for a development permit shall be made
on forms furnished by the local administrator and may include but not be
limited to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing.
Application stage. The following information is required, where
applicable:
The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the proposed lowest
floor, including basement or cellar, of all structures.
(1)
The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
(2)
When required, a certificate from a licensed professional engineer
or architect that the utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in
§ 154-14C(1).
(3)
A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 154-15.
(4)
A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(5)
A.
Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor or floodproofing
by whatever means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the local administrator a certificate of the elevation of the lowest floor
or floodproofed elevation in relation to mean sea level. The elevation
certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the
same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the
floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and
certified by the same. Any further work undertaken prior to submission
and approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk.
The local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
B.
§ 154-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-12
154:139
§ 154-13. Duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited to:
detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
Permit application review. The local administrator shall:
Review all development permit applications to determine that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(1)
Review all development permit applications to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or
local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(2)
Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development adversely affects the areas of special flood
hazard. For the purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means
physical damage to adjacent properties. An engineering study may
be required of the applicant for this purpose.
If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(a)
If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation
measures shall be made a condition of the permit.
(b)
(3)
Review all development permits for compliance with the provisions
of § 154-14E, Encroachments.
(4)
A.
Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
data has not been provided in accordance with § 154-7, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard, the local administrator shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including
data developed pursuant to § 154-14D(4), in order to administer
§ 154-15, Specific standards, and § 154-16, Floodways.
B.
Information to be obtained and maintained. The local administrator
shall:
Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, of all new
or substantially improved structures, whether or not the structure
contains a basement or cellar.
(1)
For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, to which the structure has been floodproofed.
(a)
Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §§ 154-14
and 154-15.
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 154-12 HORNELL CODE § 154-13
154:140
Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter, including variances, when granted, and
certificates of compliance.
(3)
Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Regional Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Region II, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278.
(1)
Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(2)
D.
Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
The local administrator shall have the authority to make
interpretations when there appears to be a conflict between the
limits of the federally identified areas of special flood hazard and
actual field conditions.
(1)
Base flood elevation data established pursuant to § 154-7 and/or
Subsection B, when available, shall be used to accurately delineate
the areas of special flood hazard.
(2)
The local administrator shall use flood information from any other
authoritative source, including historical data, to establish the
limits of the areas of special flood hazard when base flood
elevations are not available.
(3)
E.
Stop-work orders.
All floodplain development found ongoing without an approved
permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the
local administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject
to the penalties described in § 154-9 of this chapter.
(1)
All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions
of this chapter and/or the conditions of the approved permit shall
be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the local
administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject to
the penalties described in § 154-9 of this chapter.
(2)
F.
Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer
or architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify that the
development is in compliance with the requirements of either the
development permit or the approved variance.
G.
H. Certificate of compliance.
§ 154-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-13
154:141
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating that
the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(1)
All other development occurring within the designated flood hazard
area will have, upon completion, a certificate of compliance issued
by the local administrator.
(2)
All certifications shall be based upon the inspections conducted
subject to Subsection G above and/or any certified elevations,
hydraulic information, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or
encroachment analysis which may have been required as a
condition of the approved permit.
(3)
§ 154-13 HORNELL CODE § 154-13
154:142
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 154-14. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
Anchoring.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(1)
All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes must
be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Manufactured homes shall be elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or two feet above the highest adjacent grade
when no base flood elevation has been determined. Methods of
anchoring may include but are not to be limited to use of over-thetop
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
(2)
A.
Construction materials and methods.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(1)
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(2)
B.
Utilities.
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. When
designed for location below the base flood elevation, a professional
engineer's or architect's certification is required.
(1)
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(2)
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(3)
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4)
C.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 154-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-14
154:143
§ 154-15. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in § 154-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, and § 154-13B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(1)
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
(2)
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
(3)
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals
for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than either
50 lots or five acres.
(4)
Encroachments.
All proposed development in riverine situations where no flood
elevation data is available (unnumbered A Zones) shall be analyzed
to determine the effects on the flood-carrying capacity of the areas
of special flood hazard set forth in § 154-13A(3). This may require
the submission of additional technical data to assist in the
determination.
(1)
In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data is available pursuant to § 154-13B or Subsection D(4) above
and no floodway has been determined, the cumulative effects of
any proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
(2)
In all areas of special flood hazard where floodway data is provided
or available pursuant to § 154-13B, the requirements of § 154-16,
Floodways, shall apply.
(3)
E.
Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any resident structure shall:
Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation.
(1)
Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
(2)
A.
§ 154-14 HORNELL CODE § 154-15
154:144
licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(a)
The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b)
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c)
Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation or be floodproofed so that the structure
is watertight below the base flood level with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components located
below the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the
base flood elevation shall be designed to automatically (without
human intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(a)
The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b)
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c)
(1)
If the structure is to be floodproofed:
A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/
or review structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods
of construction are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice to make the structure watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, with
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 154-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-15
154:145
§ 154-16. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as
floodways. (See the definition in § 154-5.) The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to high-velocity floodwaters carrying debris and posing
additional threats from potential erosion forces. When floodway data is
available for a particular site as provided by §§ 154-7 and 154-13B, all
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
and other development, are prohibited within the limits of the floodway
unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that such encroachments shall
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
A licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
shall certify the specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level,
to which the structure is floodproofed.
(b)
The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of all such
certificates noted in this section.
C.
Construction standards for areas of special flood hazard without base
flood elevations. New construction or substantial improvement of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation as
may be determined in § 154-13B or two feet above the highest adjacent
grade where no elevation data is available.
New construction or substantial improvement of structures,
including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent grade next to the proposed foundation of the structure.
(1)
Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically (without human
intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(a)
The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b)
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c)
(2)
D.
§ 154-15 HORNELL CODE § 154-16
154:146
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
§ 154-16 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-16
154:147

ARTICLE VI
Variances
§ 154-17. Appeals Board.
The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the City of Hornell
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
A.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration
of this chapter.
B.
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
C.
In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(1)
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(3)
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(4)
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(5)
The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(6)
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(7)
The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(8)
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(9)
The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods of
flooding.
(10)
D.
§ 154-17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-17
154:149
§ 154-18. Conditions for variances.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(11)
The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations, and
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
(12)
Upon consideration of the factors in Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
E.
The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
F.
Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre
or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in § 154-17D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
A.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures and contributing structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places without regard to the contributing structures procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
B.
Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
(2)
C.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D.
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E.
Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
F.
§ 154-17 HORNELL CODE § 154-18
154:150
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(2)
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
(3)
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.
G.
§ 154-18 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 154-18
154:151
Chapter 157
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 95.
Bingo — See Ch. 110.
§ 157-1. Statutory authority; title.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law of the State of New York and shall be known as the
"Games of Chance Ordinance of the City of Hornell."
§ 157-2. Definitions.
§ 157-3. Games authorized.
Games of chance may be conducted in the city by an authorized
organization after obtaining a license therefor in accordance with the
provisions, requirements and limitations of Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law, the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and
Wagering Board and this chapter.
§ 157-4. Conduct on Sundays.
The conduct of games of chance on Sundays is authorized, except as
otherwise restricted in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings
as such words and terms used in Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law, unless otherwise provided herein or unless the context requires a
different meaning.
A.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Hornell.
OFFICER — The chief law enforcement officer of the City of Hornell.
B.
§ 154-18 HORNELL CODE § 157-4
157:152
Chapter 160
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Fees — See Ch. 142.
Handbills — See Ch. 167.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Pest control — See Ch. 222.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 240.
§ 157-4 GAMES OF CHANCE § 157-4
157:153

ARTICLE I
Disposal and Collection
[Adopted as Art. II of Ch. 13 of the 1970 Municipal Code; amended
in its entirety 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
§ 160-1. Definitions and word usage.
Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ASHES — The residue from fires used for cooking and heating and onsite
incineration.
BRUSH — Cuttings from lawns, hedges and trees which are less than
four (4) inches in diameter.
CITY — The City of Hornell, New York.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Discarded building material, concrete,
stones, earth from excavations or grading and all other refuse resulting
from the erection, repair, demolition or other improvement of property.
DUMPSTER — A bulk storage container for garbage and other waste
materials that can be hauled directly to the point of disposal or emptied
into a large compactor-type truck or other conveyance for disposal.
GARBAGE — Wastes from the preparation, cooking or serving of food,
market wastes and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
LARGE HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS — All large and/or bulky articles
except major appliances, actually used in the home and which equip it
for living, such as chairs, sofas, tables, beds, carpets, etc.
MAJOR APPLIANCES — Large and/or bulky household mechanisms
(as refrigerators, washers, dryers, stoves, microwave ovens, etc.)
ordinarily operated by gas or electric current.
NONRECYCLABLE RUBBISH — Nonclear plastic containers, rags,
sweepings, excelsior, rubber, leather, crockery, shells, clothing, straw,
filth, ashes, wastepaper and similar waste material.
RECYCLABLE RUBBISH — Metal and aluminum food containers and
cans with one (1) end removed, both ends if possible; clear glass
containers; nonglossy newspaper; cardboard; clear plastic containers;
and computer paper.
REFUSE — Putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste consisting of
organic or nonorganic materials but shall not include human or animal
body waste.
RUBBISH —
COMBUSTIBLE — Paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior,
tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture and bedding
dunnage and all other materials subject to burning.
(1)
A.
§ 160-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 160-1
157:155
§ 160-2. Disposal; enforcement.
STANDING or PARKING — As defined in § 1200(b) and (c) of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
TREE PARTS — Cuttings from shrubs, hedges and trees which are more
than four (4) inches in diameter.
WASTE MATERIALS — Includes all categories of materials to be
disposed of, excluding garbage.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE — Metal, tin cans, metal furniture, glass,
crockery and minerals.
(2)
Word usage.
Exclusion of brush and tree parts. The terms "garbage," "recyclable
rubbish," "nonrecyclable rubbish," "construction debris" and
"major appliance" shall not be construed to include brush or tree
parts.
(1)
Vehicle tires and tire casings. Under no circumstances shall the
terms "garbage," "recyclable rubbish," "construction debris" or
"major appliance" be deemed or construed to include vehicular
tires or tire casings. Vehicle tires and tire casings will not be picked
up or removed by the City of Hornell or its agents.
(2)
B.
No person shall dispose of garbage or recyclable or nonrecyclable
rubbish, brush, construction debris, major appliances, household
furnishings or tree parts except as follows:
Cans or containers. Each person shall provide separate galvanized
iron cans or other suitable sanitary containers for garbage and
nonrecyclable rubbish only. All cans or containers shall be placed
at the curb for collection on the days and at the times designated
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
(1)
Recyclables.
Recyclable rubbish shall be disposed of in the following
manner:
Clear glass shall be placed in a separate container suitable
for holding such items. All clear glass items shall have all
metal objects removed and shall not contain any foreign
material.
[1]
Clear plastic shall be placed in a separate container
suitable for holding such items and shall not contain any
foreign material.
[2]
Newspaper and computer paper shall be stacked and tied
in bundles no more than twelve (12) inches in height.
[3]
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 160-1 HORNELL CODE § 160-2
157:156
§ 160-3. Disposal of waste materials generated outside City.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited any
garbage, nonrecyclable rubbish, recyclable rubbish, construction debris,
major appliances, large household furnishings, brush and tree parts upon
any property within the City of Hornell when said items have not been
generated within the City of Hornell, except under the direct authorization
and supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 160-4. Permit for waste collection.
No person, firm or corporation, except the City, shall engage in the business
of removing, collecting, transporting or disposing of refuse without a permit
issued by the City. Each such permit, unless otherwise stated therein, shall
expire on December 31 following the date of issuance. The fee for such
permit shall be as provided in Chapter 142, Fees.
Tin and aluminum cans shall be placed in a separate
container suitable for holding such items. All tin and
aluminum cans shall have at least one (1) end removed
and, if possible, shall have all labels removed and shall not
contain any foreign material.
[4]
[5] Cardboard shall be flattened and stacked in a neat pile.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to dispose of
any recyclable material in any manner except as provided for
in this section.
(b)
Construction debris. No person shall place or store construction
debris with garbage, nonrecyclable rubbish or recyclable rubbish.
The person creating construction debris shall remove and dispose
of the same in a sanitary manner.
(3)
Major appliances and large household furnishings. It shall be the
duty of the owner of such items to remove and dispose of the same
in a sanitary manner.
(4)
Brush. All brush shall be disposed of by depositing the same in
a manner and at a location and time to be determined by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
(5)
Tree parts. All tree parts shall be removed by the contractor or
by the owner or occupant of such premises. Such tree parts shall
not be placed at or near the curb or street right-of-way, except
temporarily as may be necessary in the course of the work
producing such items.
(6)
The Superintendent of Public Works, a code officer, a police officer or
such other person as may be designated by the Board of Public Works
or the Board of Public Health is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce this chapter and cause collections to be made accordingly.
B.
§ 160-2 GAMES OF CHANCE § 160-5
157:157
§ 160-5. Collection vehicles.
§ 160-6. Disposal site.
Refuse shall be disposed of in a site approved by the Hornell Board of
Health that is in compliance with the New York State Sanitary Code.
§ 160-7. Hours of collection; placement of garbage for pickup.
Each vehicle used in the business of the collection and transportation
of refuse shall be approved by the Board of Health of the City or its duly
delegated representatives as to type and construction.
A.
Each vehicle used in the business of collection and transportation
of putrescible refuse shall be totally enclosed welded steel and be
watertight and be constructed, maintained and operated so that, once
putrescible refuse has been loaded, none of it may be reworked, sorted,
handled, discharged or removed from the body except by dumping the
load. Collection of nonputrescible refuse can be transported in a truck
if the load is suitably covered so as to prevent the loss of any part of
said load, if such cover is required.
B.
All vehicles and implements used herein shall be kept and maintained in
a sanitary and inoffensive condition so as not to create a public health
nuisance. The Board of Health or its duly delegated representatives
shall have the right to inspect any vehicles used herein at any time.
C.
All conveyances used in the collection and conveyance of refuse in
the City shall have thereon the name of the owner or owners and the
number of the permit.
D.
No vehicles used by refuse collectors may be parked or allowed to stand
within the limits of the City except as permitted in § 1200(b) and (c) of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York or as permitted
in an emergency situation by the Board of Public Health or its duly
delegated representatives.
E.
The days and hours of collection of refuse by licensed collectors shall
be Monday through Saturday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m.
A.
Licensed collectors are further permitted herein to make collection
of refuse from hospitals, nursing homes and restaurants on Sundays
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. if such collections are
requested.
B.
Placement of garbage for pickup. [Added 10-28-2002]
Refuse and garbage shall not be placed at the curb for pickup prior
to 7:00 p.m. on the evening preceding the pickup day. Garbage
receptacles shall be removed from the curb and placed in an
(1)
C.
§ 160-5 HORNELL CODE § 160-7
157:158
§ 160-8. Private transportation of refuse.
Any person may transport in his own vehicles refuse from his own business
operation or personal home and not the refuse of another person, but he
must use either a totally enclosed vehicle body or an open-body vehicle
which must be suitably covered so as to prevent the loss of any part of such
load, if such cover is required.
§ 160-9. Garbage receptacles.
§ 160-10. Creation of nuisance; depositing on streets.
§ 160-11. Dumpsters.
acceptable storage area, not in view from the street, before 7:00
p.m. the day of collection. [Amended 10-22-2007]
(2) The penalty for this offense shall be fixed at $50 per occasion.
The owner, tenant, occupant or lessee of any building within the limits
of the City shall provide or cause to be provided acceptable plastic or
metal receptacles with fitted covers for the reception of garbage. Said
receptacles shall be used for no other purpose and shall be kept on the
premises for which they are provided but not in view from the street.
Said receptacle shall be kept in a sanitary condition. All household
garbage and refuse shall be placed in said receptacles for collection.
[Amended 10-22-2007]
A.
No person shall carry or convey any empty garbage cans upon or
through any street, alley, lane, driveway or other public place in the
City except if the same shall have first been thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected after the garbage has been removed therefrom.
B.
All garbage disposed of within the limits of the City shall be disposed of
in such manner as not to create a nuisance and in such manner as shall
be approved by the Board of Health.
A.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited any
garbage, as defined in this chapter, upon any street, alley, lane, gutter
or any public grounds in the City or into any stream running through or
adjacent to said City or other premises in said City.
B.
Collection. The property owner, lessee or user of the container shall
make provisions to have the collection from the dumpster on such
a schedule so that the garbage and other waste materials do not
accumulate so as to overflow the confines of the container or restrict
the closing of the container cover.
A.
Location, use and conditional requirements.
No dumpster shall be located in or on a public right-of-way so as to
interfere with the flow of traffic.
(1)
B.
§ 160-7 GAMES OF CHANCE § 160-11
157:159
§ 160-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
Garbage and other waste materials must be completely contained
within the dumpster. No accumulation of garbage or waste
materials will be permitted outside the confines of the dumpster,
nor will it be permitted to accumulate garbage or other waste
materials so that the dumpster cover cannot firmly close.
(2)
All dumpsters shall be kept in good repair, be structurally sound,
be leakproof and be easily opened and closed. Dumpsters shall be
painted as required to prevent the show of rust and deterioration
and be so constructed as to stand firmly upright. All dumpsters
shall be required to have a cover which is capable of completely
closing and securing the contents contained within the dumpster.
All dumpsters shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times.
(3)
All dumpsters shall have the name of the company or individual
owning such dumpster clearly printed on either the front or back of
such dumpster.
(4)
The use of the dumpster shall be limited to the property owner,
lessee or authorized user of the container. Unauthorized use of
a dumpster by someone other than herein described shall be
considered a trespass and subject the unauthorized user to the
penalties contained within § 160-12 of this chapter.
(5)
Requests for relief. Relief from any of the provisions of this section
alleged to be a hardship may be obtained by submitting, in writing, to
the City of Hornell Board of Health a statement detailing the hardship
and relief requested. The Board of Health shall review the submission
and confer with the City fire officials and thereafter render a decision
thereon within thirty (30) days. In the event that said hardship involves
site location of a dumpster, a site plan of the property shall be
submitted, showing the proposed site location of the dumpster, the
distance from the property line or right-of-way and whatever pertinent
information the petitioner may feel will be relevant to his presentation.
C.
§ 160-11 HORNELL CODE § 160-12
157:160
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 7-9-1990 44]
§ 160-13. Definitions; construal of provisions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
BRUSH — Cuttings from lawns, hedges and trees which are less than
four (4) inches in diameter.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Discarded building material, concrete,
stones, earth from excavations or grading and all other refuse resulting
from the erection, repair or demolition or other improvements of
property.
GARBAGE — Kitchen and house refuse and table cleanings, fruit and
vegetable parings, decaying vegetables, animals and fruit and fallen
fruit.
LARGE HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS — All other large and/or bulky
articles actually used in the home and which equip it for living, such as
chairs, sofas, tables, beds, carpets, etc.
MAJOR APPLIANCES — A large and/or bulky household mechanism (as
a refrigerator, washer, dryer, stove, microwave oven, etc.) ordinarily
operated by gas or electric current.
NONRECYCLABLE RUBBISH — Nonclear plastic containers, rags,
sweeping, excelsior, rubber, leather, crockery, shells, clothing, straw,
filth, ashes, wastepaper and similar waste material.
RECYCLABLE RUBBISH — Metal and aluminum food containers and
cans with one (1) end removed, both ends if possible; clear glass
containers; nonglossy newspaper; cardboard; clear plastic containers
and computer paper.
TREE PARTS — Cuttings from shrubs, hedges and trees which are
more than four (4) inches in diameter. The terms "garbage," "recyclable
rubbish," "nonrecyclable rubbish," "construction debris" and "major
appliances" shall not be construed to include "brush" or "tree parts."
A.
Under no circumstances shall the terms "garbage," "recyclable
rubbish," "construction debris" or "major appliances" be deemed or
construed to include vehicular tires or tire casings. Vehicle tires and
tire casings will not be picked up or removed by the City of Hornell or
its agents.
B.
44.Editor's Note: This resolution provided that it became effective 8-1-1990, but that the
fines and penalties portion became effective 11-1-1990.
§ 160-13 GAMES OF CHANCE § 160-14
157:161
§ 160-14. Disposal.
No person shall dispose of garbage or recyclable or nonrecyclable rubbish,
brush, construction debris, major appliances, household furnishings or tree
parts, except as follows:
Each person shall provide separate galvanized iron cans or other
suitable sanitary containers for garbage and nonrecyclable rubbish
only. All cans or containers shall be placed at the curb for collection on
the days and at the times designated by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
A.
Recyclable rubbish.
Recyclable rubbish shall be disposed of in the following manner:
Clear glass shall be placed in a separate container suitable for
holding such items. All clear glass items shall have all metal
objects removed and shall not contain any foreign material.
(a)
Clear plastic shall be placed in a separate container suitable
for holding such items and shall not contain any foreign
material.
(b)
Newspaper and computer paper shall be stacked and tied in
bundles no more than twelve (12) inches in height.
(c)
Tin and aluminum cans shall be placed in a separate container
suitable for holding such items. All tin and aluminum cans shall
have at least one (1) end removed, and if possible, have all
labels removed and shall not contain any foreign material.
(d)
(e) Cardboard shall be flattened and stacked in a neat pile.
(1)
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to dispose of any
recyclable material in any manner except as provided for in this
section.
(2)
B.
Construction debris. No person shall place or store construction debris
with garbage, nonrecyclable rubbish or recyclable rubbish. The person
creating construction debris shall remove and dispose of the same in a
sanitary manner.
C.
Major appliances and large household furnishings. It shall be the duty
of the owner of such items to remove and dispose of the same in a
sanitary manner.
D.
Brush. All brush shall be disposed of by depositing the same in a
manner and at a location and time to be determined by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
E.
Tree parts. All tree parts shall be removed by the contractor or by the
owner or occupant of such premises. Such tree parts shall not be placed
F.
§ 160-14 HORNELL CODE § 160-14
157:162
§ 160-15. Enforcement.
The Director of Public Works, a code officer, a police officer or such other
person as may be designated by the Board of Public Works or the Board of
Public Health, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce this Article and
cause collections to be made accordingly.
§ 160-16. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for violating any part of this Article shall be as follows:
at or near the curb or street right-of-way, except temporarily as may be
necessary in the course of the work producing such items.
A. For a first offense: a fine of no more than fifty dollars ($50.).
For a second offense within one (1) year, the penalty shall be a fine
of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.) and no more than four
hundred dollars ($400.) and/or fifteen (15) days in jail; and
B.
For a third offense within six (6) months of a second offense, a fine of
at least five hundred dollars ($500.) and no more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.) and/or sixty (60) days in jail.
C.
§ 160-14 GAMES OF CHANCE § 160-16
157:163

ARTICLE III
Garbage/Recyclables Pickup Surcharge
[Adopted 4-8-1991]
§ 160-17. Acceptance and approval.
The policy and procedures with regards to pickup of garbage/recyclables
surcharge, as outlined by the Finance Committee meeting of April 4, 1991,
is hereby accepted and approved.
§ 160-18. Unpaid bills.
Any unpaid bills will be added to the tax bills. There will be a once-a-year
billing in July. Unpaid bills will carry the same penalty as unpaid water bills,
a charge of fifteen percent (15%) after thirty (30) days.
§ 160-19. Exceptions.
There will be no exceptions to the surcharge.
§ 160-20. Basis for charge.
The charge will be based on housing units, including the Housing Authority,
SCAP and Maple Court Homes.full page. This Art. will start a new page.
§ 160-17 GAMES OF CHANCE § 160-20
157:165

ARTICLE IV
Unpaid Fees and Charges
[Adopted 8-24-1992 as L.L. No. 2-1992 45]
§ 160-21. Unpaid charges to be added to annual tax levy.
All unpaid fees or charges for municipal or municipally contracted solid
waste collection and/or disposal services imposed on or after January 1,
1993, including penalties or interest, not paid by April 1, 1994, shall be
added to the annual City tax levy.
§ 160-22. Statement of fees in arrears.
The Common Council shall annually cause a statement to be prepared
setting forth each amount of solid waste disposal and/or collection fees in
arrears as of thirty (30) days prior to the last date prescribed by law for the
annexation of the warrant to the assessment roll, a brief description of the
property for which or in connection with which such solid waste services
were provided and the name and address of the person or corporation liable
to pay such amount. Such statement shall be presented to the Common
Council, which shall levy such amounts remaining unpaid on the date taxes
are levied against the real property for which or in connection with which
such solid waste services were provided.
45.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it shall take effect 1-1-1993.
§ 160-21 GAMES OF CHANCE § 160-22
157:167
Chapter 167
HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 160.
§ 167-1. Permission required for distribution.
No person shall without permission from the owner or occupant throw or
place or cause to be thrown or placed in any yard, doorway, porch, house
or vestibule any sample or sample package of medicine or any substance,
dodger or handbill which may litter such place or cause annoyance or
inconvenience to such owner or occupant without permission from the
mayor.
§ 167-2. Obscene materials prohibited.
No person shall throw or place or cause to be thrown or placed in any
yard, doorway, house or vestibule or in any public place whatever any
book, pamphlet, handbill, dodger or wrapper upon which shall be written
or printed any vile, indecent, immoral or obscene language or upon which
shall be written or printed any vile, indecent, immoral or obscene sketch,
drawing or picture.
§ 167-3. Penalties for offenses. 46
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of the
Code.
Chapter 168
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 17.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 160.
Handbills — See Ch. 167.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Noise — See Ch. 198.
Signs — See Ch. 260.
Storage of vehicles and parts — See Ch. 296.
46.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 160-22 HORNELL CODE § 167-3
167:168
§ 168-1. Findings and declaration.
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the City of Hornell
structures used for residential and nonresidential use which are or may
become in the future substandard with respect to structure, equipment or
maintenance or further that such conditions, including but not limited to
structural deterioration; lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior
of premises; infestation; lack of essential heating, plumbing, storage or
refrigeration equipment; lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities
and facilities; existence of fire hazards; inadequate provisions for light and
air; and unsanitary conditions, constitute a menace to the health, safety,
morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants
of the City. It is further found and declared that, by reason of lack of
maintenance and because of progressive deterioration, certain properties
have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums
and that, if the same are not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid
conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time and
expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the same and that, by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as
herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and
the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability
and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods
enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 168-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety, morals and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and nonresidential
premises; to establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and
other physical components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid
facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; and to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants.
§ 168-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A structure, the use of which is incidental to that
of the main building, and which is attached thereto or is located on the same
premises. [9NYCRR 606.3(a)(1)].
BILLBOARDS (See "signs") —
A flat surface (as of a panel, wall or fence) on which bills are posted; a
large panel designed to carry outdoor advertising.
A.
§ 167-3 HANDBILLS § 168-3
167:169
BLIGHT — Something that impairs or destroys; an impaired condition; to
cause to deteriorate, ruin.
BUILDING — A structure, wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
or within exterior or party walls and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
CITY — The City of Hornell.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer charged with enforcement
of building or fire codes. [9NYCRR 606.3(a)(31)].
CODE OFFICER/HEALTH CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer
employed by the City of Hornell to enforce the City Code of ordinances of
the City of Hornell and this chapter, as well as the New York State Public
Health Law.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Discarded building material, concrete, stones,
earth from excavations or grading and all other refuse resulting from the
erection, repair, demolition or other improvement of property.
DEBRIS — To break to pieces: the remains of something broken down or
destroyed; ruins.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building or structure
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting
or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use or lack of
maintenance.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE —
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or open space or any part
thereof or any building or structure that may be lawfully viewed by any
A sign or structure which directs attention to an idea, product, business
activity, service or entertainment which is conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the lot on which such sign is situated.
B.
A building containing three or more dwelling units; building containing
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities occupied by one or two families
and more than four lodgers residing with either one of such families;
a building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or twofamily
dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient paying
guests or tenants; a building with sleeping accommodations for more
than five persons used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or
sorority or for similar uses; a building used or occupied as an old-age
home or community residence [9NYCRR 606.3(a)(141)].
A.
A building containing three or more dwelling units with shared or
individual entrances and/or other essential facilities and services. This
term shall not be deemed to include motel, hotel, rooming house or
other accommodations used for more or less transient occupancy.
B.
A building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units
and designed or used for occupancy by three or more families living
independent of each other.
C.
§ 168-3 HORNELL CODE § 168-3
167:170
member of the public from a sidewalk, street, alleyway or from any
adjoining or neighboring premises.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building that are exposed
to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any building
erected thereon.
FENCE — A barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a
boundary, such as a barrier made of posts and wire or boards; an artificially
constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal or any other
manufactured material or combination of materials erected for the
enclosure of yard areas.
GARBAGE —
GOOD WORKING CONDITION — Fully operable for the use intended.
GOOD WORKING REPAIR — A standard of maintenance that renders a
building safe, habitable and possessed of a neat and orderly appearance.
HEDGE — See "fence."
JUNK — Any old, discarded or unused waste iron or other metal or
substance, glass, paper, used lumber, rags, machine parts, accessories,
machinery, machines, unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for
reconditioning, used parts of motor vehicles and any material commonly
known and generally referred to as "junk" in the ordinary and accepted
meaning of the word.
JUNKYARD — Any tract of land within the City of Hornell on which junk is
placed, collected, stored, kept, maintained or located.
OCCUPANT — The person in occupancy, in possession or in control of
premises or using premises. [9NYCRR 606.3(a)(149)].
OPERATOR or MANAGER — Any person who has charge, care or control of
a building or part thereof.
OWNER — The owner of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a
building [(9NYCRR 606.3(a)(154)].
POINT OF VIEW — For the purpose of § 168-5, Exterior standards, not
personal opinion but line of sight of adjoining property owners to include
front, rear and side views.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a
corporation, an association and any other organization recognized as an
entity by the laws of the State of New York.
Food wastes; refuse; the worthless or useless part of something;
leavings; trash.
A.
Wastes from the preparation, cooking or serving of food; market
wastes; and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
B.
§ 168-3 HANDBILLS § 168-3
167:171
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the building or
structure thereon. [9NYCRR 606.3(a)(162)].
PROPERTY — Land and whatever is erected on, growing on, placed on or
affixed thereto.
REFUSE —
RUBBISH — Useless waste or rejected matter; noncombustible waste
material. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal
and coke; and also tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust
and other noncombustible matters.
SIGNS — A lettered board or other display used to identify or advertise a
place of business; a posted command, warning or direction; something that
serves to indicate the presence or existence of something; any structure or
part thereof or any device attached to a structure or painted or represented
on a structure which shall display or include any lettering, wording, model,
drawing, picture, banner, flag, insignia, device, marking or representation
used as or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or
advertisement. A sign includes a billboard but does not include the flag or
insignia of any nation or of any governmental agency or of any political,
educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or
similar organization, campaign, drive, movement or event which is
temporary in nature.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled, constructed or
erected at a fixed location, including, for example, a building, stationary and
portable carports and swimming pools, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
TRASH — Something worth little or nothing, as junk, rubbish; something in
a crumbled or broken condition or mass; debris from pruning or processing
plant material.
§ 168-4. Provisions to be minimum standards; conflict with other
provisions.
Putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste consisting of organic or
nonorganic materials but shall not include human or animal body
waste.
A.
All cardboard, plastic material or glass containers, wastepaper, rags,
sweeping, pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber and like waste material.
B.
COMBUSTIBLE — Paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree
branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture and bedding dunnage and all
other materials subject to burning.
A.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE — Metal, tin cans, metal furniture, glass, crockery
and minerals.
B.
This chapter establishes certain minimum standards for the initial and
continued occupancy and use of all structures and does not replace
A.
§ 168-3 HORNELL CODE § 168-4
167:172
§ 168-5. Exterior standards.
The exterior of the premises and the condition of structures shall be
maintained so that the premises and all buildings shall reflect a level of
maintenance in keeping with the standards of the community and shall not
constitute blight from the point of view of adjoining property owners or lead
to the progressive deterioration of the neighborhood. Such maintenance
shall include, without limitation, the following:
or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair,
alteration or use of the structure, the premises or the equipment or
facilities contained therein, as are required by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
In any case where a provision is found to be in conflict with any
applicable zoning, building, plumbing, electrical, heating, ventilation,
fire or safety code of the City of Hornell, County of Steuben, State of
New York or United States of America, the provision that establishes
the higher standard, as determined by the Code/Health Enforcement
Officer, shall prevail.
B.
A. Foundations, porches, decks, steps and walls shall be in good condition.
Vent attachments shall be safe, durable, smoketight and capable of
withstanding the action of flue gases.
B.
Exterior balconies, porches, landings, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed, installed and
maintained to minimize the hazard of falling and unsightly appearance.
C.
All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted
by reason of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use shall
be maintained in good repair. Any signs that have become excessively
weathered, those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or those
whose supports have deteriorated so that they no longer meet the
structural requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code shall, with their supports, be removed or put into a
good state of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall
be repaired or shall, with their supports, be removed. Signs denoting a
business which is no longer on the premises shall be removed within 30
days of the date on which the business ceases to occupy the premises.
D.
All storefronts and walls exposed to public view shall be kept in a
good state of repair. Storefronts or any portion of the structure shall
not show evidence of excessive weathering or deterioration of any
nature. Unoccupied storefronts shall be maintained in a clean and neat
appearance.
E.
Any awnings or marquees and accompanying structural members shall
be maintained in a good state of repair. In the event that said awnings
or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or of a similar material and
are exposed to public view, such material shall not show evidence of
F.
§ 168-4 HANDBILLS § 168-5
167:173
§ 168-6. Open areas and parking spaces.
excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing, holes or other
deterioration. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
All vacant buildings shall be continuously guarded or sealed and kept
secure against unauthorized entry. Materials and methods with which
such buildings are sealed must meet the approval of the Code/ Health
Enforcement Officer as to color, design and building material. Owners
of such buildings shall take such steps and perform such acts as may be
required to ensure that the building and its adjoining yards remain safe
and secure and do not present a hazard to adjoining property or to the
public and that such property does not become infested with vermin or
rodents.
G.
Exterior walls, including doors and windows and the areas around
doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of the building, shall be
so maintained as to keep water from entering the building. Materials
which have been damaged or show evidence of dry rot or other
deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and refinished in a
workmanlike manner.
H.
All exposed exterior surfaces shall be maintained free of broken or
cracked glass, loose shutters, railings, aerials, peeling paint or other
conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance.
(Surfaces not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with
a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.) Wood,
masonry or other exterior materials that will naturally resist
deterioration do not have to be treated but must be maintained in a
neat, orderly, serviceable manner.
I.
Roof drains, overflow pipes, air-conditioning drains and any other
device used to channel water off or out of a building shall be maintained
in a safe and operable condition and shall not drain onto a public
sidewalk, walkway, street, alleyway or adjoining property,
J.
Lawns shall be cut and bushes, shrubs and hedges shall be trimmed
regularly during the growing season so as to avoid an unsightly
appearance.
K.
Surface or subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent the development of stagnant
ponds. Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers
or other satisfactory drainage systems shall be utilized where
necessary. No roof, surface or sanitary drainage shall create a
structural, safety or health hazard by reason of construction,
maintenance or manner of discharge.
A.
Fences and other minor construction shall be maintained in a safe and
substantial condition.
B.
§ 168-5 HORNELL CODE § 168-6
167:174
§ 168-7. Business units.
Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions. Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be
filled and necessary repairs or replacement carried out.
C.
Yards and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards
and rodent harborage and infestation. They shall be maintained in a
manner that will prevent dust or other particles from being blown
about the neighborhood. Open wells, cesspools or cisterns shall be
securely closed or barricaded from access by the public. All temporary
excavations shall be kept covered or barricaded so as to protect the
general public from injury.
D.
All land must be kept free of dead or dying trees and accumulations
of brush, shrubs, weeds, grass, stumps, roots, excessive and/or noxious
growths, garbage, refuse or debris which would either tend to start a
fire or increase the intensity of a fire already started or cause poisoning
or irritation to people or animals or cause or tend to cause or enhance
an unhealthy or dangerous or obnoxious condition on said property or
on any adjacent or neighboring property.
E.
Business units shall at all times be maintained in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter regulating open spaces, buildings or
structures and littering.
A.
No outside storage or accumulation of garbage, crates, rubbish, refuse
or debris shall be permitted at any time, and all such garbage, crates,
rubbish, refuse or debris shall be kept inside the building or buildings
on the premises or in an acceptable enclosure and shall be regularly
collected and removed from the premises.
B.
No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing in open areas, and the same shall be collected at the close
of business each day by the occupant of such unit and moved off to
the interior of the building or buildings. No one shall take a shopping
basket, cart or wagon off the premises without permission of the owner
and/or a manager.
C.
No mobile refrigeration unit shall be operated on the premises after
the closing of the business conducted thereon unless such mobile
refrigeration unit is electrically operated, except in an industrial zone.
D.
All fences and planting areas installed on the premises shall be
maintained by the owner of the property. Such maintenance shall
include but not be limited to the replacement of trees and shrubs which
may die and/or otherwise be destroyed, the maintenance and cutting of
lawns and the replacement and/or repair of fences which may become
in disrepair.
E.
§ 168-6 HANDBILLS § 168-7
167:175
§ 168-8. Infestation, storage and screening.
§ 168-9. Litter; sanitary facilities and methods; abandoned
refrigerators.
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep all walkways, public
or private, abutting said premises free from litter and trash of whatever
nature.
F.
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform to generally
accepted practice.
A.
Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be closed or
appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
B.
No materials, goods or supplies may be stored in any front yard or in an
exterior or interior side yard. Materials may be stored in a rear yard,
provided that the area used for storage is screened from neighboring
properties by a fence or hedge and that the method and manner of
storage complies with the other provisions hereof.
C.
Residential, commercial and industrial premises, whether improved or
vacant, shall be maintained free of litter; provided, however, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in appropriate private
receptacles for collection.
A.
Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse in
accordance with the provisions of applicable codes. Each owner of
any building from which garbage, rubbish, mixed refuse, ashes or
other wastes are collected shall provide refuse containers sufficient
in number to hold all collectible wastes which may accumulate.
Containers must be rodentproof and insectproof and watertight and
must be kept covered at all times. Such containers must not be kept in
a front yard or exterior side yard.
B.
No refrigerator may be discarded, abandoned or stored in a place
accessible to children without first completely removing any locking or
latching devices and all doors.
C.
Dumpsters and similar large receptacles shall be shielded from the
public view by means of appropriate landscaping, hedges, fences or
screening. This subsection shall not apply to receptacles for clothing
and the like donated to charity and temporary construction, demolition
dumpsters and similar receptacles. (This subsection will take effect
September 1, 1997.)
D.
Shopping centers, supermarkets and similar business units shall
provide permanent, attractive, decorated litter receptacles within the
E.
§ 168-7 HORNELL CODE § 168-9
167:176
§ 168-10. Responsibilities of occupants.
An occupant of premises shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter in regard to the following:
§ 168-11. Responsibilities of owners; persons considered to be
owners.
premises for public use in sufficient quantity so that a person will not
have to walk in excess of 50 feet to use any such receptacle.
Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
A.
Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities,
in that part of the premises which he occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition and providing reasonable care in the operation and
use thereof
B.
Keeping exits from the building or occupant's portion thereof clear and
unobstructed.
C.
Disposal of garbage and refuse into appropriate facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner, in accordance with any applicable provisions of the
City.
D.
Maintenance of yards, lawns and courts in a clean, sanitary and safe
condition and free from infestation by rodents or vermin, insofar as said
occupant occupies or controls said yards, lawns or any parts thereof.
E.
F. The installation and removal of required screens.
Keeping domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control, in accordance with any other regulation of the City.
G.
Elimination of all prohibited uses for that part of the premises which he
occupies, controls or has accessibility thereto.
H.
Responsibilities.
Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and shall remain responsible therefor
regardless of the fact that this chapter may also place certain
responsibilities on operators and occupants and regardless of any
agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to
which party shall assume such responsibility.
(1)
Owners and operators of building shall be responsible for the
proper installation, maintenance, condition and operation of
service facilities and for furnishing adequate heat and hot-water
supply where they have contracted to do so.
(2)
A.
§ 168-9 HANDBILLS § 168-11
167:177
§ 168-12. Inspection and enforcement.
Whenever any person or persons shall be in actual possession of or
have charge, care or control of any property within the City as executor,
administrator, trustee, guardian, operator or agent, such persons shall
be deemed and taken to be the owner or owners of said property
within the intent and meaning of this chapter and shall comply with
the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as the record owner;
and notice to any such person of any order or decision of the Code/
Health Enforcement Officer shall be deemed and taken to be good and
sufficient notice, as if such person or persons were actually the record
owner or owners of such property. In instances where an occupant is
responsible or shares responsibility with the owner for the existence of
one or more violations of this chapter, said occupant shall be deemed
and taken to be an owner within the intent and meaning of this chapter.
B.
The Code/Health Enforcement Officer and or his designee is hereby
authorized and directed to make inspections to determine compliance
with this chapter. Inspections shall be made between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and every operator
or owner shall cooperate with the Code/Health Enforcement Officer
in providing access to the premises. Whenever the Code/Health
Enforcement Officer determines that there is a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, he shall cause a written notice to be served
upon the owner or operator, which shall include:
An enumeration of conditions which violate the provisions of this
chapter.
(1)
An enumeration of the remedial action required to meet the
standards of this chapter.
(2)
A statement of a definite number of days from the date of the notice
in which the owner or operator must commence and complete such
remedial action.
(3)
(4) A statement of the penalties for noncompliance, as set forth herein.
A.
A copy of such notice shall be filed in the City Clerk's office, and such
notice shall be deemed sufficient if served upon the owner or operator
as follows:
(1) In person;
(2) By certified mail with return receipt requested; or
By posting a copy of said notice on the building or by regular postal
service, only if attempts to serve the owner or occupant by the first
two methods set out above are unsuccessful.
(3)
B.
Upon failure to comply with said notice, the Code/Health Enforcement
Officer shall issue an appearance ticket returnable in the City Court.
C.
§ 168-11 HORNELL CODE § 168-13
167:178
§ 168-13. Property under construction.
§ 168-14. Vacant and at-risk property registration and remediation.
[Added 12-18-201747]
Sect. 168.14
For purpose of enforcement of this chapter, if work is being done on the
property, either the prime or general contractor or the owner shall be
held responsible.
A.
Materials may be stored in any area of the property upon which
construction is being carried on, provided that the method of storage
and the materials stored are in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter. In no event shall such storage be permitted for a period
exceeding one year.
B.
Drainage crossing the property being developed must be maintained
during the period of development, and no materials may be stored, land
disturbed or other work done to interfere with drainage or to divert or
cause runoff of groundwater or stormwater in an unnatural fashion.
C.
The person responsible as herein shall take all necessary and
reasonable steps to ensure that there will not be an unusual or
unwarranted amount of dust and debris blown onto or across
neighboring or nearby properties.
D.
Construction roads must be oiled or kept wet or properly treated to
decrease the spread of dust and mud.
E.
A temporary cover, such as rye grass or a mulch, must be applied
on land that has been stripped of its protective vegetation during the
course of its construction to prevent the spread of dust and mud.
F.
All excavations in or near a public or private walkway or street must be
properly guarded and protected at all times by lights, flags, barricades
or other warnings sufficient in kind and amount to warn the public of
the danger of falling into the excavation.
G.
Temporary electrical service must be through electric lines that are
weather and waterproof, such lines must not cross public walkways or
highways on the ground, nor shall they be placed on the ground in areas
subject to construction equipment traffic.
H.
Grounds and buildings must be kept free of debris such as broken glass,
boards with fastenings protruding and other articles making travel
around the job site dangerous and unsafe.
I.
Legislative findings and purpose. It is the finding of the City Council
that buildings which remain vacant, with access points boarded over,
are unsightly, unsafe and have a negative effect on their surroundings.
A.
47.Editor's Note: This resolution also renumbered former § 168-14 as § 168-15.
§ 168-13 HANDBILLS § 168-14
167:179
This is particularly troublesome in residential neighborhoods and
commercial neighborhoods. Unfortunately, many buildings, once
boarded, remain that way for many years. The purpose of this section is
to establish a program for identifying and registering vacant buildings;
to determine the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings and
structures; and to speed the rehabilitation of the vacant properties.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A duly authorized representative of the
Code Enforcement Office, or its designee.
OWNER — Those shown to be the owner or owners on the records of
the City of Hornell Assessment and Taxation, those identified as the
owner or owners on a vacant building registration form, a mortgagee
in possession, a mortgagor in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, other person, firm, organization, association,
partnership, company or corporation who owns or maintains control of
the premises. Any such person shall have a joint and several obligations
for compliance with the provisions of this section.
SECURED BY OTHER THAN NORMAL MEANS — A building secured
by means other than those used in the design of the building.
UNOCCUPIED — A building which is not being used for an occupancy
authorized by the owner.
UNSECURED — A building or portion of a building which is open to
entry by unauthorized persons without the use of tools or ladders.
VACANT BUILDING — A building or portion of a building which is:
(1) Unoccupied or unsecured;
(2) Unoccupied and secured by other than normal means;
Unoccupied and an unsafe building as determined by the Codes
Office;
(3)
(4) Unoccupied and has multiple housing or building code violations;
(5) Illegally occupied;
Unoccupied for a period of time over 365 days and during which
time the enforcement officer has issued an order to correct code
violations.
(6)
B.
Vacant building registration.
The owner shall register with the Codes Department, not later
than 30 days after any building located in an area zoned for, or
abutting an area zoned for, residential or commercial use in the
City becomes a vacant building, as defined in § 168-14B, or not
later than 30 days after being notified by the City Codes Office of
(1)
C.
§ 168-14 HORNELL CODE § 168-14
167:180
the requirement to register. The Codes Office may identify vacant
buildings through its routine inspection process as well as through
notification by residents, neighborhood associations and other
community groups that a building may be eligible for inclusion on
the registry.
The registration shall be submitted on forms provided by the Codes
Office and shall include the following information supplied by the
owner:
(a) A description of the premises.
(b) The names and addresses of the owner or owners.
If the owner does not reside in Steuben County or any
adjoining county, the name and address of any third party with
whom the owner has entered into a contract or agreement for
property management.
(c)
The names and addresses of all known lienholders and all other
parties with an ownership interest in the building.
(d)
A telephone number where a responsible party can be reached
at all times during business and nonbusiness hours.
(e)
(f) A vacant building plan as described in Subsection C(3).
(2)
The owner shall submit a vacant building plan which must meet
the approval of the Codes Office. The plan, at a minimum, must
contain information from one of the following three choices for the
property:
If the building is to be demolished, a demolition plan indicating
the proposed time frame for demolition;
(a)
If the building is to remain vacant, a plan for the securing of
the building in accordance with safety standards, if applicable,
along with the procedure that will be used to maintain the
property in accordance with the City codes and ordinances,
and a statement of the reasons why the building was left
vacant.
(b)
If the building is to be returned to appropriate occupancy or
use, a rehabilitation plan for the property must be submitted to
the Codes Office. The rehabilitation plan shall not exceed 365
days, unless the Codes Office grants an extension upon receipt
of a written statement from the owner detailing reasons for
the extension. Any repairs, improvements or alterations to the
property must comply with any applicable zoning, housing,
historic preservation or building codes and must be secured
in accordance with safety standards, if applicable, during
rehabilitation.
(c)
(3)
§ 168-14 HANDBILLS § 168-14
167:181
All applicable laws and codes shall be complied with by the owner.
The owner shall notify the Codes Office of any changes in
information supplied as part of the vacant building registration
within 30 days of the change. If the plan or timetable for the vacant
building is revised in any way, the revisions must be in writing and
must meet with the approval of the Codes Office.
(4)
The owner and subsequent owners shall keep the building secured
and safe and the building and grounds properly maintained as
provided for in the City codes and ordinances.
(5)
Failure of the owner or any subsequent owners to maintain the
building and premises that result in remedial action taken by the
City shall be grounds for revocation of the approved plan and shall
be subject to any applicable penalties provided by the law.
(6)
The new owners shall register or reregister the vacant building
with the Codes Office within 30 days of any transfer of an
ownership interest in a vacant building. The new owners shall
comply with the approved plan and timetable submitted by the
previous owner until any proposed changes are submitted and
meet the approval of the Codes Office.
(7)
The Codes Office shall include in the file any property-specific
written statements from community organizations, other interested
parties or citizens regarding the history, problems, status or
blighting influence of a vacant building.
The owner of a vacant building shall pay an annual fee as set
forth in Subsection H(2) for the period the building remains
a vacant building. The fee shall be reasonably related to the
administrative costs for registering and processing the vacant
building owner registration form and for the costs of the City
in monitoring and inspecting the vacant building site.
(a)
The first-year annual fee shall be $250 and shall be paid no
later than 30 days after the building becomes vacant. If the
fee is not paid within 30 days of being due, the owner shall be
subject to prosecution as prescribed in Subsection H. If a plan
is extended beyond 365 days, subsequent annual fees shall be
paid as follows:
For the second year that the building remains vacant:
$500;
[1]
For the third year that the building remains vacant:
$1,000;
[2]
For the fourth year that the building remains vacant:
$1,500; and
[3]
(b)
(8)
§ 168-14 HORNELL CODE § 168-14
167:182
§ 168-15. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an offense punishable
by a fine not less than $50 and no more than $500 or no more than 15 days
For the fifth, and each succeeding year, that the building
remains vacant: $2,000.
[4]
The fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any building
permits, with the exception of a demolition permit. The fee
shall be prorated, and a refund may be issued if the building is
no longer deemed vacant under the provisions of this section
within 180 days of its registry.
(c)
All delinquent fees shall be paid by the owner prior to any
transfer of an ownership interest in any vacant building. If the
fees are not paid prior to any transfer, the new owner shall
pay the annual fee no later than 30 days after the transfer of
ownership, and subsequent annual fees shall be due on the
new anniversary date.
(d)
Exemptions. A building which has suffered fire damage or damage
caused by extreme weather conditions shall be exempt from the
registration requirement for a period of 90 days after the date of the
fire or extreme weather event if the property owner submits a request
for exemption, in writing, to the Codes Office. The decision to grant an
exemption is within the sole discretion of the Codes Office. This request
shall include the following information supplied by the owner:
(1) A description of the premises;
(2) The names and addresses of the owner or owners.
A statement of intent to repair and reoccupy the building in an
expedient manner or the intent to demolish the building.
(3)
D.
Inspections. The Codes Office shall inspect any premises in the City
of Hornell for the purpose of enforcing and assuring compliance with
the provisions of this section. Upon the request of the Codes Office,
an owner shall provide access to all interior portions of an unoccupied
building in order to permit a complete inspection.
E.
Vacant building fees. All fees generated by this section shall be put in a
special reserve account to be used for blight remediation.
F.
Assessment. Any and all annual fees that are unpaid for more than 90
days from their due date shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of
the assessment.
G.
Penalties for offenses. Any violation of this section shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $250 and/or 15 days in jail. Each day that a
violation exists shall be considered a separate offense.
H.
§ 168-14 HANDBILLS § 168-15
167:183
in jail. For the purposes of this chapter, each day continued existence of a
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 172
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 120.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 135.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 160.
Farmers market — See Ch. 190.
Pest control — See Ch. 222.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 240.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 252.
Storage of vehicles and parts — See Ch. 296.
Water — See Ch. 306.
§ 172-1. Offensive substances and other health nuisances.
§ 172-2. Deposits in streams.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw, deposit or leave in any
stream, creek or river or between the wall, spilling or banks of such stream,
creek or river any leaves, grass, ashes, bottles, glass, rubbish or any refuse
matter of any nature whatsoever.
§ 172-3. Slaughterhouses and killing animals.
City's right of entry; notice to abate. It shall be the duty of the
Superintendent of Public Works or such person as may be specially
authorized for that purpose by the Superintendent and such Board or
person so authorized shall have the power to enter into and upon and
examine any lot, yard, building, cellar, alley, street, sink, drain, vault or
any other place within the limits of the city, and if the same is found
damp, sunken or ill-constructed or if the same is found to contain any
filth or any offensive substance or nuisance, said Board or person shall
order the cleansing and removal of any such nuisance within 24 hours.
A.
Abatement by city; collection of expenses. In case there shall be any
nuisance existing or maintained upon any real estate in the city and
the owner or occupant of such real estate shall refuse or neglect to
comply with the directions of the Superintendent of Public Works or
person as aforesaid, the Common Council may order the same abated
by and under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, and
the Superintendent of Public Works shall report the expense thereof to
the Common Council, which shall order such expense to be assessed
upon the lot upon which such nuisance shall exist, with 5% additional
for collection. A warrant shall be attached thereto, and the amount shall
be collected in the same manner as taxes are assessed.
B.
§ 168-15 HORNELL CODE § 172-3
172:184
§ 172-4. Depositing dead animals in streams.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any dead animal in
the Canisteo River or in Crosby or Canacadea Creek or any creek in the city
or upon the banks of any such river or creek or upon the banks or in the
waters of any pond within the limits of the city.
§ 172-5. Burial of animals.
Slaughterhouses prohibited. The maintenance of slaughterhouses for
the killing of animals within the corporate limits of the city is hereby
prohibited.
A.
Killing of animals within city.
The slaughtering or killing of horses, cattle, sheep, swine or other
animals within the limits of the city is hereby prohibited, except
such animals as may be killed for humane purposes because of
injuries. The keeping of live chickens, geese and other fowl in meat
markets or in the rooms, basements or cellars beneath said meat
markets or in rooms and areaways used in connection therewith in
the city and the killing of chickens, geese and other fowl in any of
said places is hereby prohibited.
(1)
No person shall mutilate, cut up, dismember, dissect, skin or
remove the hide from any dead animal in any place within the limits
of the city, but this prohibition shall not apply to dead animals
actually kept and intended for sale as human food, provided that
the meat of said animals is wholesome and fit for food and is not
diseased.
(2)
B.
Generally. All dead animals within the city, except such as may be
actually kept and intended for sale as human food, shall be immediately
removed from the place where they shall be and transferred to and
properly buried at the city dumping grounds in accordance with the
regulations herein provided, and no dead animals shall be buried within
the corporate limits of the city without special permission of the Health
Officer first obtained in writing. This provision shall not restrict or
prohibit the right to bury any dead animal in any other place outside
the city or the shipping of a dead animal in due course of trade to points
outside the city. No animal shall be taken alive to the city dumping
grounds for the purpose of being there killed or buried until the owner
has first applied for and obtained the permit required by Subsection B.
A.
Permit required. The permit hereby provided for shall be issued by the
City Clerk upon the filing of a written application of the owner of any
such live or dead animal, which application shall be subscribed by the
owner and shall state the kind and age of the animal, the cause of death
and shall contain an agreement to convey said animal to the place of
burial specified in the permit in a sanitary manner and to cause said
animal to be at once buried at such place on the dumping ground as
B.
§ 172-3 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 172-5
172:185
§ 172-6. Scavengers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger
in the area known as the "city dump."
§ 172-7. Penalties for offenses.48
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of the
Code.
Chapter 176
HOUSING, FAIR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affirmative action — See Ch. 7.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Housing authority — See Ch. A325.
§ 176-1. Findings; declaration of policy.
The Hornell City Council hereby finds and declares that acts of prejudice,
intolerance, bigotry and discrimination which deny a person the opportunity
to sell, purchase, lease, rent or to obtain financing for the purchase or lease
of unimproved land or housing accommodations because of race, creed,
color, sex, marital status, physical disability or national origin undermines
the foundations of a free democratic community. The City Council declares
it to be the public policy of the City of Hornell to eliminate and prevent such
discrimination and to safeguard the right of every person to sell, purchase,
lease or rent or to obtain financing for the purchase or lease of unimproved
land or housing accommodations without regard to race, creed, color, sex,
marital status, physical disability or national origin. This chapter is adopted
in order to supplement the federal and state laws pertaining to fair housing.
shall be designated by the caretaker of the ground on presentation of
the permit, such animal to be covered with earth at least three feet
in depth. The permit holder will further agree that he will obey any
direction of the Health Officer in case the manner of said burial is
not satisfactory to said Officer; and in case the animal has died or
is afflicted with any contagious or infectious disease, the owner will
promptly comply with such other requirements in relation thereto as
may be exacted by the Health Officer of the city. This subsection and
the regulations herein prescribed shall not apply to animals killed or
buried by any lawful authority or by an officer acting in the discharge
of any duty prescribed by law.
48.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 172-5 HORNELL CODE § 176-2
176:186
§ 176-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 176-3. Prohibited acts.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Includes any building or structure or
portion thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied as the home, residence or sleeping
place of one or more human beings.
NATIONAL ORIGIN — Includes ancestry.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, corporations, legal representatives and successors.
A.
The singular of any term used herein shall include the plural where
appropriate.
B.
No person or agent acting on behalf of another shall:
Refuse to sell, lease or rent or otherwise deny or withhold any
unimproved land or any housing accommodation constructed or to
be constructed in the City of Hornell to any person or refuse to
negotiate for the sale, lease or rental of any unimproved land or
housing accommodation to any person by reason of the race, creed,
color, sex, marital status, physical disability or national origin of the
person that any unimproved land or housing accommodation is not
available.
(1)
Discriminate against any person because of his race, creed, color,
sex, marital status, physical disability or national origin in the
terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any
unimproved land or any housing accommodation constructed or to
be constructed.
(2)
Print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any
statement, advertisement or publication or use any form or
application for the purchase, rental or lease of any unimproved
land or any housing accommodation or make any record of inquiry
in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of any
unimproved land or any housing accommodation which expresses,
directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination
as to race, creed, color, sex, marital status, physical disability
or national origin or any intent to make any such limitation,
specification or discrimination.
(3)
A.
No person shall aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of
the acts forbidden under this chapter or attempt to do so.
B.
No person engaged in any activity to which this chapter applies shall
retaliate or discriminate against any person because such person has
C.
§ 176-2 HOUSING, FAIR § 176-3
176:187
§ 176-4. Enforcement.
filed a complaint or testified or assisted in any proceeding under this
chapter.
Within 180 days after the alleged occurrence of a prohibited act as
hereinabove defined, any person claiming to be aggrieved by another
person having engaged in one of said prohibited acts may file with
the Fair Housing Officer a verified complaint, in writing, which shall
state the name and address of the property owner, the address of
the property involved, the name and address of the person allegedly
engaged in one of the prohibited acts and a detailed statement
describing the alleged prohibited act. Upon receiving such verified
complaint, the Fair Housing Officer may elect any of the following
procedures:
Conduct an investigation into the allegations of the complaint, with
or without notice to the person alleged to have committed the
violation and/or the owner of the property.
(1)
Attempt conciliation among the parties to the end that a settlement
agreement be entered into providing for the elimination of any
prohibited act and/or affirmative action to ensure the future
compliance with the conditions and purposes of this chapter.
(2)
Assist the complainant in the preparation and submission of a
housing discrimination complaint (HUD Form 903) with the
appropriate division of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
(3)
Assist the complainant in the preparation and submission of a
complaint to the State Division of Human Rights under Article 15
of the New York Executive Law.
(4)
Assist the complainant in the preparation and filing of a complaint
or information with the City Court of the City of Hornell, New York,
charging the violation of this policy. Upon the filing of any such
complaint or information, it shall be the duty of the City Attorney
to prosecute the complaint or information in said City Court.
(5)
A.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a person who
claims to be aggrieved by an alleged occurrence of a prohibited act
may file a complaint or information with City Court without first seeking
redress through the Fair Housing Officer; provided, however, that any
such proceeding must be brought within 270 days after the alleged
violation.
B.
§ 176-3 HORNELL CODE § 176-4
176:188
Chapter 178
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Unsafe building — See Ch. 120.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 135.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 160.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
Fair housing — See Ch. 176.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 228.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 252.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Utilities — See Ch. 290.
Water — See Ch. 306.
Zoning — See Ch. 315.
§ 176-4 HOUSING, FAIR § 176-4
176:189

Part 1
Residential Premises
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 178-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known as "Housing Standards Applicable to Residential
Premises."
§ 178-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 is to provide basic and uniform standards, in
terms of performance objectives implemented by specific requirements,
governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of residential
premises and establishing reasonable safeguards for the safety, health and
welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
§ 178-3. Applicability.
§ 178-4. Conflict with other provisions; highest standard to prevail.
Scope. This Part 1 shall apply to residential premises as follows:
Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings,
buildings of mixed occupancy or accessory structures are located.
(1)
Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple dwellings, except as specifically excluded in Subsection B.
(2)
(3) Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
(4) Accessory structures accessory to residential occupancies.
A.
Nonapplicability. This Part 1 shall not apply to mobile homes and mobile
home courts or to transient-type occupancies and uses, including but
not limited to nursing and convalescent homes, hotels, motels, tourist
camps, farm labor camps, travel trailers and trailer parks and other
forms of temporary housing.
B.
The provisions of this Part 1 shall supersede local laws, ordinances,
codes or regulations to the extent that such laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part 1, provided
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
adoption and enforcement of a law, ordinance, code or regulation which
is more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those provided
in this Part 1, and such more-restrictive requirement or higher standard
shall govern during the period in which it is in effect.
A.
Where a provision of this Part 1 is found to be in conflict with a
provision of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health,
B.
§ 178-1 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-4
176:191
§ 178-5. Conformity with state standards. 49
Installations, alterations and repairs to residential premises and materials,
assemblies and equipment utilized in connection therewith shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with applicable
statutes of the State of New York and orders, rules and regulations issued
by authority thereof. Conformity of such work, materials, assemblies or
equipment with the applicable requirements of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be prima facie evidence that the
same is reasonably safe to persons and property.
§ 178-6. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the residential building and which is located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental to
the principal use or occupancy of a residential building. Such "accessory
uses" may include, among others, the following:
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations
of this Part 1 or approved by an authority designated by law or this Part 1.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade which
has more than half its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the
water supply or sewage disposal law or ordinance or a regulation
adopted pursuant thereto or other local law, ordinance, code or
regulation, the provision or requirement which is the more restrictive
or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
A. Offices for the building management.
B. Dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens and ballrooms.
C. Recreation and play rooms.
Laundries for the use of tenants and occupants and in connection with
the management and operation of a residential building.
D.
Maintenance and work shops and storage rooms for linen, bedding,
furniture, supplies and tenants' equipment and effects.
E.
Rooms or space for the incidental sale or display of merchandise to
occupants and tenants, such as newspaper, candy and cigar stands.
F.
Garages within a residential building or on the premises thereof used
primarily for the storage of passenger-type motor vehicles.
G.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 178-4 HORNELL CODE § 178-6
176:192
average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
BATHROOM — An enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which may also contain water closets, lavatories or
fixtures serving similar purposes. See the definition of "toilet room."
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
or within exterior or party walls and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing not more than one
dwelling unit occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing not more than two
dwelling units occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
EXIT — A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure to
the exterior at street or grade, including doorways, passageways, hallways,
corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes and all other elements necessary
for egress or escape.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by
one or more persons.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide
or procedure in the field of construction or related thereto recognized and
accepted as authoritative.
GRADE, FINISHED — The natural surface of the ground or the surface of
the ground after completion of any change in contour, abutting buildings or
premises.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space occupied by one or more persons for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be
"habitable space." See the definitions of "nonhabitable space," "public
space" and "exit."
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, lodging house, lodging unit or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests.
KITCHEN — A space, 60 square feet or more in floor area with a minimum
width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food.
KITCHENETTE — A space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or preparation of food.
§ 178-6 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-6
176:193
LODGING HOUSE — A multiple dwelling used primarily for the purpose of
furnishing lodging, with or without meals, for compensation.
LODGING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for lodging.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part for residential use
and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MULTIPLE DWELLING —
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — See the definition of "multiple dwelling."
MUNICIPALITY — A city, town or village.
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath-
, toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler
rooms, closets and other spaces for service and maintenance of the building
and those spaces used for access and vertical travel between stories. See
the definitions of "habitable space," "public space" and "exit."
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, the drainage system,
the vent system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes.
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a residential building for public use, such as
lobbies and lounges, reception, ball, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms,
banquet and dining rooms and their kitchens and swimming pools.
SEWAGE — Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution and which may include industrial wastes and liquids
containing chemicals.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
A. A building containing three or more dwelling units.
A building containing living, sanitary and sleeping facilities occupied by
one or two families and more than four lodgers residing with either one
of such families.
B.
A building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or twofamily
dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient paying
guests or tenants.
C.
A building with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons
used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house or for
similar uses.
D.
A building used or occupied as a convalescent, old-age or nursing home,
but not including private or public hospitals or public institutions. (See
§ 178-3B for certain multiple dwellings not within scope of this Part 1.)
E.
§ 178-6 HORNELL CODE § 178-6
176:194
TOILET ROOM — An enclosed space containing one or more water closets
which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing
fixtures. See the definition of "bathroom."
VENTILATION — The supply and removal of air to and from a space by
natural or mechanical means.
A. VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks, with or without winddriven
devices.
B.
§ 178-6 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-6
176:195

ARTICLE II
Space Requirements
§ 178-7. General requirements.
§ 178-8. Occupancy classification.
Buildings, for the purpose of this Part 1, shall be classified in respect to their
occupancies as follows:
§ 178-9. Maximum occupancy.
Buildings occupied in whole or in part as defined in this Part 1 shall
comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth concerning
occupancy, size, light and ventilation in order to provide a safe and
healthful environment.
A.
The term "accessory use" shall have a uniform meaning and shall apply
in the same manner and under the same conditions or restrictions to all
residential buildings.
B.
One- and two-family dwellings: buildings containing one or dwelling
units with fewer than four lodgers residing with a family in either one
of such dwelling units.
A.
Multiple dwellings: buildings containing one or two dwelling units with
more than four lodgers with a family in either one of such dwelling
units.
B.
C. Buildings containing three or more dwelling units.
D. Apartment houses and apartment hotels.
E. Lodging houses.
Buildings with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons
used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house or for
similar uses.
F.
G. Garden apartments.
Accessory structures: garages, carports and similar-type structures on
residential premises.
H.
In dwelling units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited
to the number determined on the basis of the floor areas of habitable
rooms, other than kitchens, as follows: one occupant per room having
a floor area of at least 80 but less than 120 square feet, two occupants
per room having floor area of at least 120 but less than 180 square feet
and three occupants per room having floor area of 180 or more square
feet.
A.
§ 178-7 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-9
176:197
§ 178-10. Prohibited uses.
§ 178-11. Habitable space.
In lodging units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the same basis as for dwelling units.
B.
In buildings occupied as clubs, dormitories or sorority or fraternity
houses and providing sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons, the maximum number of occupants so accommodated in any
habitable room shall be limited to the number determined on the basis
of the floor area, in square feet, of the room divided by 50 square feet
per occupant.
C.
It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen,
nonhabitable space or public space.
A.
It shall be prohibited in lodging houses to use for dining purposes any
communal kitchen containing less than 100 square feet of floor area or
any nonhabitable space or public space other than dining space.
B.
C. It shall be prohibited to prepare or eat meals in lodging units.
D. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as habitable space.
Size.
Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet
six inches over 50% of the floor area; and the floor area where
the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered in
computing floor area.
(1)
A dwelling unit shall contain at least one habitable room having a
minimum of 150 square feet of floor area and a minimum horizontal
dimension of 10 feet.
(2)
Kitchens shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of floor area, and
other habitable spaces shall contain not less than 80 square feet of
floor area and shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of seven
feet.
(3)
Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooking
space or foyer, shall be deemed to be part of a habitable room. The
area of the opening in the dividing partition between the alcove and
the room shall be at least 80% of the wall area of such partition,
measured on the alcove side, but not less than 40 square feet.
The depth of such alcove shall not exceed half its width. The floor
area of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of the room in
determining light and ventilation requirements for the room. An
alcove with an area of 60 square feet or more but less than the
required area of a habitable room shall be separately lighted and
ventilated as required for habitable space.
(4)
A.
§ 178-9 HORNELL CODE § 178-11
176:198
§ 178-12. Public space.
Basements. Basements shall not be deemed habitable space where
required windows are located only on one wall and the depth of the
basement space exceeds four times it clear height.
B.
Light and ventilation.
Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one
or more windows, skylights or transparent or translucent panels,
or any combination thereof, that face directly on legal open spaces
at least six inches above the adjoining finished grade or are above
a roof. The amount of light shall be equivalent to that transmitted
through clear glass equal in area to 10% of the floor area of the
habitable space.
(1)
(2) Habitable space shall be provided with artificial light.
Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that
face legal open spaces above the adjoining finished grade or above
a roof or through openable parts of skylights, provided that the
total clear ventilation area is equal to not less than 5% of the total
floor area of each habitable space.
(3)
Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation
in addition to natural ventilation.
(4)
C.
Miscellaneous requirements.
Dwelling units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the dwelling unit.
(1)
Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separated from each
other and from other spaces outside the sleeping rooms to provide
privacy.
(2)
Lodging units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the lodging units.
(3)
A communal kitchen or dining room in a lodging house shall be
accessible to the occupants sharing such kitchen or dining room
without going through a dwelling unit or lodging unit of another
occupant.
(4)
D.
Height. Public space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six
inches measured from finished floor to finished ceiling.
A.
Light and ventilation.
(1) Public spaces shall be provided with artificial light.
In public stairs, stairways and passageways, artificial light shall be
electric lighting available at all times so as to afford safe passage
(2)
B.
§ 178-11 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-12
176:199
§ 178-13. Nonhabitable space.
for occupants and users. Such lighting shall conform to the
following:
A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the
distance between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that
no wall is more than 15 feet distant from a fixture.
(a)
Incandescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/4 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps with a total of not less than 25 watts.
(b)
Fluorescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/10 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps of a total of not less than 15 watts.
(c)
Where, under these formulas, the calculated wattage does not
correspond to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall
be used.
(d)
Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation
conforming to the requirements for habitable space or with
mechanical ventilation.
(3)
Height. Nonhabitable space, except crawl spaces and attics, in multiple
dwellings shall have a minimum height of seven feet measured from
floor to ceiling.
A.
Toilet rooms and bathrooms.
Toilet rooms and bathrooms in one- and two-family dwellings shall
have provisions for privacy.
(1)
Toilet rooms and bathrooms for dwelling units in multiple dwellings
shall be located within the dwelling units and shall be accessible
from any sleeping room without passing through any other sleeping
room.
(2)
Unless located within dwelling units or directly connected with
sleeping rooms, toilet rooms and bathrooms in multiple dwellings
shall be provided in each story containing habitable space and shall
be accessible thereto.
(3)
Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings shall be in
separate rooms for each sex where there are five or more
employees, shall be readily accessible to such employees and shall
not open directly into any public kitchen or other public space used
for the cooking or preparation of food.
(4)
In one- and two-family dwellings, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
be provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
(5)
B.
§ 178-12 HORNELL CODE § 178-13
176:200
§ 178-14. Stairs and railings.
§ 178-15. Exits.
In multiple dwellings, floors of bathrooms, toilet rooms and similar
spaces shall be waterproof. Such waterproofing shall extend six
inches or more above floors except at doors so that floors can be
flushed or washed without leaking.
(6)
Light and ventilation.
Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
artificial light appropriate for the use of such rooms.
(1)
Laundry rooms, furnace rooms and similar nonhabitable space
shall be provided with artificial light appropriate for the intended
use of such rooms.
(2)
Stairs shall be provided with artificial light to allow safe ascent or
descent.
(3)
Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
ventilation in accordance with either of the following:
Natural ventilation as required for habitable space, except that
such openable areas shall be not less than 1 1/2 square feet for
bathrooms or toilet rooms and not less than three square feet
for kitchenettes; or
(a)
Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 25 cubic feet
per minute for bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than
100 cubic feet per minute for kitchenettes.
(b)
(4)
Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central heat-producing,
air-conditioning and other equipment shall be ventilated to the
outer air, and air from these spaces shall not be recirculated to
other parts of the building.
(5)
Ventilation shall be provided in unheated attics, spaces below flat
roofs and crawl spaces. The location and net areas of ventilation
openings shall be such as to minimize deterioration of structural
members from condensation or other causes in conformity with
generally accepted standards.
(6)
C.
Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in
conformity with generally accepted standards so as to serve the
occupants.
A.
Railings shall be provided on open portions of stairs, balconies,
landings and stairwells.
B.
Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the
interior of the building to the exterior at street or grade level.
A.
§ 178-13 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-15
176:201
Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of emergency.
B.
In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to a primary exit from the
building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one
or more exit openings for emergency use.
C.
D. In multiple dwellings, approved exits shall be provided.
§ 178-15 HORNELL CODE § 178-15
176:202
ARTICLE III
Structural Requirements
§ 178-16. General requirements.
§ 178-17. Exterior protection.
§ 178-18. Interior protection.
Sustention of weight and loads. Buildings and parts thereof shall be
maintained so as to be capable of sustaining safely their own weight
and the loads to which they may be subject.
A.
Transmittal of loads to soil. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads
are transmitted to the soil without undue differential settlement, unsafe
deformation or movement of the building or of any structural part.
B.
Structural members. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection
is provided for all structural members which may become structurally
unsound if left unprotected. Causes of such deterioration include,
among others, action of freezing and thawing, dampness, corrosion,
wetting and drying and termites and other destructive insects.
C.
Buildings on water-bearing soil. Buildings built in soil which is waterbearing
at any season of the year shall be maintained so that groundand
surface water will not penetrate into habitable spaces, basements
and cellars.
D.
Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be maintained so as to be
structurally sound and to prevent entrance or moisture, termites and
vermin. Such protection shall consist of shoring, where necessary,
subsoil drains at footings, the grouting of masonry cracks, the
waterproofing of walls and joists and other suitable means.
A.
Exterior walls. Exterior walls and wall components shall be maintained
so as to prevent deterioration due to the elements and destructive
insects. Such maintenance shall consist of the painting, installation
or repair of walls, copings and flashings, the waterproofing of joints,
waterproof coatings, installation or repair of termite shields, the poison
treatment of soil or other suitable means.
B.
Roofing. Roofing shall be maintained in watertight condition so as
to prevent leakage into the building. Such maintenance shall consist
of repairs of roofing, flashings, waterproof coatings or other suitable
means.
C.
Crawl spaces. Crawl spaces shall be maintained free of moisture, and
the flow of air from such spaces into walls above shall be effectively
barred so as to prevent deterioration of structural members. Such
provisions shall consist of the maintenance of openings in foundation
walls to provide adequate circulation of air in the crawl space, covering
the ground in the crawl space with a moisture barrier, the installation
A.
§ 178-16 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-18
176:203
of drains outside the structure if the crawl space is below surrounding
grade, blocking openings in stud walls to prevent the flow of air and
moisture into walls, frequent destruction of termite tubes from the
soil to wood floor members above, poison treatment of soil and other
suitable means.
Structural members. Structural members shall be maintained so as
to be structurally sound. Such protection shall consist of shoring,
reinforcement or repair, where necessary, frequent destruction of
termite tubes or other appropriate means.
B.
Chimneys and flues. Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be
structurally sound and to prevent leakage of gases into the structure.
Such maintenance shall consist of clearing flue stoppages, sealing open
joints, repairing masonry where necessary and other suitable means.
C.
Ceilings and walls. Ceilings and walls shall be maintained so that
parts which become loose or defective do not constitute a hazard to
occupants. Such maintenance shall consist of removing and replacing
loose or defective sections.
D.
Toilet rooms; bathroom floors. Toilet rooms and bathroom floors shall
be maintained so as to prevent leakage of water through the floor
under normal conditions of use and floor washing and the resultant
deterioration or defects in structural members and ceilings below.
Maintenance shall consist of repairs which effectively provide the
moisture and waterproof qualities required for the particular floor.
E.
§ 178-18 HORNELL CODE § 178-18
176:204
ARTICLE IV
Firesafety Requirements
§ 178-19. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
It shall be prohibited:
§ 178-20. Prevention of fire spread.
§ 178-21. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings and interior trim
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or objectionable gases.
§ 178-22. Fireplaces.
To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in approved
locations, any highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints,
volatile oils, cleaning fluids and similar materials, or any combustible
refuse liable to spontaneous combustion, such as wastepaper, boxes,
rags or similar materials.
A.
To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways
or passageways, at doors or windows or in any other locations where,
in the event of fire, such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or
interfere with fire-fighting operations.
B.
Maintenance of walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings shall be
maintained free from cracks and openings which would permit flame or
excessive heat to enter the concealed space.
A.
Separation of space in buildings of mixed occupancy. In buildings of
mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be separated from
residential space by approved fire separations which will retard the
spread of fire.
B.
Garages. Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be
separated from other spaces in the building by approved fire
separations which will retard the spread of fire and prevent flammable
or toxic vapors originating within the garage from being transmitted to
other parts of the building.
C.
Installation. Fireplaces and similar construction used or intended to
be used for burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved
chimneys and shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible
material and structural members shall not be heated to unsafe
temperatures.
A.
§ 178-19 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-22
176:205
Hearths and linings. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces
exposed directly to flame shall be of materials that will not melt,
disintegrate, spall or shatter at high temperatures.
B.
Wooden mantels and trim. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall
be placed and attached so that they cannot be heated to unsafe
temperatures or ignited by sparks or embers from the fire.
C.
§ 178-22 HORNELL CODE § 178-22
176:206
ARTICLE V
Equipment Requirements
§ 178-23. General requirements.
§ 178-24. Plumbing.
Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire-protection and radiation-production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical
additions, installations or systems for the use of the building shall be
installed, located and maintained so that, under normal conditions of
use, such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or
welfare, a danger because of structural defects or a source of ignition
or a radiation hazard and will not create excessive noise or otherwise
become a nuisance. Equipment and systems include but are not limited
to apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangers, pipe covering,
wiring, fittings and materials used as part of or in connection with such
installations.
A.
Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
B.
Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
C.
General requirements.
Plumbing systems shall be maintained in a sanitary and serviceable
condition.
(1)
Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken
structural members nor cause damage or deterioration to any part
of the building through fixture usage.
(2)
A.
Water supply.
Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times in residential buildings. The domestic water supply system
of the building shall be connected to such approved source and
shall not be subject to contamination. When supplied from a public
source, the potable water supply system shall not be connected to
private or unsafe water supplies.
(1)
Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices
and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate
to enable them to function satisfactorily and without undue noise
under all normal conditions of use.
(2)
Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that
water used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be
(3)
B.
§ 178-23 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-24
176:207
reintroduced into the domestic water supply system nor be
distributed through such equipment to plumbing fixtures.
Hot-water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressure and excessive
temperatures.
(4)
Sewage drainage system.
Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system,
and such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an
adequate and approved system of sewage disposal.
(1)
Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance.
(2)
Sewage or other waste which may be deleterious to surface or
subsurface waters shall not be discharged into the ground or into
a waterway unless it has first been rendered harmless through
subjection to treatment in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
(3)
Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
(4)
Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system
shall be equipped with a water seal trap.
(5)
Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the
pipes may be readily cleaned.
(6)
The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be
maintained so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes
in order that siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss
of trap seal under ordinary conditions of use.
(7)
Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and
maintained so as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost
closure, the return of foul air to the building or the creation of a
nuisance to adjacent premises.
(8)
Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials shall be
equipped with air breaks adequate to prevent contamination of
such contents from any possible backup of sewage through the
direct or indirect drainage piping.
(9)
C.
D. Storm drainage.
§ 178-24 HORNELL CODE § 178-24
176:208
Roofs and paved areas, including yards and courts, shall be
drained. Storm drainage shall be conveyed to an adequate and
approved system of stormwater disposal where available. Storm
drains shall be discharged in such manner that water will not flow
onto sidewalks.
(1)
Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
(2)
Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of
noncombustible materials, except that wood leaders and gutters
may be used for buildings not more than three stories high.
(3)
Plumbing facilities.
Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing
systems and designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures
and to furnish cold water to every water closet and urinal and hot
and cold water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub and shower required
therein. In multiple dwellings, hot water shall be furnished at a
130° F. to 140° F. from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(1)
There shall be provided within each dwelling unit plumbing fixtures
consisting of at least one kitchen sink, one water closet, one
bathtub or shower and one lavatory.
(2)
Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six
sleeping rooms or fraction thereof, there shall be provided
plumbing fixtures consisting of at least one water closet, one
bathtub or shower and one lavatory.
(3)
Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as a dormitory, for each multiple of 15 persons or fraction
thereof so accommodated, there shall be provided and located
adjacent thereto plumbing fixtures consisting of at least one water
closet, one bathtub or shower and one lavatory.
(4)
Urinals may be substituted in men's toilet rooms for not more than
1/3 of the required number of water closets.
(5)
Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited in residential
premises.
(6)
E.
Plumbing fixtures.
Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth, nonabsorbent material
and shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
(1)
Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible
for their intended use.
(2)
F.
§ 178-24 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-24
176:209
§ 178-25. Fuel gas.
Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted and ventilated.
(3)
Swimming pools.
Water supply used for filling or for the cleaning of the pool shall be
clean. Water supply shall be protected against potential pollution
from all sources, including cross-connection and backflow.
(1)
Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and
adequately drained. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding
the swimming pool and arranged so that water from such areas will
drain without entering the pool.
(2)
Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where required, shall
be adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of water during each
period the pool is in use. Equipment containing gases or
disinfectants capable of giving off irritating, toxic or flammable
fumes shall be located in ventilated rooms.
(3)
The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt,
sand or other foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
(4)
G.
Water supply tanks.
Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
watertight, verminproof, rodentproof, resistant to corrosion and
capable of withstanding the working pressures under normal
operation.
(1)
(2) Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment
or structures other than for tank use, except where specifically
designed for such other use.
(3)
Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in proper working condition.
(4)
Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to
furnish water in sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
(5)
H.
General requirements.
Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
(1)
Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning
appliances connected thereto.
(2)
A.
§ 178-24 HORNELL CODE § 178-25
176:210
§ 178-26. Heating.
Shutoff valves.
Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply, and such means shall be maintained in
good operating condition.
(1)
An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in
the piping in close proximity to and ahead of every outlet for gas
appliance.
(2)
B.
Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains. Gas services, gas
meters and gas-pressure regulators shall be located so that they are
protected from damage.
C.
Gas refrigerators and ranges. Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be
installed with clearance for ventilation and shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
D.
High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure
in excess of one pound per square inch gauge shall be provided with a
device to reduce such pressure to not more than 1/2 pound per square
inch gauge prior to entering the meter, except where such service
supplies equipment using gas at high pressures.
E.
Liquefied petroleum gas.
Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
(1)
Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing
an open flame or an open electrical coil.
(2)
Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off
the flow of gas to equipment.
(3)
Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or to the surrounding property.
(4)
Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates
at a safe location.
(5)
Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building and shall
be maintained in good operating condition.
(6)
F.
General requirements.
Residential buildings intended for occupancy from September 15
to May 31 of the following year shall be provided with equipment
designed to maintain a temperature of not less than 70° F. at
(1)
A.
§ 178-25 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-26
176:211
a distance of three feet and more from exterior walls and at a
level of five feet above the floor in habitable spaces, kitchenettes,
bathrooms and toilet rooms. The capability of the heating
equipment to maintain such indoor temperature shall be based on
the average of the recorded annual minimum outside temperatures
for the locality. [Amended 11-18-2013]
In multiple dwellings, adequate heat shall be provided to maintain
the indoor temperature in habitable spaces, kitchenettes,
bathrooms and toilet rooms at 70° F. from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
when the outside temperature falls below 55° F.
(2)
Smoke control. Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment shall be
installed and maintained so that the emission or discharge into the
atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other products of
combustion will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health,
comfort, safety or property of any person.
B.
Warm air heating. Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for
heating shall conform to the requirements of such equipment used for
ventilating purposes.
C.
Prohibited locations for heat-producing equipment. Fuel-burning water
heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms or toilet
rooms.
D.
Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. The fuel supply connection to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
E.
Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing equipment is
installed on or adjacent to combustible materials, the location,
insulation clearance and control of the equipment shall be such that the
temperature on the surface of the combustible materials will not exceed
a safe temperature.
F.
Air supply.
Direct-fired heat-producing equipment and the enclosure in which
it is located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment
and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation
of heat.
(1)
Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior
or by means of fixed openings to interior spaces which open to the
exterior.
(2)
G.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
§ 178-26 HORNELL CODE § 178-26
176:212
§ 178-27. Chimneys, flues and gas vents.
Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
(1)
Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms
normally kept closed shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent.
(2)
Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent when the discharge of products of combustion into the
space where the equipment is installed would be a hazard.
(3)
Safety devices.
Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or
temperatures shall be provided with means to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(1)
Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the
fuel supply shall be cut off.
(a)
When a predetermined temperature or pressure is exceeded,
the input of additional heat shall be prevented or reduced to a
safe rate.
(b)
When the water level in a steam boiler drops below a
predetermined level, the fuel supply shall be cut off.
(c)
When failure or interruption of the pilot light or the main
burner of liquefied petroleum gas equipment occurs, the fuel
supply to each pilot light and main burner shall be cut off.
(d)
(2)
I.
Heating of garages. Fuel-burning equipment for garages servicing
multiple dwellings shall be located in heater rooms, except that
equipment burning gas or liquid fuel located in the vehicle storage
space shall be permitted in stories at or above grade where elevated so
as not to be exposed to the possible accumulation of flammable gases.
J.
General requirements.
Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed
and maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
noncombustible and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling.
(1)
Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air.
(2)
A.
§ 178-26 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-27
176:213
§ 178-28. Incinerators.
Masonry chimneys, except approved prefabricated chimneys, shall
have noncombustible foundations.
(3)
Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue
gas without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling at the
temperature to which they will be subjected.
(4)
Openings for smoke pipes or gas vent connections shall be
provided with means for easy connection without restriction of the
flue.
(5)
No flue shall have smoke pipe or gas vent connections in more than
one story of a building.
(6)
Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different
tenancies shall not be connected to the same flue.
(7)
Firesafety. Chimneys, flues and gas vents shall be installed and
maintained so that, under conditions of use, the temperature of any
combustible material adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in
contact therewith does not exceed a safe temperature.
B.
Spark arresters. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a
chimney or flue which may emit sparks shall be provided with a spark
arrester of noncombustible construction. Spark arrestors shall have
sufficient total clear area to permit unrestricted passage of flue gases.
Openings in spark arresters shall be of such size as to prevent passage
of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
C.
General requirements.
(1) Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
Flue-fed incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning
auxiliary fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion
of refuse.
(2)
A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrester.
(3)
Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable noncombustible
chimney, smokestack or flue.
(4)
Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
(5)
A.
Service openings.
Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
(1)
B.
§ 178-27 HORNELL CODE § 178-28
176:214
§ 178-29. Electrical.
Durable signs with plainly legible letters prohibiting the disposal of
highly flammable substances in incinerators shall be provided near
service openings.
(2)
General requirements.
Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity
with generally accepted standards and maintained so as not to be
a potential source of ignition of combustible material or a potential
source of electrical hazard.
(1)
Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(2)
Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations
or where exposed to explosive or flammable gases or to excessive
temperatures shall be of a type approved for the purpose and
location.
(3)
Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
excessive current by properly rated overcurrent devices.
(4)
Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the
danger of high voltages from lightning or other causes.
(5)
Electrical equipment which, in ordinary operation, produces arcs
or sparks shall be enclosed unless separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
(6)
Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
(7)
A.
Artificial lighting.
Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity,
and lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide
adequate illumination for the intended use of each space. Electric
wiring systems shall be connected to an adequate source of supply.
(1)
There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in
each dwelling unit near the point of entrance to such unit.
(2)
B.
Exit and directional signs.
Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and
directional signs visible from the approach to the exits, except that
such signs shall not be required in those portions of a building
which contain dwelling units only or in which exits from sleeping
rooms are directly to the outside.
(1)
C.
§ 178-28 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-29
176:215
§ 178-30. Cooking and refrigeration.
§ 178-31. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation.
Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
(2)
Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the
word EXIT for exit signs and the words TO EXIT, with a suitable
pointer or arrow indicating the direction of exit, for directional
signs. Letters for signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible
and at least six inches high, except that, for internally illuminated
signs, the height of such letters shall be at least 4 1/2 inches high.
(3)
Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or
internally by electric lights and shall be kept illuminated at all
times when the building is occupied.
(4)
General requirements.
Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
(1)
Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
(2)
Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently fastened and
connected in place. The gas supply connection to such equipment
shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
(3)
Solid-fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately
vented.
(4)
A.
Communal cooking and dining facilities. Communal kitchens and dining
rooms shall comply with the following requirements:
Communal kitchens shall contain at least one kitchen sink, at least
one kitchen gas or electric stove equipped with an oven and not
less than four top burners and at least one electric or gas-type
refrigerator with adequate food storage capacity but in no case
less than eight cubic feet nominal size. Dining space and eating
facilities where provided in the kitchen area shall comply with the
requirements of communal dining rooms.
(1)
Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and
two linear feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in a
dining room at any particular time.
(2)
B.
One- and two-family dwellings.
Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
(1)
A.
§ 178-29 HORNELL CODE § 178-31
176:216
Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately
firestopped.
(2)
Multiple dwellings.
Refrigerants.
Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in
multiple dwellings.
(a)
Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic
shall not be used for air-conditioning purposes.
(b)
(1)
Ventilating systems.
Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that
the rapid spread of heat, flame or smoke through the system
will be prevented and so that under conditions of use, the
temperature of any combustible material adjacent thereto or in
contact therewith will not exceed a safe temperature.
(a)
Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall
not be used as plenum chambers.
(b)
Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately
firestopped.
(c)
Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of
noncombustible material.
(d)
Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute
a fire or smoke hazard.
(e)
Ducts passing through or located within combustible
construction shall be separated from such construction by a
clearance of at least 1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating
material at least 1/4 inch thick.
(f)
Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or
shall be quality controlled.
(g)
Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space whose contents
may emit odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to
other occupied spaces within the building.
(h)
(2)
Air intake and exhaust openings.
Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance and so
as to prevent the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes or foreign
matter being drawn into the system.
(a)
Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings
for incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required
(b)
(3)
B.
§ 178-31 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-31
176:217
§ 178-32. Fuel oil.
circulation. Intake openings shall provide air from an
uncontaminated source.
Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces
that also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be
provided fixed intake openings from the exterior to supply
sufficient air so that the fuel-burning equipment is not
adversely affected.
(c)
Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will
not create a nuisance.
(d)
Ventilation requirements.
Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors or odors may
accumulate and become a potential source of hazard or
nuisance shall be provided with adequate means of ventilation
to remove such excess.
(a)
Public spaces shall be provided with the means for obtaining
air supply for the maximum number of persons for which such
spaces are designed.
(b)
(4)
Safety controls.
Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the
operations of all central fan equipment. Such controls shall
be conspicuously identified and in readily accessible locations
outside the fan room.
(a)
Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly
space or more than one fire area or more than one story of
a building shall be provided with controls arranged so that,
under an abnormal rise in temperature of the air in the system,
the fans causing normal circulation shall stop and require
manual restart.
(b)
Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be
provided with an emergency switch conveniently located and
with a durable sign giving instructions for shutting down the
system in case of fire.
(c)
(5)
General requirements. Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed
by means of fixed liquid-tight equipment.
A.
Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to
the premises served or the surrounding property.
(2)
B.
§ 178-31 HORNELL CODE § 178-32
176:218
§ 178-33. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
§ 178-34. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators in multiple
dwellings.
Piping.
Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote control to stop the flow of oil during fire or
other emergency.
(1)
The filling, emptying and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside of buildings
at a safe distance from building openings.
(2)
C.
Fire alarm systems. Required fire alarm systems shall be maintained in
proper operating condition at all times.
A.
Sprinkler equipment.
Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause
minimum interference to the effective discharge of water.
(1)
Valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in the
open position.
(2)
(3) Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
B.
Standpipe systems.
Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
(1)
(2) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
Hoses shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry and free
of deterioration.
(3)
C.
Portable extinguishers.
Each oil burner for boilers, furnaces or central hot-water heaters
shall be provided with an approved hand fire extinguisher or two
rounded-bottom pails filled with sand.
(1)
Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their
designated locations and in a condition which will permit efficient
operation without delay.
(2)
D.
Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained so as to be
free from physical and fire hazards.
A.
§ 178-32 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-34
176:219
Elevator and power-operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall
be indicated.
B.
Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
C.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall
not be used for the storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the
maintenance of the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not
be kept in such rooms.
E.
No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative except where necessary during
tests, inspections or maintenance.
F.
§ 178-34 HORNELL CODE § 178-34
176:220
ARTICLE VI
Property Maintenance Requirements
§ 178-35. General requirement.
Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions
of this Part 1 so as to assure the desirable residential character of the
property.
§ 178-36. Open areas.
§ 178-37. Buildings and structures.
§ 178-38. Infestation and screening.
Drainage. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained
to protect buildings and structures and to prevent the development
of stagnant ponds. Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets,
stormwater sewers, approved combined storm and sanitary sewers or
other satisfactory drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed
necessary.
A.
Fences and other minor constructions. Fences and other minor
constructions shall be maintained in a safe and substantial condition.
B.
Steps, walks, driveways, etc. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces
and similar paved areas shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage
under normal use and weather conditions.
C.
Yards and courts. Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of
physical hazards.
D.
Elimination of undergrowth, etc. Heavy undergrowths and
accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to
health shall be eliminated.
E.
Exterior surfaces. Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures
that are not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically
treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
A.
Floors, walls, etc. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of
residential buildings shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
B.
Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to
be free of conditions detrimental to safety or health.
C.
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform to generally
accepted practice.
A.
§ 178-35 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-38
176:221
§ 178-39. Garbage and refuse.
§ 178-40. Domestic animals and pets.
Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in an appropriate manner and shall
not be permitted to run at large.
Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be appropriately
screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
B.
From May 1 to October 1, entrances to residential buildings shall be
provided with self-closing-type devices or screens, and windows and
other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately screened.
Screens shall not be required in rooms located sufficiently high in the
upper stories of multiple dwellings as to be free of mosquitoes, flies and
other flying insects.
C.
Generally. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for
the collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
A.
Accumulations prohibited in multiple dwellings. In multiple dwellings,
it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate garbage or refuse in public
halls and stairways.
B.
§ 178-38 HORNELL CODE § 178-40
176:222
Part 2
Mobile Homes And Mobile Home Courts
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
§ 178-41. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known as "Housing Standards Applicable to Mobile
Homes and Mobile Home Courts."
§ 178-42. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to provide basic and uniform standards, in
terms of performance objectives implemented by specific requirements,
governing the construction, occupancy and maintenance of mobile homes
and mobile home courts and establishing reasonable safeguards for the
safety, health and welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
§ 178-43. Applicability.
This Part 2 shall apply to mobile homes used or intended to be used for
year-round dwelling accommodations in fixed locations and to mobile home
courts.
§ 178-44. Conflict with other provisions; highest standard to
prevail.
§ 178-45. Conformity with state standards.
The provisions of this Part 2 shall supersede local laws, ordinances,
codes or regulations to the extent that such laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part 2, provided
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
adoption and enforcement of a law, ordinance or regulation which is
more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those provided in
this Part 2, and such more-restrictive requirement or higher standard
shall govern during the period in which it is in effect.
A.
In a case where a provision of this Part 2 is found to be in conflict with a
provision of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health,
water supply or sewage disposal law or ordinance or a regulation
adopted pursuant thereto or other local law, ordinance, code or
regulation, the provision or requirement which is the more restrictive
or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
B.
Installations, alterations and repairs to mobile homes and mobile home
courts and the materials, assemblies and equipment utilized in
connection therewith shall be reasonably safe to persons and property
and shall comply with applicable statutes of the State of New York and
orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof.
A.
§ 178-41 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-45
176:223
§ 178-46. Permit required.
No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home court which falls within
the purview of Chapter VII of the New York State Sanitary Code without
first having obtained a permit from the state, county or city health
department office having jurisdiction.
§ 178-47. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this Part 2:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the mobile home and which is attached thereto or located on the
same mobile home lot. "Accessory structures" include but are not limited
to portable, demountable or permanent enclosures, shade structures and
carports.
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations
of this Part 2 or approved by an authority designated by law or this Part 2.
COMMUNITY AREA — An area or space within a mobile home court,
including fences, walls and other minor constructions, which is designed for
the joint use of occupants or restricted to nonresidential use.
COMMUNITY STRUCTURE — A structure within a mobile home court
providing laundry, toilet, recreation, parking or other common facilities,
including management offices and storage buildings.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide
or procedure in the field of construction of mobile homes or mobile home
courts or related thereto, recognized and accepted as authoritative.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking
purposes, excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, storage spaces
and enclosures for equipment installations.
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT — Mobile home electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning systems and equipment
used for living purposes, including cooking and refrigeration equipment.
MOBILE HOME — A movable living unit equipped with a chassis and
provided with the following mechanical systems and equipment: plumbing,
heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration. See "trailer."
Except as otherwise provided in this Part 2, conformity of installations,
alterations and repairs of mobile home court buildings and their
accessory structures and of materials, assemblies and equipment
utilized in connection with such buildings and structures to the
applicable requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code shall be prima facie evidence that such work,
material, assembly or equipment is reasonably safe to persons and
property. 50
B.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 178-45 HORNELL CODE § 178-47
176:224
MOBILE HOME COURT — A parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A designated site within a mobile home court for
the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual mobile home lot which
has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home.
PATIO — A paved outdoor living space designed to supplement the mobile
home living area.
STORAGE LOCKER — An enclosed space designed to provide auxiliary
general storage space for an individual mobile home.
TRAILER (TRAVEL OR VACATION) — A movable living unit equipped with a
chassis but lacking any of the following mechanical systems and equipment:
plumbing, heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration. See "mobile home."
§ 178-47 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-47
176:225

ARTICLE VIII
Mobile Homes
§ 178-48. General requirements.
§ 178-49. Design and construction.
Mobile homes shall be structurally sound, effectively insulated and capable
of sustaining designed dynamic loading.
Mobile home design and construction shall conform to generally
accepted standards of the mobile home industry.
A.
Materials, assemblies and equipment shall conform to generally
accepted standards with respect to strength, durability, corrosion and
fire resistance and other qualities recognized under such standards.
B.
Habitable and nonhabitable space shall be arranged, located, lighted
and ventilated so as to be appropriate for the intended use.
C.
Mechanical systems and equipment shall be designed, installed and
located so that, under normal conditions of use, such systems and
equipment shall be capable of functioning safely and efficiently without
being forced to operate beyond the designed capacity.
D.
Equipment requiring operation, inspection or maintenance shall be
located so that easy access to it is provided.
E.
Plumbing, heating and electrical systems shall be properly connected
to approved sources of supply when a mobile home is in a fixed location
and occupied for living purposes.
F.
Mobile home units, including mechanical systems and equipment, shall
be maintained and operated so as to be free of conditions conducive to
personal injury or detrimental to health or welfare.
G.
Body and body framing.
Body frames shall be designed and constructed as complete units.
Wall and floor surfaces shall be firmly attached to body framing
members. Doors and windows shall be securely framed in place.
Framing and exterior skin shall be surface treated or painted to
prevent deterioration.
(1)
Roofs shall be pitched for proper drainage and shall be
weathertight. Roof decks shall be of metal or noncombustible
materials.
(2)
Wood body framing shall be of seasoned lumber and shall provide
adequate support and rigidity. Members shall be joined so as to
ensure permanent attachment to each other.
(3)
A.
§ 178-48 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-49
176:227
§ 178-50. Space requirements.
Metal body framing shall be of structural formed sections riveted,
bolted or welded together. Where different metals are joined,
precaution shall be taken to prevent electrolytic action.
(4)
Insulation of floors, roof and exterior walls shall consist of
noncombustible materials.
(5)
Ventilation shall be provided to minimize deterioration of structural
members from condensation or other causes.
(6)
Chassis.
The chassis shall extend substantially the length of the body and
shall be capable of supporting the live and dead loads to which
subjected.
(1)
A tongue and drawbar shall be secured to the chassis and shall be
capable of supporting the weight of the forward end of the mobile
home. If designed to support gas cylinders, the tongue shall be of
sufficient strength and shall permit secure attachment.
(2)
A hitch shall be securely attached to the tongue so as to become an
integral part of the tongue.
(3)
Axles, spring assemblies and wheels shall be capable of supporting
the calculated loads.
(4)
B.
Placement. Placement of a mobile home on a mobile home stand by
jacks or supports shall be such as to ensure the retention of the mobile
home in a fixed position.
C.
Maximum occupancy. The maximum number of occupants of a mobile
home shall be limited to the number determined on the basis of the
square feet of floor area of habitable space, exclusive of habitable space
used for cooking purposes, in accordance with the following:
Number of Occupants
Required Floor Area
(square feet)
1 or 2 150
3 250
Each occupant thereafter 80 additional
A.
Height of habitable space. Habitable space shall have a minimum
ceiling height of seven feet over 50% of the floor area; and the floor
area where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be
considered in computing gross floor area.
B.
§ 178-49 HORNELL CODE § 178-50
176:228
§ 178-51. Height and ventilation.
§ 178-52. Mechanical systems and equipment.
Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have
provisions for privacy and shall be provided with floors of moistureresistant
material.
C.
Prohibited uses. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and kitchenettes
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
D.
Exits. A mobile home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit
and an emergency exit located remote from the primary exit.
E.
Habitable space. A mobile home shall be provided with natural light
and ventilation adequate for the intended use of each habitable space
in accordance with the following:
The window area shall equal at least 10% of the floor area of each
habitable space.
(1)
Openable area of windows and other openings used for natural
ventilation of each habitable space shall equal at least 45% of the
required window area, or mechanical ventilation shall be provided
as set forth in § 178-52B(16).
(2)
A.
Nonhabitable space. A mobile home shall be provided with light and
ventilation adequate for the intended use of nonhabitable space in
accordance with the following:
Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
light of sufficient intensity and so distributed as to permit the
maintenance of sanitary conditions and the safe use of the space
and the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
(1)
Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
natural ventilation consisting of openable areas of not less than
1 1/2 square feet for bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than
three square feet for kitchenettes, or mechanical ventilation shall
be provided as set forth in § 178-52B(16).
(2)
B.
Plumbing.
A mobile home shall contain a kitchen sink, a flush-type water
closet, a bathtub or shower and a lavatory.
(1)
A hot and cold water supply shall be provided at kitchen sinks,
bathtubs or showers and lavatories. Cold water shall be supplied to
water closets.
(2)
Plumbing systems shall be designed and arranged so as to facilitate
connecting to approved exterior water supply and sewage disposal
(3)
A.
§ 178-50 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-52
176:229
systems, provide adequate water supply to all plumbing fixtures
and dispose of all liquid wastes therefrom.
Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
A mobile home shall contain space-heating equipment and waterheating
equipment.
(1)
Areas allocated for installation of space-heating and water-heating
equipment shall provide adequate clearance so that the surface of
adjacent combustible materials will not exceed a safe temperature.
Curtains and draperies shall not be used in such areas.
(2)
Space- and water-heating units shall be of an approved type for
installation in a mobile home. Fuel-burning water heaters and
furnaces other than those having a sealed combustion space shall
not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
(3)
Space-heating units shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a
minimum inside temperature of 70° F., based on the average of the
recorded annual minimum outside temperatures for the locality,
and shall be provided with manual or automatic temperature
control devices.
(4)
Water-heating units shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at each
hot-water outlet an ample supply of water at a minimum
temperature range of one hundred thirty degrees to one hundred
forty degrees Fahrenheit (130° to 140° F.), and such units shall
be provided with safety devices arranged to relieve hazardous
pressures and excessive temperatures.
(5)
Electrical space- and water-heating equipment shall be of an
approved type and shall have adequate circuit protection devices.
(6)
Gas- and liquid-fuel-burning equipment shall be specifically
designed for the type of fuel used. Flues and vents shall be suitable
for the type of fuel used and shall be installed so that the surface of
adjacent combustible material will not exceed a safe temperature.
(7)
Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using utility gas
shall have a valve that will automatically shut off the flow of gas to
the main burner when the pilot flame is extinguished.
(8)
Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using liquefied
petroleum gas shall have a valve that will automatically shut off the
flow of gas to the pilot light and main burner when the pilot flame
is extinguished.
(9)
Fuel-burning space- and water-heating units shall be vented. Other
fuel-burning equipment shall be vented where the discharge of
products of combustion into the space where the equipment is
installed would be unsafe.
(10)
B.
§ 178-52 HORNELL CODE § 178-52
176:230
Liquid-fuel-burning equipment shall be vented and shall be
provided with means to prevent the spilling of fuel.
(11)
Fuel storage containers and gas cylinders shall be mounted outside
the mobile home or in a space that is vented to the outside and is
vaportight to the inside.
(12)
Warm air supply ducts and fittings shall be of noncombustible
material.
(13)
Return air ducts shall be of noncombustible material where
exposed to temperatures which are unsafe for combustible
materials.
(14)
Return air grilles in doors and partitions shall be of a permanent
nonclosable type. Openings for return air shall not be located in
bathrooms, toilet rooms or kitchenettes.
(15)
Mechanical ventilation, where required, shall exhaust air at rates
not less than the following:
(a) For habitable space: two air changes per hour.
(b) For bathrooms and toilet rooms: 25 cubic feet per minute.
(c) For kitchenettes: 100 cubic feet per minute.
(16)
Air conditioning for habitable space provided in lieu of mechanical
ventilation shall supply an amount of air not less than that set forth
in Subsection B(16), with at least 25% of the required quantity
taken from the outside.
(17)
Electrical.
A mobile home shall contain an electrical wiring system and service
equipment.
(1)
Electrical wiring shall have an adequate capacity for the designed
lighting and appliance equipment. Individual circuits shall contain
overload protection devices.
(2)
At least one receptacle outlet shall be provided for each multiple
of 12 linear feet of wall space or major fraction thereof in each
habitable space and kitchenette. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
have permanently installed lighting fixtures and switches located
so as not to be an electrical hazard.
(3)
Exterior equipment shall be weatherproofed to ensure protection
of equipment from the elements. Service equipment shall have
means for quick disconnection from the source of supply.
(4)
Provision shall be made for grounding non-current-carrying
metallic parts of the electrical system. Such grounding shall be
(5)
C.
§ 178-52 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-52
176:231
§ 178-53. Maintenance.
A mobile home shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
common to one external supply point. Provisions shall be made for
exterior source grounding of the electrical system.
Cooking and refrigeration.
A mobile home shall contain cooking equipment and refrigeration
equipment.
(1)
Electrical cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an
approved type for installation in a mobile home and shall have
adequate circuit protection devices.
(2)
Gas-burning cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an
approved type for mobile home installation, and connections to
rigid pipe shall be made with approved flexible metal gas appliance
connectors.
(3)
Fuel storage shall conform to the requirements of fuel storage for
heating.
(4)
D.
Interior. The floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Exits shall be maintained
free of obstructions.
A.
Garbage and refuse. Suitable containers shall be provided for the
temporary storage of garbage and refuse within the mobile home.
B.
Screening. From May 1 to October 1, entrances to the mobile home
shall be provided with self-closing-type devices or screens, and
windows and other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately
screened.
C.
Extermination. Mobile homes shall be maintained free of insects,
vermin and rodents. Extermination shall be effected in conformance
with generally accepted practice.
D.
Flammable materials. Flammable cleaning liquids and other flammable
materials shall be stored in a safe, approved manner.
E.
§ 178-52 HORNELL CODE § 178-53
176:232
ARTICLE IX
Mobile Home Courts
§ 178-54. Design and construction.
§ 178-55. Utilities.
General requirements.
Design and construction of mobile home courts shall conform to
applicable zoning and building regulations and generally accepted
standards for mobile home courts.
(1)
Open areas shall be adequate to assure privacy, natural light and
ventilation for each mobile home and sufficient for essential
outdoor uses.
(2)
A.
Stormwater drainage.
Mobile home courts shall have adequate facilities for the drainage
of surface and subsurface water.
(1)
Grading of the entire property shall be such as to facilitate the safe
and efficient drainage of surface water.
(2)
Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers,
approved combined storm and sanitary sewers or other sanitary
drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
(3)
B.
Surfacing. Walks, driveways and parking spaces shall be provided with
paved and durable surfacing so as to provide safe and easy access
under normal use and weather conditions.
C.
Overhead wires. Wires installed above driveways and parking spaces
shall have a clearance of not less than 18 feet.
D.
Exterior lighting. Artificial lighting shall be provided to illuminate
walks, driveways and parking spaces for the safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles at night.
E.
Maintenance. Mobile home courts shall be properly maintained so as to
assure the desirable residential character of the property.
F.
Travel or vacation trailers. No occupied travel or vacation trailer or
other form of temporary-type living units shall be permitted in a mobile
home court.
G.
Water, sewage, gas and electricity.
A mobile home court shall be provided with the following utilities:
a water supply system, a sewage disposal system and an electrical
system.
(1)
A.
§ 178-54 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-55
176:233
§ 178-56. Mobile home lots.
Utilities, including a gas piping system, where provided, shall have
sufficient capacity to supply the requirements of the mobile home
court and for the maximum number of connected mobile homes.
(2)
Water supply system. Water supply systems shall be designed to provide
a sufficient supply of potable water under adequate pressure to outlets
servicing mobile homes, community structures, drinking fountains,
hose connections, hydrants, etc.
B.
Private water system. When a public water supply system is not
available, an adequate private water supply system, approved by the
state, county or city health department having jurisdiction, shall be
provided.
C.
Sewage and disposal system.
Sewage disposal systems shall provide each mobile home and
community structures containing plumbing fixtures with an
adequate and safe method of sewage disposal.
(1)
No sewage from a plumbing system shall be disposed of into the
waters of the State of New York except where specifically approved
by the authority having jurisdiction in accordance with Article 12
of the New York State Public Health Law. 51
(2)
D.
Private sewage disposal system. Where a public sewage disposal
system is not available, an adequate private sewage disposal system,
approved by the state, county or city health department having
jurisdiction, shall be provided.
E.
Gas piping system. Gas piping systems shall be designed to provide a
supply of gas sufficient to meet the maximum demand without undue
loss of pressure at the connection to the mobile home furthest from the
source of supply.
F.
Electrical system. Electrical systems shall be designed to provide
adequate capacity to supply the connected load without exceeding the
allowable current-carrying capacity of the conductors.
G.
Mobile home stands.
A mobile home lot shall contain a mobile home stand capable of
retaining the mobile home in a fixed position.
(1)
Mobile home stands shall be adequately compacted and at such
elevation, distance and angle in relation to the accessway as to
facilitate the safe and efficient placement and removal of the
mobile home.
(2)
A.
51.Editor's Note: Article 12 of the New York State Public Health Law was repealed by Chapter
664 of the Laws of 1972; see now Environmental Conservation Law Article 17.
§ 178-55 HORNELL CODE § 178-56
176:234
§ 178-57. Community areas.
§ 178-58. Community structures.
Community structures shall be structurally sound and appropriate for their
intended use and location.
Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be of durable
construction and appropriate for the intended use and location.
B.
Patios. Patios shall be located so as to provide safe and easy access from
the mobile home.
C.
Storage lockers. Storage lockers shall be designed to provide adequate
storage facilities convenient to the mobile home.
D.
Utility connections.
A mobile home lot shall be provided with the following utility
connections: a water supply connection, a sanitary drainage
connection and an electrical receptacle.
(1)
Utility connections, including gas connections, where provided,
shall be readily accessible at the mobile home stand and shall have
means for safe and efficient hookup to the mobile home.
(2)
Water supply connections shall be located a safe distance from
sanitary drainage connection and shall not be subject to surface
drainage. Means shall be provided for a suitable watertight
connection, without cross-connection and danger of freezing.
(3)
Sanitary drainage connections shall be at proper location relative
to the mobile home, and piping shall have a continuous grade to
the point of disposal. Drainage connections shall be provided with
suitable fittings to permit a watertight junction to be made with the
mobile home outlet.
(4)
Gas connections shall provide a suitable gastight connection to the
mobile home.
(5)
Electric system connection receptacles or terminal boxes shall be
of an approved weatherproof type. Such receptacles shall have
provision for an equipment ground.
(6)
E.
Community areas, including community facilities, shall be appropriate
for their intended use and location.
A.
Fences, walls and other minor constructions shall be capable of
sustaining anticipated loads.
B.
Swimming pools, playground equipment, etc., shall be designed so as
not to be a potential hazard.
C.
§ 178-56 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-59
176:235
§ 178-59. Community fuel storage.
A mobile home court shall be provided with facilities for the safe and
efficient storage of required fuels.
§ 178-60. Property maintenance.
Liquefied petroleum gas. Liquefied petroleum gas storage containers
having a capacity exceeding 125 gallons shall be located not less than
25 feet from the nearest mobile home, structure, building and lot line
and shall not be subject to damage from moving vehicles.
A.
Fuel oil. Fuel oil and other flammable materials shall be stored so as
not to be a fire hazard.
B.
General. A mobile home court shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary
and orderly condition.
A.
B. Premises. Premises shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
Brush and weed control. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy
undergrowths. Accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
C.
Infestation. Grounds and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
purposes of extermination shall conform to generally accepted practice.
D.
Structures. Exterior wood surfaces of structures that are not inherently
resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a protective
coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
E.
Garbage and refuse. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be
used for the collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and
refuse.
F.
Domestic animals and pets. Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in
an appropriate manner and shall not be permitted to run at large.
G.
§ 178-59 HORNELL CODE § 178-60
176:236
Part 3
Administration And Compliance
ARTICLE X
General Provisions
§ 178-61. Title.
This Part 3 shall be known as "Administration and Compliance Provisions
Supplementary to Applicable Housing Standards."
§ 178-62. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 3 is to provide basic and uniform administration
of and compliance with applicable housing standards and to establish the
responsibilities of parties concerned therewith.
§ 178-63. Applicability.
Scope. This Part 3 shall apply to the administration of and compliance
with applicable housing standards.
A.
Nonapplicability. This Part 3 shall not apply to premises which are not
within the scope of applicable housing standards.
B.
§ 178-61 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-63
176:237

ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 178-64. Administrative agency.
§ 178-65. Powers and duties of agency.
Establishment. There shall be established or designated by local law in
the City of Hornell an agency to administer and secure compliance with
the applicable housing standards. Such agency is hereinafter referred
to as the "agency."
A.
Direction of agency. The agency shall be under the direction and charge
of a chief officer who shall have as his representatives such assistants
and inspectors as may be necessary to carry out effectively the powers
and duties of the agency.
B.
Qualifications and appointment of agency personnel. All personnel of
the agency shall be qualified and appointed as prescribed by local law
and shall be furnished with appropriate official badges or identification
cards.
C.
Liability of agency personnel. All personnel of the agency shall be free
from personal liability for acts done in good faith in the performance of
their official duties.
D.
Duty to administer housing standards; adoption of rules and
regulations. The agency shall be charged with the duty of administering
the applicable housing standards and securing compliance therewith
and shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations necessary for
securing such compliance and for its own organization and internal
management, provided that such rules and regulations shall not be in
conflict with the applicable housing standards.
A.
Authority to conduct surveys. The agency shall be authorized to
conduct surveys of housing in any area of the municipality to determine
the condition of premises, the extent of deterioration, the lack of
facilities, inadequate maintenance, unsafe and insanitary conditions,
the extent of overcrowding, land use and other relevant factors.
B.
Duties of chief officer. It shall be the duty of the chief officer:
To cause periodic inspections to be made not less than once every
five years of all premises within the scope of applicable housing
standards.
(1)
To cause an investigation of all complaints of alleged housing
violations or other unsafe or insanitary conditions.
(2)
To order, in writing, the remedying of all conditions found to exist
in or on any premises in violation of the provisions of the housing
standards or of the rules and regulations adopted by the agency, to
(3)
C.
§ 178-64 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-65
176:239
§ 178-66. Inspections.
§ 178-67. Records.
The agency shall keep records of all complaints received, inspections made
and violations found regarding premises regulated by the housing
standards. Records shall be kept in a manner and form as prescribed by
local law and shall be available for public inspection.
state in the violation order a reasonable time limit for compliance
therewith and, where necessary, to order the vacation of premises
found unfit for human habitation.
To request the chief legal officer of the municipality to take
appropriate legal action in the name of the agency upon failure of
the responsible party to comply with such violation order within the
time specified therein.
(4)
To cause a search of the agency's records of housing violations
existing on any premises and to issue a certified statement thereof
upon receipt of a written request and the payment of any fees
required by local law or ordinance.
(5)
(6) To study housing conditions in the municipality.
To cooperate with other municipal, governmental and private
agencies engaged in the study and improvement of housing
conditions.
(7)
To publish an annual report of housing conditions in the
municipality, accomplishments of the agency and recommendations
for the future.
(8)
Issuance of orders to remove or abate hazardous or dangerous
conditions. Where violations of the housing standards exist and pose an
immediate hazard or danger to the health, safety or welfare of building
occupants or of the public, the chief officer may issue an order citing
the violation and directing such action by such municipal agency as is
necessary to remove or abate the immediate hazard or danger.
D.
Inspector's right of entry. Inspectors shall be authorized and have
the right, in the performance of their duties, to enter any premises
during normal business hours and in emergencies whenever necessary
to protect the public interest.
A.
Duty of owners, etc. Owners, agents, operators and occupants shall be
responsible for providing access to all parts of the premises within their
control to authorized agency personnel acting in the performance of
their duties.
B.
§ 178-65 HORNELL CODE § 178-68
176:240
§ 178-68. Penalties for offenses.52
Every person who shall fail to comply with a violation order issued by the
agency within the time limit stated thereon shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 178-68 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-68
176:241

ARTICLE XII
Compliance
§ 178-69. Responsibilities of owners.
§ 178-70. Responsibilities of lodging house operators.
Lodging house operators shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards in regard to the following:
§ 178-71. Responsibilities of occupants.
Occupants of dwelling units shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards in regard to the following:
Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards and shall remain responsible therefor regardless
of the fact that this Part 3 may also place certain responsibilities on
operators and occupants and regardless of any agreements between
owners and operators or occupants as to which party shall assume such
responsibility.
A.
Owners of premises shall be responsible for the proper maintenance,
condition and operation of service facilities and for furnishing an
adequate heat and hot-water supply in multiple dwellings.
B.
Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by the housing
standards.
A.
Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of lodging
house premises.
B.
C. Maintenance and operation of all required service facilities.
Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances within their control, as well as other building equipment and
facilities, in an operative, clean and sanitary condition.
D.
E. Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings.
F. Keeping exits clear and unencumbered.
The disposal of building garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary
manner.
G.
H. The extermination of insects, rodents or other pests on the premises.
I. Hanging and removing screens.
Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which they occupy or
control to the maximum permitted by the housing standards.
A.
Maintenance of that part of the premises which they occupy or control
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
B.
§ 178-69 HOUSING, FAIR § 178-71
176:243
Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities,
in that part of the premises which they occupy or control in a clean and
sanitary condition and providing reasonable care in the operation and
use thereof.
C.
D. Keeping exits from his dwelling unit clear and unencumbered.
The disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean
and sanitary manner.
E.
The extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within their
dwelling unit if their unit is the only one infested in the premises.
F.
G. Hanging and removing required screens.
Keeping his domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control.
H.
§ 178-71 HORNELL CODE § 178-71
176:244
Chapter 190
MARKET, FARMERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 198.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
§ 190-1. Establishment; location.
A public curb market is hereby established in and for the city at such place
or location within the city as may be determined by the Department of
Public Works.
§ 190-2. Time. 53
The curb market may be operated at any time designated by the City Clerk
or Mayor.
§ 190-3. Persons who may sell at market.
The curb market shall be used only by bona fide farmers and gardeners
who desire to expose for sale on the curb market the garden truck and
farm produce raised or produced by them, and all idlers, disorderly persons,
hucksters, nonproducers and speculators are hereby prohibited from using
such curb market.
§ 190-4. Conduct of sales.
§ 190-5. Placement of vehicles.
All such sales on the curb market shall be from a wagon, cart or other
vehicle properly placed so as not to interfere with or obstruct persons,
travel or traffic lawfully using the street, but in no instance shall it be
allowed to extend upon the sidewalk. All horses shall immediately be
unhitched and removed from the street and shall not be allowed to stand
upon the street.
A. All sales shall be at reasonable prices.
B. All loud hawking and disorderly traffic is prohibited.
Buying and selling upon the market and all combinations to govern
prices are hereby prohibited.
C.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 178-71 MARKET, FARMERS § 190-6
190:245
§ 190-6. Vehicles and litter to be removed upon close of market.
Immediately at the close of the curb market, all wagons, carts and other
vehicles shall be removed, and no paper, debris, litter or offensive matter of
any kind shall be allowed to be or remain upon the market.
§ 190-7. Stalls prohibited.
The construction and maintenance upon the curb market of stalls is hereby
prohibited.
§ 190-8. Weights and measures.
All scales, weights and measures used upon the curb market shall strictly
conform to the tests and standards required by law and shall be subject to
inspection of the Local Sealer of Weights and Measures.
§ 190-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any persons found violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
thereafter denied the privilege of using the curb market.
Chapter 198
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 135.
Farmers market — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
§ 198-1. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise in
the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to
endanger public comfort, peace or repose or to be detrimental to the life
or health of any individual is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance within the
meaning of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive.
§ 198-2. Disturbances in public places.
No person shall create a disturbance or engage in improper conduct or
abusive acts or language in any church, theater, public hall or other public
place.
§ 190-6 HORNELL CODE § 198-3
198:246
§ 198-3. Animals and birds.
No person shall keep any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or longcontinued
noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the
vicinity.
§ 198-4. Radios, phonographs and musical instruments.
No person shall operate or play any radio, phonograph or any musical
instrument in such manner or with such volume at any time, particularly
during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., so as to annoy the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence.
§ 198-5. Steam whistles.
No person shall blow or cause to be blown any steam whistle, except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger.
The blowing or operating of a whistle operated by steam or other artificial
means for more than 15 seconds at one time during a period of 30 minutes
in any one day is prohibited.
§ 198-6. Motor vehicles.
No person shall use an automobile, motorcycle, bus or vehicle so out of
repair or so loaded or in any manner as to create loud or unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise, such as unnecessary blowing of
horns, squealing of tires, racing of motors or racing of motorcycles.
§ 198-7. Horns and signalling devices.
No person shall sound any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a
danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or,
if in motion, only as a danger signal; nor create by means of any such signal
device any unnecessary or unreasonably loud, harsh or prolonged sound;
nor sound such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
except that this section shall not apply to the vehicles of the Departments of
Fire and Police and such emergency vehicles of municipal departments or
public service corporations and ambulances as are authorized or marked as
approved by the Commissioners of Public Safety.
§ 198-8. Discharge of exhausts.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the open air the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motor
vehicle or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other device which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
§ 198-9. Loading and unloading of vehicles; opening of boxes;
handling of garbage cans.
§ 198-3 NOISE § 198-9
198:247
§ 198-10. Compressed-air devices.
No person shall use or cause to be used any mechanical device operated by
compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and
reduced.
§ 198-11. Creation of noise near institutions.
§ 198-12. Building operations.
No person shall create or cause to be created loud or excessive noise in
connection with the erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair of any building.
§ 198-13. Hawking and peddling.
The unreasonable and unnecessary sounding and crying of peddlers,
hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the
neighborhood is prohibited.
§ 198-14. Bells and gongs.
No person shall sound or cause to be sounded any bell, except church bells,
or gong attached to any building or premises which disturbs the quiet or
repose in the vicinity thereof.
§ 198-15. Advertising.
No person shall create or cause to be created a loud and excessive noise
in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
A.
The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with the
handling of ash, trash and garbage cans, either in loading or unloading
and whether full or empty, is prohibited.
B.
No person shall create or cause to be created any excessive noise on
any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning or court while
the same is in session or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, provided that
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same
is a school, hospital or court street.
A.
The making by oneself or by the operation of any instrument, agency
or vehicle of any unnecessary or unseemly noise within 150 feet of any
portion of the grounds and premises on which is located a hospital or
other institution reserved for the sick is prohibited. The Commissioners
of Public Safety shall place as many signs as they may deem proper
within or near the zones hereby created calling attention to the
prohibition against unnecessary noises within such zones.
B.
§ 198-9 HORNELL CODE § 198-15
198:248
§ 198-16. Sound-producing devices.
No person shall use any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of loud
and raucous noise to any performance, show or sale or display of
merchandise.
A.
The making, causing, permitting or allowing to be made of any loud
and raucous noise by means of any rattle, clapper, hammer, drum, horn
or any musical instrument or mechanism for creating or reproducing
sound in a street or near enough to a street so that any such noise will
be heard in a street for the purpose of advertising any goods, wares or
merchandise or of attracting the attention or inviting the patronage of
any person to any occupation or business whatsoever is prohibited.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as a principal, agent or
employee, to play, use or operate for advertising purposes or for any
other purpose whatsoever on and upon the public streets, alleys,
thoroughfares or public places in the city any device known as a "sound
truck," "loudspeaker" or "sound amplifier," or any other instrument
known as a "calliope" or any instrument of any kind or character which
emits therefrom loud and raucous noise and is attached to and upon
any vehicle, except police trucks or vehicles, operated or standing upon
said public street, alleys, thoroughfares or public places.
C.
No person shall erect, install or use any sound-producing instrument,
broadcaster, radio, amplifier or conveyor of sound on or over the streets
or public places within the city for the purpose of advertising through
loud and raucous noise any goods, wares or merchandise or any
meeting, entertainment or event or for the purpose of attracting the
attention or inviting the patronage of any person to any business
whatsoever or to any meeting, entertainment or event or for any other
purpose.
A.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent any
funeral procession or religious ceremony; nor shall the terms of this
section be construed to prevent the production of music in connection
with any parade authorized under any provision of law; nor shall this
section prevent any musical performance upon any public street or
place where a permit has been obtained from the Commissioners of
Public Safety for such purpose; nor shall this section prevent the use
of amplifiers or other sound-producing instruments in connection with
any athletic competition or recreational event held on athletic fields,
stadiums or public parks; nor shall such provisions apply to police or
fire apparatus while used in the performance of public duty.
B.
§ 198-15 NOISE § 198-17
198:249
§ 198-17. Penalties for offenses.54
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of the
Code.
Chapter 201
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned and unsafe buildings — See Ch.
122.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 198-17 HORNELL CODE § 198-17
198:250
ARTICLE I
Nuisance Buildings
[Adopted 11-15-2010]
§ 201-1. Legislative findings.
The Council finds that public nuisances exist in the City of Hornell in the
operation of certain establishments and the use and occupation of property
in flagrant and persistent violation of state and local laws and ordinances,
which nuisances substantially and seriously interfere with the interest of
the public in enhancing the quality of life and community environment in the
City, and in fostering and facilitating commerce, maintaining and improving
property values, and in preserving and protecting the public health, safety
and welfare. The Council further finds that the persistence of such activities
and violations is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the people
of the City of Hornell and of the businesses thereof and the visitors thereto.
It is the purpose of the Council to authorize and empower the Board of
Public Safety to impose sanctions and penalties for such public nuisances,
and such powers of the Board of Public Safety may be exercised either in
conjunction with, or apart from the powers contained in other laws without
prejudice to the use of procedures and remedies available under such other
laws. The Council further finds that the sanctions and penalties that may
be imposed by the Board of Public Safety pursuant to this article constitute
an additional and appropriate method of law enforcement in response to
the proliferation of the above-described public nuisances. The sanctions and
penalties are reasonable and necessary in order to protect the health and
safety of the people of the City and to promote the general welfare.
§ 201-2. Use of point system to determine existence of nuisance.
For purposes of this article, a public nuisance shall be deemed to exist
wherever, through violations of any of the following provisions resulting
from separate incidents at a building, erection or place, 12 or more points
are accumulated within a period of six months or 18 or more points are
accumulated within a period of 12 months, in accordance with the following
point system. Where more than one violation occurs during a single
incident, the total points for the incident shall be the highest point value
assigned to any single violation. For the purpose of this article, an "incident"
will be defined as the execution of an enforcement action.
§ 201-3. Assessment of points.
The following violation shall be assigned a point value of eight points:
§ 265 of the Penal Law, Firearms and other dangerous weapons.
A.
The following violations shall be assigned a point value of six points:
Article 220 of the Penal Law, Controlled Substances Offenses
(except if the charge is a B felony or above, it shall be eight points).
(1)
B.
§ 201-1 NOISE § 201-3
198:251
Article 221 of the Penal Law, Offenses Involving Marijuana (except
if the charge is a B felony or above, it shall be eight points).
(2)
(3) Article 225 of the Penal Law, Gambling Offenses.
(4) Section 230.00 of the Penal Law, Prostitution.
Sections 165.40, 165.45, 165.50, 165.52 and 165.54 of the Penal
Law, Criminal possession of stolen property.
(5)
(6) Section 123 of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
Sections 260.20 and 260.21 of the Penal Law, Unlawfully dealing
with a child.
(7)
(8) Section 263 of the Penal Law, Sexual Performance by a Child.
(9) Section 415-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, Vehicle dismantlers.
Possession, use, sale, or offer for sale of any alcoholic beverage in
violation of Article 18 of the Tax Law or of any cigarette or tobacco
products in violation of Article 20 of the Tax Law.
(10)
(11)Article 158 of the Penal Law, Welfare Fraud,
Article 178 of the Penal Law, Criminal Diversion of Prescription
Medications and Prescriptions.
(12)
The following violations shall be assigned a point value of four points:
Chapter 122, Housing, and Chapter 168, Property Maintenance
Requirements, and § 267-5 of Chapter 267, Streets and Sidewalks;
and Title IX of the Charter, § C-176, Responsibility of owner to
repair and maintain sidewalks.
(1)
Permitting persons to be on the premises in excess of occupancy
limit.
(2)
Violations regarding building certificates of occupancy in violation
of Chapter 120.
(3)
C.
The following violations shall be assigned a point value of three points,
(1) Chapter 168, § 168-9, Litter, of this Code.
(2) Chapter 115, Brush, Grass and Weeds, of this Code.
(3) Chapter 198, Noise, of this Code.
(4) Chapter 135, Dogs and Other Animals, of this Code,
Suffering or permitting the premises to become disorderly,
including suffering or permitting fighting or lewdness.
(5)
(6) Section 175.10 of the Penal Law, Falsifying business records.
D.
§ 201-3 HORNELL CODE § 201-3
198:252
§ 201-4. Conviction not required.
For purposes of this article, a conviction for an offense in a court of
competent jurisdiction shall not be required to establish that a specified
violation of law has occurred at a building, erection, or place. Instead, the
City shall be required to prove a specified violation by a preponderance of
the evidence. However, a conviction as defined and applied in accordance
with the provisions of § 1.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law, in any court of
competent jurisdiction, shall constitute conclusive proof of such a violation
of law. Conviction of an attempt to commit a violation of any of the specified
provisions shall be equivalent to a conviction for a violation of the specified
provision.
§ 201-5. Powers of Board of Public Safety enumerated.
In addition to any other enforcement procedures established elsewhere, the
Board of Public Safety or its designee, after notice and opportunity for a
hearing with respect to a public nuisance, shall be authorized:
§ 201-6. Notice.
Sections 170.65 and 170.70 of the Penal Law, forgery of or illegal
possession of a vehicle identification number.
(7)
(8) Section 147 of the Social Services Law, food stamp program fraud.
(9) Article 26 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, cruelty to animals.
(10)Chapter 300, Article V, of this Code.
To order the closing of the building, erection, or place to the extent
necessary to abate the nuisance;
A.
To suspend for a period not to exceed six months or revoke for a period
of one year a certificate of use issued for such premises, and to prevent
the operator from obtaining a new certificate of use for another location
for the period of suspension or revocation;
B.
To suspend for a period not to exceed six months or revoke for a period
of one year any occupational license or permit issued by the City related
to the conduct of a business or trade at the premises, which suspension
or revocation shall also apply to any other locations operated by the
holder for which the license or permit is required; or
C.
D. Any combination of the above.
Prior to the issuance of orders by the Board of Public Safety or its
designee pursuant to this article, the Board of Public Safety or its
designee shall give notice and opportunity for a hearing to the owner,
lessor, lessee, or mortgagee of a building, erection, or place wherein
the public nuisance is being conducted, maintained, or permitted.
A.
§ 201-3 NOISE § 201-6
198:253
§ 201-7. Presumption of ownership.
The owner of the property affected by the orders of the Board of Public
Safety or its designee shall be presumed to be the person in whose name
title to the real estate is recorded in the Office of the Steuben County Clerk.
§ 201-8. Opportunity for hearing.
An opportunity for a hearing shall be within 60 days after the occurrence of
the most recent violation cited in the notice.
§ 201-9. Lack of knowledge not a defense.
The lack of knowledge of, acquiescence or participation in or responsibility
for a public nuisance on the part of the owners, lessors, lessees, mortgagees
and all those persons in possession or having charge of the property as
agent or otherwise, or having any interest in the property, real or personal,
used in conducting or maintaining the public nuisance, shall not be a
defense by such owners, lessors and lessees, mortgagees, and such other
persons.
§ 201-10. Orders.
Notice shall be served upon an owner pursuant to Article 3 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules, upon a lessor or lessee pursuant to
§ 735 of the Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law, and upon a
mortgagee by means of certified mail, return receipt requested, sent
to the mortgagee's last known address, provided that any service other
than delivery to the person to be served shall be complete immediately
upon delivery, mailing, or posting without the necessity of filing proof
of service with the Clerk of any court before the hearing. Proceedings
shall be commenced by service of the notice.
B.
Orders of the Board of Public Safety or its designee issued pursuant to
this article shall be posted at the building, erection or place where a
public nuisance exists or is occurring in violation of law and shall be
mailed to the owner of record thereof within one business day of the
posting.
A.
Five business days after the posting of an order issued pursuant to this
section and upon the written directive of the Board of Public Safety
or its designee, officers of the City of Hornell Police Department are
authorized to act upon and enforce such orders,
B.
Where the Board of Public Safety or its designee closes a building,
erection or place pursuant to this article, such closing shall be for such
period as the Board of Public Safety or its designee may direct, but in
no event shall the closing be for a period of more than one year from
the posting of the order pursuant to this section. If the owner, lessor, or
lessee shall file a bond in an amount determined by the Board of Public
Safety or its designee, but not exceeding the value of the property
C.
§ 201-6 HORNELL CODE § 201-10
198:254
§ 201-11. Penalties for offenses.
§ 201-12. Power to promulgate rules and regulations.
The Board of Public Safety or its designee shall promulgate rules and
regulations to carry out and give full effect to the provisions of this article.
ordered to be closed, and submit proof satisfactory to the Board of
Public Safety or its designee that the nuisance has been abated and will
not again be created, maintained or permitted for such period of time
as the building, erection or place has been directed to be closed by the
order of the Board of Public Safety or its designee, then the Board of
Public Safety or its designee may vacate the provisions of the order that
direct the closing of the building, erection or place.
A closing directed by the Board of Public Safety or its designee
pursuant to this article shall not constitute an act of possession,
ownership, or control by the City of the closed premises.
D.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to use or occupy any building,
erection or place, or portion thereof, ordered closed by the Board of
Public Safety or its designee pursuant to this article.
A.
Mutilation or removal of a posted order of the Board of Public Safety
or its designee shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $250 or
by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, provided such order
contains therein a notice of such penalty.
B.
Intentional disobedience or disregard of any provision or orders issued
by the Board of Public Safety or its designee pursuant to this article, in
addition to any other punishment prescribed by law, shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed six
months, or both.
C.
§ 201-10 NOISE § 201-12
198:255

ARTICLE II
Abatement of Nuisances Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 11-14-2011]
§ 201-13. Commencement of proceedings.
All public nuisance proceedings brought under Hornell City Code §§ 201-1
through 201-12 (hereafter, Hornell City Code Chapter 201, Article I) shall
be commenced by service of a notice of charges on the owner, lessor,
lessee and mortgagee of a building, erection or place (hereinafter called
"respondent(s)"), wherein the public nuisance is being conducted,
maintained or permitted.
§ 201-14. Notice of charges.
§ 201-15. Notice of hearing.
The owner or managing agent, mortgagee, and the lessor and lessee
of a building, erection, or place, if known, shall be given written notice
of incidents occurring thereat which constitute a public nuisance as
defined in Hornell City Code Chapter 201, Article I. The notice shall
set forth a description of the nuisance act; the section of law, if any,
violated; the date of violation; and the address at which the violation
occurred.
A.
The notice shall further state that Hornell City Code Chapter 201,
Article I authorizes the Board of Public Safety's designee to order, after
notice and opportunity for a hearing, certain actions to abate public
nuisances, including ordering suspension or closure of the business
and/or the premises; suspension or revocation of the certificate of use
or occupational license or permit issued by the City; suspension or
revocation of the right to secure a certificate of use; or any combination
of the above.
B.
The notice shall further state that the respondents have 10 days from
the date of receipt of this notice to demand a hearing and to serve an
answer upon the City Attorney.
C.
Service of the notice of charges shall be made pursuant to Civil Practice
Law and Rules § 2103(b) upon everyone, but service shall be made upon
an owner pursuant to Article 3 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules;
the lessor or lessee pursuant to § 735 of the Real Property Actions
and Proceedings Law; the mortgagee by means of certified mail, return
receipt requested, sent to the mortgagee's last known address.
D.
A notice of hearing shall be served in every proceeding where a
respondent has filed an answer and demand for a hearing in
conformance with these rules and regulations. Appropriate
neighborhood interests shall also be notified of the proceeding and
invited to provide information regarding the subject properties.
A.
§ 201-13 NOISE § 201-15
198:257
§ 201-16. Prehearing conference.
Service. Service shall be made at least 12 days before the scheduled
hearing, Service shall be complete immediately upon delivery, mailing
or posting. Service shall be accomplished by priority mail with delivery
confirmation mail receipt to each individual's last known residence
or business address unless the respondent is represented by counsel
whereby service shall be on the respondent's attorney at the address
listed on the answer.
B.
Notice.
A notice of hearing shall contain the name and address of the
owner, lessor, lessee and mortgagee, the address of the building,
erection or place where the public nuisance is being conducted, a
scheduled time and place for the hearing and the identity of the
hearing officer appointed to preside over the hearing. The notice
shall cite the subsection of Hornell City Code § 201-3 being violated
and shall contain a short and plain statement of the violation(s).
It shall also list the dates of the violation and the specific section
of the law upon which they were predicated. The notice shall also
indicate the possible penalties and sanctions for violation(s) and
a warning that failure to appear may result in an order closing
the building, erection or place. The notice shall also include a
statement that the respondent has a right to be represented by
counsel, to cross-examine witnesses and to present witnesses and
evidence on his or her behalf.
(1)
The notice shall further state that a prehearing conference will be
held, the date and place for the conference, the duty of all parties
to disclose all evidence that they intend to introduce at the hearing
and the obligation to consider measures to expedite the disposition
of the proceedings. The notice shall further contain a statement
that any party who unreasonably denies or refuses to admit a fact,
authenticate a document or exchange witness lists or proposed
exhibits will be precluded from denying the fact, or denying the
authenticity or accuracy of the document or from introducing the
exhibit or the testimony of the witnesses or objecting to the
introduction of the exhibit or the testimony of witnesses.
(2)
C.
Prehearing conference. A prehearing conference will be held at least
seven days in advance of the hearing date at which time each party
must disclose the evidence that the party intends to introduce at the
hearing, including documentary evidence and identification of
witnesses, and consider:
(1) Simplification of the issues;
Amendments to any pleadings, notices or replies for purposes of
clarification;
(2)
A.
§ 201-15 HORNELL CODE § 201-16
198:258
§ 201-17. Hearing officer.
Stipulations, admissions of fact, contents or authenticity of
documents, or the accuracy of any photocopy or reproduction
intended to be introduced at the hearing;
(3)
(4) Limitations on the number of witnesses; and
Other matters which would expedite the disposition of the
proceedings.
(5)
Witnesses and evidence precluded. Any party who unreasonably denies
or refuses to admit a fact, authenticate a document or exchange witness
lists or proposed exhibits will be precluded from denying the fact,
or denying the authenticity or accuracy of the document or from
introducing the exhibit or the testimony of the witnesses or objecting to
the introduction of the exhibit or the testimony of witnesses.
B.
Failure to appear at prehearing conference. Pursuant to the rule in
§ 201-19E, any respondent(s)' failure to appear at a prehearing
conference will be deemed to have withdrawn their request for a
hearing and be in default.
C.
Designation of. The hearing will be conducted by an independent
hearing officer who is an attorney chosen by the Board of Public Safety
for that purpose and who has not been involved in any way with the
matter, except that hearing officers can conduct a rehearing resulting
from a motion to vacate a default.
A.
Duties. The hearing officer shall:
(1) Conduct the hearing in a fair and impartial manner;
Take all necessary action to avoid delay in the disposition of the
proceedings;
(2)
(3) Maintain order;
(4) Inquire fully into all matters in issue; and
(5) Obtain a full and complete record.
B.
Powers. The hearing officer shall have all powers necessary to this end,
including the powers to:
(1) Administer oaths and affirmations;
Rule upon the admission of evidence and motions, consistent with
the provisions of this section;
(2)
Issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, documents and other records;
(3)
C.
§ 201-16 NOISE § 201-17
198:259
§ 201-18. Proceedings upon default.
§ 201-19. Hearing procedure.
Rule upon requests for adjournments and continuances consistent
with the provisions of this section;
(4)
Admit or exclude evidence, including the exclusion or protection of
evidence on grounds of privilege or confidentiality;
(5)
Preclude irrelevant or unduly repetitious, tangential, speculative
testimony or argument; and
(6)
Do any other act or take any other measure consistent with the
provisions of this section necessary for the maintenance of order
and to ensure the efficient and fair conduct of the hearing.
(7)
Declaring a default. Upon respondent(s)' failure to answer and demand
a hearing or to appear at the prehearing conference or at the hearing or
any adjournment thereof, respondent(s) will be deemed to have pleaded
no contest and an order assessing any of the penalties set forth in
Hornell City Code Chapter 201, Article I may be issued. In such an
event, the order shall not be issued unless the Board of Public Safety
is satisfied that the notice of charges and/or a notice of hearing was
duly served and that the evidence offered in support of the penalties
constitutes a public nuisance as defined in Hornell City Code Chapter
201, Article I.
A.
Application to vacate a default after answer is served and hearing
demanded. An application for a hearing and stay of a default may be
made within 10 days of the posting of an order imposing penalties on
the affected building, erection or place, or mailing of a copy of the
hearing officer's decision, whichever is later. Such application shall be
made to the Board of Public Safety and shall be granted upon a showing
of good cause.
B.
Public hearing. Hearings shall be generally open to the public except
that if either party has shown good cause, the hearing officer may
exclude the public from a particular hearing or portion of a hearing.
A.
Representation of the Board of Public Safety. The City Attorney shall
present the evidence supporting the existence of a public nuisance.
B.
Representation of the respondents.
Any person who is entitled to notice pursuant to this rule may
appear and be heard in person or by duly appointed representative
and may produce, under oath, evidence relevant and material to
the charges.
(1)
A respondent may be represented by an attorney who is a member
in good standing of the Bar of the State of New York.
(2)
C.
§ 201-17 HORNELL CODE § 201-19
198:260
Adjournments.
No application for adjournment of a hearing shall be granted
except for good cause shown, and if such adjournment is sought
upon the grounds that the respondents' attorney is actually
engaged in a court of record, an affidavit of actual engagement by
such attorney must be presented.
(1)
Upon granting any adjournment, the hearing officer may direct that
the matter is set down peremptorily against the respondent(s), in
which event the respondent(s) shall be notified that there shall be
no further entitlement to any adjournment.
(2)
D.
Withdrawal of hearing request. A hearing request may be deemed to
have been withdrawn only under the following circumstances:
The Board of Public Safety receives a written statement from the
respondent(s) stating that the request is withdrawn;
(1)
The respondent(s) makes a statement on the record at the hearing
withdrawing the request; or
(2)
(3) The respondent(s) fails to attend the prehearing conference.
E.
Record. All testimony shall be made under oath, and a verbatim record
of the proceeding shall be made by stenographic transcription.
Typewritten copies thereof may be ordered by the parties at their own
expense.
F.
Amendment of the charges set forth in the notice of hearing. The
hearing officer or the attorney for the City may amend the charges
set forth in the notice of hearing at any time before the close of the
hearing or prior to a determination by the Board of Public Safety. If a
respondent requests an adjournment based upon such amendment, the
hearing officer may, in his discretion, grant such adjournment in the
interest of justice when a party to such proceeding was surprised by
such amendment without fault on his part.
G.
Official notice.
Facts not subject to reasonable dispute. The hearing officer or the
Board of Public Safety may take official notice of a fact not subject
to reasonable dispute if it either is generally known or can be
accurately and readily verified in a generally accepted reference
prior to or following the close of the hearing record.
(1)
Procedure. If the hearing officer or Board of Public Safety intends
to take official notice of a material fact which does not appear in
the hearing record and of which judicial notice could not be taken,
every party must be given notice and an opportunity to dispute the
fact and its materiality.
(2)
H.
§ 201-19 NOISE § 201-19
198:261
Stipulation of facts. Prior to the hearing, the parties shall meet to
determine and agree by stipulation what, if any, facts involved in the
proceedings are not in dispute. Such stipulation shall be duly noted
on the record and become part of the record. The attorney of record
representing a party may enter into such a stipulation on behalf of that
party.
I.
Consent orders.
At any time, the Board of Public Safety may enter into a consent
order with a respondent, whereby the latter agrees to discontinue
the nuisance acts or practices and provide such other further relief
to which the respondent(s) may agree.
(1)
Such consent order shall be admissible as evidence to provide the
basis for a finding of fact in any subsequent proceeding brought by
the Board of Public Safety against such respondent(s) involving the
same or similar violation(s).
(2)
J.
Discovery. There shall be no formal discovery procedure applicable to
adjudicatory proceedings. Reasonable demands for discovery shall be
complied with by the parties and objections thereto shall be timely
made to the hearing officer.
K.
Subpoenas. Any person desiring to subpoena a witness, document or
other evidence may do so in the manner provided for in the CPLR.
L.
Motions.
Must be in writing. All motions and requests prior to the hearing
shall be submitted in writing to the hearing officer. Copies of
motion papers shall be served upon all parties. Motions made
during the course of a hearing may be stated orally and shall be
made a part of the record.
(1)
Ruling on the motions. The hearing officer shall rule upon all
motions and requests prior to the submission of his report to the
Board of Public Safety. The Board of Public Safety shall rule upon
all motions submitted after receipt of the hearing officer's report.
(2)
M.
Evidence. All parties have the right to call witnesses, to conduct
examinations, including cross-examination, to present evidence, and to
make objections, motions and arguments.
All evidence submitted must be relevant. Irrelevant and unduly
repetitious testimony and cross-examination will be excluded.
(1)
Technical rules of evidence followed in a court of law will not be
followed, but evidence must be relevant and material.
(2)
Hearsay evidence may be admitted if a reasonable degree of
reliability is shown.
(3)
N.
§ 201-19 HORNELL CODE § 201-19
198:262
Evidence otherwise relevant may be excluded if its value as proof
is substantially outweighed by a potential for unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, undue delay, waste of time or needless
presentation of repetitious or duplicate evidence.
(4)
Where part of a document is offered as evidence by one party, any
party may offer the entire document as evidence.
(5)
Each witness must be sworn or make an affirmation before
testifying. Opening, closing and other unsworn statements are not
evidence, and they will be considered as arguments bearing on
evidence.
(6)
The burden of proof to sustain a motion will be on the party making
the motion.
(7)
All decisions, determinations or orders must be made upon
consideration of the entire record.
(8)
Certificate shall constitute conclusive evidence of a violation. Police
reports and accusatory instruments and supporting depositions
concerning such violation shall be admitted as prima facie evidence
of the information contained therein, which evidence may be
overcome by other credible evidence.
(9)
Burden of proof. No public nuisance may be established except upon
proof by a preponderance of the credible evidence. The municipal
attorney has the burden of proof in establishing that a public nuisance
exists at the cited premises, but the proponent of any factual
proposition will be required to sustain the burden of proof with respect
thereto.
O.
Order of events. The hearing officer will have discretion to adjust the
order of events and establish procedures to promote the conduct of a
fair and efficient hearing. In general, the order of events at a hearing
shall be as follows:
Formal opening. The hearing officer will convene the hearing by
opening the record, identifying the issues involved and making
appropriate procedural announcements as necessary.
(1)
Noting appearances. The hearing officer will call the name of the
person who has requested the hearing and note the appearance of
counsel, if any.
(2)
Opening statements. Prior to the commencement of the evidentiary
hearing, each party may offer a brief opening statement of position
on the issues in dispute.
(3)
Admission of evidence. The City of Hornell will present its direct
case first. The respondent(s) will then present its case. All parties
will have an opportunity to cross-examine the opposing party's
witnesses. Evidence will be confined to that which is relevant to
(4)
P.
§ 201-19 NOISE § 201-19
198:263
§ 201-20. Finding of facts after hearing.
Within 30 days of closing of the hearing, the hearing officer shall file a
report and a complete record of the hearing.
the issues identified by the hearing officer and disclosed at the
prehearing conference.
Closing statements and briefs. Closing statements of position will
be taken in the same manner as opening statements. At the
concluding session of the hearing, the hearing officer will
determine whether to allow the submission of written post-hearing
briefs and proposed findings of fact. The hearing record will be
officially closed upon the receipt of additional technical data or
other material agreed at the hearing to be made available after
the hearing, or the submission of briefs and reply briefs, proposed
findings of fact, memoranda, and exceptions, if any, by the various
parties, whichever occurs later.
(5)
Reopening of the hearing. At any time prior to issuing the final decision,
the Board of Public Safety or the hearing officer may direct that the
hearing record be reopened. This may be done to secure additional
information or data or to consider significant new evidence.
Q.
Recording of the hearing is prohibited. Televising of a hearing for
rebroadcast is prohibited pursuant to § 52 of the Civil Rights Law.
R.
The report. The hearing officer's report shall include a statement:
(1) Of the charges against the respondent(s);
(2) Summarizing each respondent's response to the charges;
Of the facts recommended with specific references to principal
supporting items in the record;
(3)
Of the conclusions recommended, as well as the reasons or basis
therefor, and whether the evidence sustained the charges.
(4)
A.
Service of the report. A copy of such report shall be served on each
of the respondents or their attorneys, if so represented. The report,
when served, shall be accompanied by a statement in writing advising
that the recipient may controvert any of the findings contained therein
within seven days of the date of the notice by written submission to the
Board of Public Safety and all parties.
B.
Filing of the record. The record, which the hearing officer shall refer to
the Board of Public Safety after the hearing, includes:
The pleadings, which are:
(a) The notice of charges;
(b) Demand for hearing;
(1)
C.
§ 201-19 HORNELL CODE § 201-20
198:264
§ 201-21. Final determination and order.
After receipt of the record and the hearing officer's report, the Board of
Public Safety shall approve, modify or reject the hearing officer's report and
thereby make a final determination based upon the entire record and issue
an order consistent thereto.
(c) Answer; and
(d) Hearing notice;
(2) Copies of all motions and decisions;
(3) Transcript of the proceedings;
(4) All exhibits received into evidence;
(5) Any admissions, agreements or stipulations;
(6) A statement of matters officially noted;
(7) Offers of proof, objections and rulings; and
(8) The report referenced in Subsection A of this section.
Content of decision. The decision will be in writing and shall consist of
two parts:
The final determination, which describes the issues, recites the
relevant facts and pertinent provisions of the law and codes, makes
appropriate findings, and states the reasons for the determinations;
and
(1)
The final order, which shall provide for:
(a) The dismissal of charges; or
An assessment of penalties consistent with Hornell City Code
Chapter 201, Article I; or
(b)
(c) A direction for abatement; and/or
(d) A combination of any or all of the foregoing.
(2)
A.
Service. A copy of the final determination and order shall be mailed to
the respondent(s) or its attorneys, if represented by counsel, together
with notice of right to judicial review in accordance with Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Orders of the Board of Public Safety
shall also be posted at the building, erection or place where the public
nuisance exists.
B.
§ 201-20 NOISE § 201-21
198:265
Chapter 205
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 90.
Farmers market — See Ch. 190.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
§ 205-1. Supervision of playground apparatus and equipment. 55
The Summer Recreation Director, subject to the direction of the Common
Council, shall have charge of the tennis courts, apparatus and personal
property on the playgrounds of the city and is authorized to close the tennis
courts whenever from rain or wet grounds the same are unfit for use.
§ 205-2. Destruction of equipment and use of closed facilities
prohibited. 56
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously injure, remove
or destroy any of the apparatus or property on the playgrounds or to use the
tennis courts when the same have been closed by the Summer Recreation
Director. 57
§ 205-3. James Street Park. [Added 5-24-1982]
§ 205-4. Glass containers. [Added 5-26-1987]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to have in his possession
or under his custody or control any container made of glass which has
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or organization to be in
James Street Park between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and sunrise, except
by the permission of the Common Council of the City of Hornell, New
York.
A.
B. The tennis courts shall be used solely for the playing of tennis.
C. There will be no beverage brought into the park in any glass containers.
There will be no selling of any goods at the park except with special
permission from the Common Council.
D.
E. There will be no playing of golf or hitting of golf balls.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
57.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 17-3, Injury to trees, shrubs, animals, facilities in Union
Square, and Sec. 17-4, Regulation of Sunday baseball games in Maple City Park, which
immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 201-21 HORNELL CODE § 205-4
205:266
been designed to contain or does contain a beverage within any park or
playground currently owned or under the custody or control of the City
of Hornell except in designated picnic areas and carried to and from such
areas.
§ 205-5. Penalties for offenses. [Added 5-26-1987 58]
Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of the
Code.
Chapter 210
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 90.
Bingo — See Ch. 110.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 135.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 148.
Games of chance — See Ch. 157.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 160.
Handbills — See Ch. 167.
Noise — See Ch. 198.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
§ 210-1. Public intoxication.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk or in a state of intoxication
in any highway, street or public place in the city or in any private house or
place to the annoyance of any person or persons.
§ 210-2. False fire alarms.
No person shall raise a false alarm of fire knowing the same to be false.
§ 210-3. Gambling.
No person shall keep any billiard table, pool table, bowling alley or other
instrument or device for gaming upon which or with which games of chance
shall be played for money, wines, liquors, beer, cigars or other articles.
§ 210-4. Injury to property; advertising.
No person shall willfully and unlawfully cut, injure, deface or tarnish
any building, bridge, sign, fence, awning or other useful or ornamental
improvement or any public work in the city or willfully and unlawfully
break any window or window glass in any private or public building or
A.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 205-4 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 210-4
205:267
§ 210-5. Obstruction of officers in discharge of duties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or obstruct or attempt to hinder
or obstruct any officer of the city in the legal discharge of his duties.
§ 210-6. Obstruction of public work.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally hinder, obstruct or
interfere with any person employed by the city in the construction of any
public work.
§ 210-7. Solicitation of alms.
No person shall solicit alms within the city without the written permission
of the Mayor, the City Clerk or the Chief of Police.
§ 210-8. Spitting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit:
§ 210-9. Penalties for offenses. [Added 12-28-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in § 1-1 of the Code.
place of worship in the city or the glass of any public lamp or aid, abet
or assist therein.
No person shall display upon any property belonging to the city,
including buildings, sidewalks, street signs, traffic lights or other
municipal property, any sign, advertising, writing, picture or character
of any kind.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, print or draw any work,
words, design, figure or sign upon any sidewalk within the city.
C.
No person shall unlawfully ride or drive any horse, team, carriage,
wagon or other vehicle on any burial lot or on any of the margins,
footwalks or walks in any cemetery of the city. Nor shall any person
unlawfully tread down the grass or cut, break or remove any tree,
shrub, plant, flower or turf in or from any cemetery in the city.
D.
No person shall remove, mutilate, deface or destroy or in any manner
unlawfully interfere with business or other signs or advertisements of
any description.
E.
A. Upon any sidewalk.
B. Upon the floor or any other part of any public conveyance.
C. Upon the floor or any part of a public building, theater or store.
§ 210-4 HORNELL CODE § 210-10
205:268
§ 210-10. Smoking at school bus stops. [Added 11-18-2013]
Chapter 215
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 100.
Fees — See Ch. 142.
Handbills — See Ch. 167.
Farmers market — See Ch. 190.
Noise — See Ch. 198.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Smoking and all other tobacco use is prohibited within 30 feet of any
and all school bus stops within the City of Hornell while students are
present waiting to enter a school bus or discharging from a school bus.
A.
For the purposes of this section, a school bus stop shall be defined as
any location within the City of Hornell where a school bus stops to
either pick up or discharge students going to or coming from school
and/or school activities.
B.
A violation of this section shall carry a fine of not less than $50 and no
more than $250 for each offense.
C.
§ 210-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 210-10
215:269

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 12 of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 215-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-17-1973]
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words, terms and
phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings herein ascribed
to them: ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building or store in
which or where the person transacts business and deals in the goods, wares
and merchandise he hawks, peddles or solicits for during regular business
hours.
HAWKER and PEDDLER — Any person, either principal or agent, who, from
any boat or car on a railroad track or in any public street or public place
or by going from house to house or place of business to place of business,
on foot or on or from any animal or vehicle, sells or barters, offers for
sale or barter or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares
or merchandise, except milk, newspapers and periodicals, on a permanent
basis.
PERMANENT BASIS — The operation of a local business for a period of
more than six months.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from place to place or house to house
or who stands in any street or public place taking or offering to take orders
for goods, wares or merchandise, except newspapers or milk, or for services
to be performed in the future or for making, manufacturing or repairing any
article or thing whatsoever for future delivery.
§ 215-2. Applicability.
Nothing in this Article shall be held to apply:
A. To any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
To any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such
articles.
B.
To merchants having an established place of business within the city,
or their employees, for soliciting orders from customers and delivering
the same.
C.
To farmers and truck gardeners who, themselves or through their
employees, vend, sell or dispose of products of their own farms and
gardens.
D.
To any honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine who has procured
a license as provided by the General Business Law of the State of
New York, who is a cripple as a result of injuries received while in the
military or naval service of the United States and who has otherwise
complied with § 32 of said General Business Law.
E.
§ 215-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 215-2
215:271
§ 215-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to
act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor, as herein defined, without first having
obtained and paid for and having in force and effect a license therefor.
§ 215-4. License fees. [Amended 12-17-197359]
The fee for a license required by this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter
142, Fees.
§ 215-5. Application for license.
§ 215-6. Issuance of license; assignability.
F. To berry pickers who sell berries of their own picking.
G. So as unlawfully to interfere with interstate commerce.
Information required. Any person desiring to procure a license as
herein provided shall file with the City Clerk a written application upon
a blank form prepared and furnished by the city and shall file at the
same time satisfactory proof of good character. Such application shall
contain the following information:
The number and kind of vehicles to be used by the applicant in
carrying on the business for which the license is desired.
(1)
The kind of goods, wares and merchandise the applicant desires to
sell or the kind of service he desires to perform and the method of
distribution.
(2)
(3) The name, address and age of the applicant.
The name and address of the person, firm or corporation the
applicant represents.
(4)
(5) The length of time the applicant desires the license.
(6) Such other information as may be required by the City Clerk.
A.
Certificate from Sealer of Weights and Measures. Such application
shall be accompanied by a certificate from the Sealer of Weights and
Measures certifying that all weighing and measuring devices to be used
by the applicant have been examined and approved.
B.
Upon the filing of the license application and the certificate as provided
in § 215-5, the City Clerk shall, upon his approval of such application,
issue a license to the applicant. Except as otherwise provided in this
Article, no license shall be refused except for a specific reason and for
the protection of the public safety, health, morals or general welfare.
A.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 215-2 HORNELL CODE § 215-6
215:272
§ 215-7. Waiting period after refusal or revocation of license.
No applicant to whom a license has been refused or who has had a license
which has been revoked shall make further application until a period of
at least six months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection or
revocation, unless he can show that the reason for such rejection no longer
exists.
§ 215-8. Age requirement.
No license issued under the provisions of this Article shall be granted to a
person under 21 years of age.
§ 215-9. Exhibition of license.
Each person licensed under the provisions of this Article, while exercising
his license, shall carry the license with him and shall exhibit the same upon
demand.
§ 215-10. Record of licenses.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep a record of all applications and
of all licenses granted under the provisions of this Article. Such record shall
show:
§ 215-11. Revocation of license.
The Mayor may, at any time, for a violation of this Article or any ordinance
or any law, revoke any license issued under the provisions of this Article.
When a license shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of
the license fee shall be made. Notice of such revocation and the reason
or reasons therefor, in writing, shall be served by the City Clerk upon the
person named in the application or by mailing the same to the address given
in the application and upon filing a copy of such notice with the City Clerm.
§ 215-12. Vehicles to be marked.
Every vehicle used by a licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor in or about
his business shall have the name of the licensee and his address plainly,
A license issued under the provisions of this Article shall not be
assignable. Any holder of such license who permits it to be used by any
other person and any person who uses such license shall each be guilty
of a violation of this Article.
B.
A. The number and date of each license.
B. The name and residence of the person licensed.
C. The amount of the license fee paid.
D. The date of revocation of all licenses revoked.
§ 215-6 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 215-12
215:273
distinctly and legibly painted in letters and figures at least two inches in
height in a conspicuous place on the outside of each side of every such
vehicle, and such name and address shall be kept painted plainly and
distinctly at all times while such vehicle is in use during the continuance of
the license.
§ 215-13. Maintenance of vehicles and receptacles.
A hawker, peddler or solicitor licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
Article shall keep the vehicles and receptacles used by him in a clean
and sanitary condition and the foodstuffs and edibles offered for sale well
covered and protected from dirt, dust and insects.
§ 215-14. Employing assistants.
Any licensee using a horse or wagon or motor vehicle may employ two
persons, and no more, to assist in selling and delivering the wares, but such
persons shall so act only while accompanying a licensed peddler, hawker or
solicitor.
§ 215-15. Misrepresentation of merchandise.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not falsely or fraudulently
misrepresent the quantity, character or quality of any article offered for
sale or offer for sale any unwholesome, tainted or diseased provisions or
merchandise.
§ 215-16. Noise.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not blow a horn, ring a bell or
use any other noisy device to attract public attention to his wares or shout
or cry out his wares.
§ 215-17. Sales near schools.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not sell any confectionery or
ice cream within 250 feet of any school between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. on school days.
§ 215-18. Standing in one place.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not stand or permit the vehicle
used by him to stand in any one place in any public place or street for more
than 10 minutes or in front of any premises for any time if the owner of or
lessee of the ground floor thereof objects.
§ 215-19. Stopping in crosswalks.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not permit any vehicle used by
him to stop or remain on any crosswalk.
§ 215-12 HORNELL CODE § 215-20
215:274
§ 215-20. Booths or obstructions.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not create or maintain any
booth or stand or place any barrels, boxes, crates or other obstructions
upon any street or public place for the purpose of selling or exposing for
sale any goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 215-21. Taking of orders.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing,
in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and
one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the deposit of money is
paid to the solicitor.
§ 215-22. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who, himself or by his clerk, agent or employee, shall act as
a hawker, peddler or solicitor, as herein defined, without a license or shall
violate any of the provisions of this Article or who, having had his license
revoked, shall continue to act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
§ 215-20 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 215-22
215:275

ARTICLE II
Transient Merchants
[Adopted 11-24-1986 (Art. II of Ch. 14 of the 1970 Municipal Code)]
§ 215-23. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association, incorporated association and principal or agent thereof.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — A person who engages or proposes to engage
in a transient retail business.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — One conducted in a store, hotel, motel,
building, tent, lot, truck, tractor-trailer or structure for the retail or discount
sale of goods, wares and merchandise, excepting food products, and from
which business is intended to be conducted for a temporary period of time
and not permanently. If the place in which a business is conducted is rented
or leased for a period of four months or less, such fact shall be presumptive
that the business carried on therein is a transient business.
§ 215-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to assist the government of the City of Hornell,
the management of its business and the preservation of good order and the
peace, health, safety and welfare of its inhabitants and the protection and
security of their property.
§ 215-25. License required; fees. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
No person shall engage in business as a transient merchant unless he shall
first have obtained a license to do so from the City Clerk no later than
five business days before the first date of business. The fee for a transient
merchant's license shall be as provided in Chapter 142, Fees.
§ 215-26. Application for license.
Information required. An application for a transient merchant's license
shall provide the following information:
(1) The address of his place of residence.
The firm or firms he represents, together with copies of documents
establishing the firm's state or county, form of organization,
ownership and qualification to do business in the state and the
exact relationship between the firm and the transient merchant. (If
a corporation, the shareholders, directors and officers of the same
shall be reported.)
(2)
A.
§ 215-23 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 215-26
215:277
§ 215-27. Licensing of nonresidents of state.
Before any person who is a nonresident of New York State shall have a
license issued hereunder, such person must provide to the City Clerk proof
of authorization by the New York Secretary of State to receive service
A brief description of the nature of the business and the kind of
goods or commodities he desires to sell.
(3)
The hotel, room or other place where the applicant proposes to sell
such merchandise and the time during which said business is to be
conducted.
(4)
Bond required.
Before such license is issued by the City Clerk, the applicant will
be required to post a surety bond in an amount of $25,000 with
a surety company licensed to do business in this state. Said bond
shall be approved as to form and sufficiency by the City Attorney
and the City Clerk before such license is issued. [Amended
11-9-1998]
(1)
A condition of such bond shall be that said transient merchant
will pay all state and local sales and other taxes applicable to
his transactions entered into in this city; that he will well and
truly perform any and all contracts or sales orders made within
the city; that all contracts and sales orders will be in writing and
will specify in detail all terms thereof, including but not limited
to any warranty or guaranty therein; and if said merchant takes
orders for merchandise to be delivered at a future date and accepts
payment in part or in full, that he will deliver said merchandise in
a satisfactory condition within a period of three months from the
date of said contract, a copy of which contract or sales order with
full particulars is to be delivered to the purchaser at the time of
sale.
(2)
There shall be no forfeiture in respect to the three month's
limitation where there is proof that nondelivery was due to strikes
or other extraordinary events beyond the control of said merchant;
however, in such event, the merchant, upon demand, shall promptly
return, in full, the purchaser's deposit; and if he fails to do so, the
surety will be required to make restitution under said bond.
(3)
B.
Registration with Chamber of Commerce of the City of Hornell
required. Before such license is issued by the City Clerk, the applicant
will be required to file a duplicate copy of his application with the
Chamber of Commerce of the City of Hornell.
C.
Location and extent of business. Licenses hereunder shall state the
place where business is to be conducted and the date of expiration of
the terms of such business pursuant to the license.
D.
§ 215-26 HORNELL CODE § 215-27
215:278
pursuant to the Business Corporation Law § 304. A certified copy of such
authorization shall be filed with the City Clerk of the City of Hornell.
§ 215-28. Exemptions.
§ 215-29. Compliance with zoning required.
Chapter 315, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Hornell shall apply to all
licenses granted under this Article. The city reserves the right to revoke any
license which violated such chapter or this Article.
§ 215-30. Report of merchant by hotelkeeper.
The owner, proprietor or manager of any hotel, motel, roominghouse or
other place of public accommodation shall report, within six hours after
renting, to the City of Hornell Police Department the name of any person
who has rented a room or other space for the sale and display of
merchandise of a transient merchant, giving the location of the room so
rented.
Nothing in this Article shall be held to apply to any of the following:
(1) Sales conducted pursuant to statute.
(2) Sales conducted pursuant to the order by any court.
Any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in
such articles.
(3)
The peddling of meats, fish fruit and similar produce by farmers
and persons who produce such commodities or to dealers in milk,
baked goods, heating oil and daily newspapers.
(4)
Any honorable discharged member of the United States Armed
Forces who has procured a license under Article 4 of the General
Business Law of the State of New York.
(5)
Persons soliciting, collecting or operating a sale on behalf of any
bona fide charitable, educational, scientific, health, religious,
patriotic or other organization or worthy cause deemed to be in the
public interest.
(6)
Any person selling personal property at a garage sale held at his
residence.
(7)
(8) Any person selling Christmas trees.
Any person selling arts and crafts when said arts and crafts were
produced by the seller.
(9)
A.
This Article shall not be construed so as to unlawfully burden or
interfere with interstate commerce.
B.
§ 215-27 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 215-31
215:279
§ 215-31. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
Any person violating the provision of this Article shall be guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of
the Code; and every day that a violation of this Article shall continue shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 215-31 HORNELL CODE § 215-31
215:280
Chapter 222
PEST CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 120.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
§ 215-31 PEST CONTROL § 215-31
222:281

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-11-1972 (Art. III of Ch. 13 of the 1970 Municipal Code)]
§ 222-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply only in the interpretation and
enforcement of this Article:
DWELLING — Any building or structure which is wholly or partly intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, and includes
appurtenances attached thereto.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of rodents, insects, vermin
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing and
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food and water; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other elimination
methods approved by the Health Officer.
GARBAGE — Animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food and also combustible waste
material. The term shall also include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings and other
combustible materials.
HARBORAGES — Improperly stored or handled containers, lumber, boxes,
building materials, barrels, machinery, vehicles, raw materials and other
such items that afford protection or nesting places for rodents, insects,
vermin or other pests.
INFESTATION — The presence of any rodents, insects, vermin or other
pests on premises.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.
NONDWELLING STRUCTURE — Any structure, except a dwelling, used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or
property of any kind.
OCCUPANT — A person who uses or occupies a building structure, whether
as owner or tenant. A tenant who uses a part of a building structure shall be
deemed the "occupant" of that part of which he has actual or constructive
possession. The owner, agent or other person having custody or control of a
building structure shall be deemed "occupant" of the part that is vacant.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
A.
§ 222-1 PEST CONTROL § 222-1
222:283
PERSON — Includes any individual, family, firm, public or private
corporation, municipality, association, trust, estate or private corporation,
partnership or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
PREMISES — A parcel of land, with or without a dwelling or nondwelling
erected thereon, and includes any building, accessory structure or other
structure thereon.
RODENT STOPPAGE — Preventing ingress and egress of rodents. It shall
consist of blocking all passages which rodents are likely to use to enter or
leave a dwelling with material impervious to rodent gnawing and shall be
done in a manner considered proper and acceptable standards for building
repairs.
RUBBISH — Noncombustible waste material; and the term shall include
the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and also tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and other noncombustible matters.
§ 222-2. Responsibilities of owners.
Shall have the charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit
as owner, lessee, mortgagee or vendee in possession or assignee of
rents or as a receiver or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian
of the estate of the owner. Any agent for any of the above shall be bound
to comply with the provisions of this Article to the same extent as if he
were the "owner."
B.
The owners shall keep all dwellings, multiple dwellings, premises or
commercial vehicles free from rodents, insects, vermin or other pests.
A.
Whenever infestation by rodents, insects, vermin or other pests occurs
or is caused by the failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling, building,
premises or a vehicle in a rodentproof or reasonably insectproof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
B.
When any building, premises or vehicle is subject to infestation by
rodents, insects, vermin or other pests, the owner shall provide rodent
stoppage.
C.
When the Health Officer makes a determination that an area, building,
multiple dwelling, premises or vehicle is infested with rodents, insects
or other pests, he may order the owner to take such rodent
extermination measures as the Health Officer considers necessary.
D.
The owner of a multiple dwelling shall supply facilities or containers
for clean, sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and
garbage. Containers shall be animalproof, rodentproof and watertight
and provided with a tight cover.
E.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain free of actual or
potential rodent feeding areas and harborages all communal, shared or
public areas of dwellings and premises.
F.
§ 222-1 HORNELL CODE § 222-3
222:284
§ 222-3. Responsibilities of occupants.
§ 222-4. Enforcement; powers and duties of Health Officer.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of rodents, insects, vermin or other
area pests therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling
unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be
responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the
only one infested.
A.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of his
garbage and rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner by placing it
in the facility or containers required by this Article.
B.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit, when required to do so by the Health
Officer, shall provide rodent stoppage within the unit occupied by him.
C.
The occupant of any dwelling or premises other than a multiple
dwelling shall supply facilities or containers for the clean, safe, sanitary
storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage.
D.
No person shall feed in the open any domesticated animals other than
in a suitable container and in such a manner so as to prevent the
scattering of food upon the ground or ground level which will or can
provide food for rodents, insects, vermin or other pests.
E.
The Health Officer shall have the power to inspect any and all premises
covered by the regulations of this Article for the purpose of determining
whether there is compliance with the terms of this Article. If the
owner, occupant, agent, manager or other person in charge of the
premises refuses entry to the representative of the Health Officer onto
the premises for the purpose of making inspection, the Health Officer
shall then have the power to obtain a search warrant through the
proper court of law to effectuate the inspection.
A.
Whenever the Health Officer determines that any dwelling, dwelling
unit, nondwelling structure or premises fails to meet the requirements
of this Article, he shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged failures
and directing the owner, occupant or other person in charge to correct
such failures. This notice shall be in writing and it shall provide for a
reasonable time within which the violations must be corrected. Service
of this notice shall be made either by mail or personally upon the owner,
tenant, operator or any other person in charge of the premises. Where
any of the above-named persons are unable to be found, service may be
obtained by affixing to the premises a copy of the notice.
B.
Upon notice of correction of the violations alleged or at the end of the
period of time allowed for the correction of any violation alleged, the
Health Officer shall reinspect the premises.
C.
§ 222-3 PEST CONTROL § 222-4
222:285
§ 222-5. Penalties for offenses. 60
Each violation of this Article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of
the Code. Each day the violation is in effect it shall be deemed a separate
offense.
If, upon reinspection, it is determined that the violations have not been
corrected, the owner, occupant or person in charge shall be either
summoned to appear at a hearing before the Health Officer or the
Health Officer may have a summons issued by the appropriate court of
law charging the person with the violations of this Article.
D.
An owner, occupant or person in charge of a premises, upon receipt of
notice of an alleged violation of this Article, shall have the right to apply
to the Health Officer for a hearing as to the alleged violations. Any
request for a hearing shall be submitted to the Health Officer within
the time period granted for the elimination of the alleged violations.
A petition shall accompany the request for a hearing setting forth the
aggrieved person's reasons for contesting the notice.
E.
The Health Officer, after a hearing, may rescind or modify the notice of
violations or direct that the original terms of the notice of violations be
carried out.
F.
The Health Officer may grant variances from any provisions of this
Article or regulations made pursuant thereto when the Health Officer
finds that there is a practical difficulty or undue hardship connected
with the performance of any act required by this Article or regulation.
G.
Any dwelling or nondwelling structure which is not reasonably
rodentproof and any dwelling, nondwelling structure, or premises in
which or on which there is an infestation of rats or mice or which
contains uncontrolled feeding areas for rats or mice or offers actual
or potential harborage for rats or mice shall constitute a nuisance
detrimental to public health. Should any person fail to comply with a
notice of violation and order of correction to suppress such violations,
the Health Officer may declare the dwelling or nondwelling structure
as unfit for human occupancy and order the premises vacated, and the
Health Officer may enter upon the premises to which such vacation
order relates and suppress such nuisance.
H.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 222-4 HORNELL CODE § 222-5
222:286
ARTICLE II
Poisons
[Adopted as Sec. 16-14 of Ch. 16 of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 222-6. Use restricted.
§ 222-7. Penalties for offenses. 61
Any violation of the provisions of this Article shall be punishable as provided
in § 1-1 of the Code.
No person shall use or employ within the corporate limits of the city
sodium fluoracetate, sodium fluoride or fluoroacetic acid, or any
combination thereof, for the purpose of exterminating rodents, insects,
vermin or any other pests without first having obtained written
permission for the use of such poison or poisons from the City Health
Officer and using such poison or poisons strictly in accordance with the
rules and regulations prescribed by such City Health Officer for the use
of such poisons.
A.
All persons owning or possessing such sodium fluoracetate, sodium
fluoride or fluoroacetic acid shall keep the same so as to prevent harm
to persons or domestic animals.
B.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the use of other poisonous
chemical compounds for the purpose of exterminating rodents, insects,
vermin or other pests within the city.
C.
61.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 222-6 PEST CONTROL § 222-7
222:287
Chapter 228
PLUMBING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 252.
Water — See Ch. 306.
§ 222-7 HORNELL CODE § 222-7
228:288
ARTICLE I
Board of Overseers; General Provisions
§ 228-1. Board of Overseers established. [Added 6-27-1994 by L.L.
No. 2-199462]
§ 228-1.1. Powers and duties of Board. [Added 6-27-1994 by L.L.
No. 2-1994]
The Board of Overseers shall have the following powers and duties:
The Mayor shall appoint members to the Board of Overseers, which
members shall be confirmed by the Common Council. The Board shall
be made up of five voting members consisting of two members of the
Board of Health, the Superintendent of Public Works, one registered
plumber and one Common Council member. The Mayor and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be nonvoting members of the Board.
A.
Each appointee to the Board shall serve a three-year term to be
computed from the first day of January following his/her appointment.
The terms shall be staggered so that one new member shall be
appointed each year. The terms of office at the time of inception of the
Board shall vary in order to effectuate yearly vacancies.
B.
Vacancies occurring by expiration of a term shall be filled by the Mayor
for a full term. All other vacancies occurring during the term of office
shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term.
C.
Each voting member shall be entitled to remuneration in the amount of
$100 per annum.
D.
To meet at regular intervals and as requested by the Superintendent of
Public Works or any two members of the Board.
A.
To have jurisdiction over and to examine all persons desiring or
intending to engage in the trade, business or calling of plumbing as
discussed herein.
B.
To issue certificates of examination to all persons who shall have passed
the examinations as required herein and to issue certificates of
experience to all persons who shall meet the qualifications and
requisites promulgated by the Board and as further set forth herein.
C.
To formulate administrative rules regulating the work of plumbing and
drainage and to set additional qualifications as deemed necessary.
D.
62.Editor's Note: This local law superseded former § 228-1, Applicability of state law, which
referred to Article 4 of the General City Law. Chapter 661 of the Laws of 1993 exempted
the City of Hornell from the provisions of Article 4 of the General City Law.
§ 228-1 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-2
228:289
§ 228-2. Compliance with regulations.
The plumbing and drainage of all buildings, both public and private, in the
city shall be executed in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted
by the Board of Overseers 63 in conjunction with the Board of Health for
plumbing and drainage, and all repairs and alterations in the plumbing and
drainage of all buildings heretofore constructed shall also be executed in
accordance with such rules and regulations; but this section shall not be
construed to repeal any existing provision of law requiring plans for the
plumbing and drainage of new buildings to be filed with the Local Board of
Health and to be previously approved, in writing, by such Board of Health
and to be executed in accordance therewith, except that, in case of any
conflict with such plans, rules and regulations of the Board of Overseers,
the latter shall govern.
§ 228-3. Conflicts with state law. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
§ 228-4. Definitions.
The definitions given herein deal only with certain terms used in this
chapter in the sense that they are used herein. These definitions are not of
a general nature and are not generally applicable beyond the sense used in
this chapter.
APPROVED — Acceptable to or accepted by the Inspector of Plumbing.
BRANCH — The "branch" of any system of piping is that part of the system
which extends horizontally at a slight grade, with or without lateral or
vertical extensions or vertical arms, from the main to receive fixture outlets
not directly connected to the main.
DEAD END — A branch leading from a soil, waste or vent house drain or
house sewer which is terminated at a developed distance of two feet or
more by means of a cap, plug or other fitting not used for admitting water
to the pipe.
In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the plumbing
standards of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, the provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.
A.
In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the plumbing
standards of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, the terms, conditions and requirements which are the most
restrictive shall take precedence and apply.
B.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to impair any provision of
state law to the extent such law is applicable. [Added 6-27-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-1994]
C.
63.Editor's Note: The words "Local Board of Examining Plumbers" have been changed here
and throughout this chapter, at the request of the city, to "Board of Overseers," in
accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 228-2 HORNELL CODE § 228-4
228:290
HOMEOWNER IN RESIDENCE — A person who holds title to and resides in
a residential dwelling.[Added 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
HOUSE DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a house
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of any building and conveys the same to the
house sewer beginning five feet outside of the inner face of the building
wall.
HOUSE SEWER — That part of the horizontal piping of a house drainage
system extending from the house drain five feet outside of the inner face of
the building wall to its connection with the public sewer or private disposal
plant and conveying the drainage of but one building site.
INTERCONNECTION — A water supply connection to a fixture or a
drainage, soil or waste pipe so installed that the contents of the fixture or
the drain may enter the water supply line.
JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER — A plumber who has completed an approved
apprenticeship program registered with the United States Department of
Labor or the New York State Department of Labor or who has had five
years' experience under the supervision of the master plumber.[Added
6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
LABORER — A person who supplies labor under a plumbing contract which
does not entail laying or connecting of pipes or any job for which a
knowledge of plumbing is required. Such labor shall include but not be
limited to digging, lifting, driving, carrying, etc.[Added 6-27-1994 by L.L.
No. 2-1994]
LOCAL VENTILATING PIPE — A pipe through which foul air is removed
from a room or fixture.
MAIN — That part of any system of horizontal, vertical or continuous piping
which receives the waste, vent or back vents from fixture outlets or traps,
directly or through branch pipes.
PERSON — Individual, sole proprietor, partnership or corporation.[Added
6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
PLUMBING — The art of installing in buildings the pipes, fixtures and other
apparatus for bringing in the water supply and removing liquid and watercarried
wastes.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — Receptacles intended to receive and discharge
water, liquid or water-carried wastes into a drainage system with which
they are connected.
PLUMBING SYSTEM — Includes the water supply distributing pipes, the
fixtures and fixture traps, the soil, waste and vent pipes, the house drain
and the stormwater drainage, with their devices, appurtenances and
connections, all within or adjacent to the building.
PROTECTED WASTE PIPE — One from a fixture which is not directly
connected to a drain, soil, vent or waste pipe.
§ 228-4 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-4
228:291
RECOGNIZED PROGRAM — A program registered with the United States
Department of Labor or the New York State Department of Labor.[Added
6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
REGISTERED PLUMBER — A plumber registered in accordance with the
provisions hereof.[Added 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
SIZE AND LENGTH — The given caliber or "size" of a pipe is for a nominal
internal diameter, except that, other than iron pipe size, tubing is measured
by its outside diameter. The developed "length" of a pipe is its length along
the center line of pipe and fittings.
SOIL PIPE — Any pipe which conveys the discharge of water closets, with
or without the discharge from other fixtures, to the house drain.
STACK — A general term for any vertical line of soil, waste or vent piping.
TRAP — A fitting or device so constructed as to prevent the passage of air
or gas through a pipe without materially affecting the flow of sewage or
wastewater through it.
TRAP SEAL — The vertical distance between the crown weir and the dip of
the trap.
VENT PIPE — Any pipe provided to ventilate the plumbing system and to
prevent trap siphonage and back pressure.
WASTE PIPE and SPECIAL WASTE — A "waste pipe" is any pipe which
receives the discharge of any fixture, except water closets and urinals, and
conveys the same to the house drain or soil or waste stacks. When such pipe
does not connect directly with a house drain or soil stack, it is termed a
"special waste."
WATER DISTRIBUTION PIPES — Those which convey water from the
service pipe to the plumbing fixtures.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — That pipe from the water main to the building
served.
§ 228-4.1. Mandatory registration. [Added 6-27-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
Except as provided in § 228-4.5, no person shall engage in the trade,
business or calling of plumbing unless he shall first apply for
registration with the City of Hornell. Such application for registration
shall consist of name, home address (if any), home telephone number
(if any), business address (if any), business telephone number (if any)
and a summary of the experience and credentials of each prospective
registrant.
A.
No application for registration shall be accepted unless the prospective
registrant shall file, together with the aforesaid information, a valid
certificate of examination or a valid certificate of experience issued by
the Board of Overseers, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B.
C. A registration must be renewed annually and shall be nontransferable.
§ 228-4 HORNELL CODE § 228-4.1
228:292
§ 228-4.2. Plumbing permits. [Added 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 228-4.3. Certificate of examination and certificate of experience.
[Added 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 228-4.4. Registration fees. [Added 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A homeowner in residence may not hire any persons under the
provisions of this chapter to circumvent the mandatory registration
provisions hereof.
D.
No person shall undertake a plumbing contract or job in the City of
Hornell unless a valid permit is issued by the Code Enforcement Office
and is in full force and effect during the execution of said contract or
job.
A.
Except as provided in § 228-4.5, no permit shall be issued unless each
and every person who will work under such permit contract or on such
job will be directly supervised by a registered plumber.
B.
No permit shall be issued unless and until a plumber shall first obtain
and provide proof of insurance in an amount acceptable to the City
Attorney. Said insurance shall consist of general liability insurance,
workers' compensation insurance and disability insurance as required
by law. All policies of insurance shall remain in full force and effect
during the effective period of the permit. A lapse in any required policy
of insurance shall subject a permit or registration to revocation.
C.
The Board of Overseers shall examine or cause to have examined all
qualified applicants desiring to obtain a certificate of examination. The
Board shall issue a certificate of examination to any person who takes
said examination and achieves a passing score.
A.
The Board of Overseers shall issue a certificate of experience to any
person who was a licensed plumber in good standing under the
provisions of Article 4 of the General City Law on or before the
enactment of L.L. No. 2-1994. 64
B.
The Board of Overseers may issue a certificate of experience to any
person who can demonstrate an acceptable level of competence in
the field of plumbing by virtue of his years of experience under the
supervision of a journeyman plumber or a plumber licensed under
the provisions of Article 4 of the General City Law on or before the
date of enactment of L.L. No. 2-1994. The issuance of a certificate of
experience under this subsection is wholly within the discretion of the
Board. In no event shall a certificate of experience be issued unless a
plumber has at least five years of experience in the field of plumbing.
C.
64.Editor's Note: Local Law No. 2-1994, appearing in this chapter, was adopted under the
authority of Ch. 661 of the Laws of 1993, which exempted the City of Hornell from the
provisions of Article 4 of the General City Law.
§ 228-4.1 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-4.4
228:293
§ 228-4.5. Performance of plumbing work; exceptions. [Added
6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 228-4.6. Inspections. [Added 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 228-4.7. Penalties. [Added 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
The Board of Overseers shall establish the amount which is to be the
annual registration fee to be collected by the City of Hornell from
persons applying for registration under this chapter. Fees shall run on
a calendar-year basis terminating on December 31 of each year. The
registration fee amount may be reviewed annually and amended as the
Board deems to be appropriate.
A.
The registration fee shall be a lump sum amount and shall not prorated
for a portion of calendar year, nor shall it be returned in whole or any
part should registration terminate prior to completion of the calendar
year.
B.
A homeowner in residence may perform plumbing work in his or her
home without registration, provided that the work does not extend
beyond the exterior walls of the structure, excepting that the
homeowner in residence may perform excavations and laying of pipes
for water and sewer services to his residence. In no case shall the
homeowner in residence perform connections to the main sewers or to
the city's waterlines.
A.
A homeowner in residence must possess a valid permit pursuant to
§ 228-4.2A.
B.
C. A laborer shall be exempt from the registration requirements hereof.
A journeyman plumber may work under a contract and not be
registered, provided that:
(1) The person is a journeyman; and
(2) A valid permit has been issued to a registered plumber.
D.
An apprentice may work under a contract and not be registered,
provided that:
(1) The person is an apprentice; and
(2) A valid permit has been issued to a registered plumber.
E.
The city shall appoint a qualified Plumbing Inspector to conduct
inspections on new construction and other plumbing work and for the
purpose of enforcing this chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
A.
Costs of correcting errors pursuant to a follow-up inspection shall be
borne by the plumber who performed the work.
B.
§ 228-4.4 HORNELL CODE § 228-4.7
228:294
§ 228-4.8. Applicability. [Added 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
This chapter shall apply to persons who perform plumbing work on sewer
and water mains on the city system, even though such lines may be located
outside of the corporate limits of the City of Hornell.
§ 228-5. Inspector.
There shall be appointed as provided by law an Inspector or Inspectors of
Plumbing, whose duties, in addition to those prescribed by law and those
which may be enjoined or required by the Board of Health, shall be to
inspect the construction and alteration of all plumbing work performed in
the city and to report, in writing, the results of such inspections to the Board
of Health. Said Inspector or Inspectors shall also report in like manner
any person engaged in or carrying on the business of employing plumber
without having the certificate provided for in Article II of this chapter. Such
Inspector or Inspectors shall be citizens and actual residents of the city in
which they are appointed, and before entering upon the discharge of their
duties as such Inspector or Inspectors, they shall each be required to obtain
a certificate of competency from the Board of Overseers.65
§ 228-6. Notice of violations or deviations.
Whenever the Plumbing Inspector or other person reports a violation of
any rules and regulations for plumbing and drainage or a deviation from
any officially approved plan or specification for plumbing and drainage filed
with any board or department, the Local Board of Health shall first serve a
notice of the violation thereof upon the master plumber doing the work, if a
registered plumber.
§ 228-7. Service of notice.
The notice provided for in § 228-6 may be served personally or by mail,
and if by mail, it may be addressed to such master plumber at the address
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rules
or regulations of the Department of Health or any provisions of the
Plumbing Code regulating the plumbing and drainage of buildings in
the City of Hornell shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction,
if a master or employing plumber, shall in addition forfeit his
registration.
A.
Violations of the Plumbing Code shall be prosecuted as an offense
against the law. Upon conviction, the penalty shall be a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense; and further, the
offender shall be compelled to make immediate corrections to the work
as necessary to comply with the Plumbing Code.
B.
65.Editor's Note: The words "Local Board of Examining Plumbers" have been changed here
and throughout this chapter, at the request of the city, to "Board of Overseers," in
accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 228-4.7 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-7
228:295
registered by him with the Local Board of Health, but the failure of a master
plumber to register will relieve the Board of Health from the requirement
of giving notice of violation. Unless the violation is removed within three
days after the day of serving or mailing such notice, exclusive of the day of
serving or mailing, the Board of Health may proceed according to law.
§ 228-7 HORNELL CODE § 228-7
228:296
ARTICLE II
Registration and Licensing
§ 228-8. Examination of plumbers; fee; certificate required to
conduct trade. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
A person desiring or intending to conduct the trade, business or calling
of a plumber or of plumbing in the city as employing or master plumber
shall be required to submit to an examination before an Examining Board
of Plumbers, appointed according to law, as to his experience and
qualifications for such trade, business or calling. The fee for such
examination shall be as provided in Chapter 142, Fees. It shall not be lawful
in the city for a person to conduct such trade, business or calling unless
he shall have first obtained a certificate of competency from the Board of
Overseers.66
§ 228-9. Registration of corporation. [Amended 6-10-1985]
A domestic corporation desiring or intending to conduct a trade, business
or calling of plumber or plumbing in this city as employing or master
plumber may do so, provided that one or more officers of such corporation,
separately or aggregately, hold a certificate of competency from the City of
Hornell or an equivalent designation from another municipality in the State
of New York. The examination for a corporate officer shall be the same as
the examination then being given to persons within the meaning of § 228-8
above. Each and every officer of said corporation holding a certificate of
competency shall comply with all the rules and regulations applicable to
master or employing plumbers in the city. Such corporation shall register at
the office of the Board of Health as provided in § 228-11 of this Article.
§ 228-10. Issuance of metal license plate or sign.
Plate required. No person otherwise qualified shall engage in the trade,
business or calling of a plumber or of plumbing in the city as employing
or master plumber until he has first procured from the Department
or Board of Health a metal plate or sign appropriately lettered or
marked "licensed plumber," such plate to be conspicuously posted in
the window of the place where such business is conducted.
A.
Surrender. Any person retiring, abandoning or not actually engaged in
such trade, business or calling hereinbefore mentioned shall surrender
to the Board of Health or to the Board of Overseers67 such metal plate
or sign and shall not again engage in such trade, business or calling
until he has again procured a metal sign as herein provided.
B.
66.Editor's Note: The words "Examining Board of Plumbers" have been changed here and
throughout this chapter to "Board of Overseers," where applicable, at the request of the
city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
67.Editor's Note: The words "Examining Board of Plumbers" have been changed here and
throughout this chapter to "Board of Overseers," where applicable, at the request of the
city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 228-8 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-10
228:297
§ 228-11. Registration of plumbers.
§ 228-12. Cancellation of registration.
The registration provided for in this Article may be canceled by the Board
of Health for a violation of the rules and regulations for the plumbing and
drainage of the city duly adopted and enforced, after a hearing had before
such Board of Health and upon a prior notice of not less than 10 days stating
the grounds of complaint and served upon the person charged with the
violation, but such revocation shall not be operative unless concurred in by
the Board of Overseers.70 It shall not be lawful for any person to engage in
Cost and issuance. Every person now actually engaged or about to
engage in the trade, business or calling of a plumber or of plumbing
as employing or master plumber, who has otherwise complied with
the provisions of law relating to the conduct of such business, upon
payment as provided in Chapter 142, Fees, to the Board of Health
shall have issued to him a sign or plate as described in Subsection A.
[Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
C.
Violations. Any person to whom such plate or sign has been issued who
shall loan, rent, sell or transfer the same to another person, whether
such person is entitled to receive a similar plate or sign or not, or
otherwise willfully violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an offense, punishable as provided in § 1-1 of the Code, and in addition
thereto, shall forfeit his license and certificate of qualifications.
[Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
D.
Employing or master plumbers. Every employing or master plumber
carrying on his trade, business or calling in the city shall register his
name and address at the office of the Board of Health, and thereupon he
shall be entitled to receive a certificate of such registration; provided,
however, that such employing or master plumber shall, at the time of
applying for such registration, hold a certificate of competency from the
Board of Overseers.68
A.
Journeyman plumbers. Every journeyman plumber working at the trade
of plumbing in the city shall register his name and address with the
Board of Overseers69 on or 30 days prior to the first day of January each
year. Blanks for such registration can be obtained from the Plumbing
Inspector.
B.
68.Editor's Note: The words "Examining Board of Plumbers" have been changed here and
throughout this chapter to "Board of Overseers," where applicable, at the request of the
city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
69.Editor's Note: The words "Examining Board of Plumbers" have been changed here and
throughout this chapter to "Board of Overseers," where applicable, at the request of the
city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
70.Editor's Note: The words "Examining Board of Plumbers" have been changed here and
throughout this chapter to "Board of Overseers," where applicable, at the request of the
city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 228-10 HORNELL CODE § 228-12
228:298
or carry on the trade, business or calling of employing or master plumber in
Hornell unless his name and address shall have been registered in the city.
§ 228-13. Expiration of certificates; renewal.
All certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this Article
and all licenses authorizing connections with street sewers or water mains
shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which they shall be
issued and may be renewed within 30 days preceding such expiration. Such
renewals shall be for one year from the first day of January in each year.
§ 228-14. Forfeiture of registration. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L.
No. 4-1992]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article or any rules or
regulations of the Board of Health or of the Board of Overseers71 shall be
guilty of an offense and, on conviction, if a master plumber, shall in addition
forfeit any certificate of competency or registration which he may hold
under the provisions thereof.
§ 228-15. Certificate required for sewer and water connection
licenses.
No license shall be issued to anyone to connect with the sewers or water
mains of the city unless such person has obtained and shall produce a
certificate of competency and a plate or sign from the Board of Overseers of
the city.72 The fee for such plate or sign shall be as provided in § 228-10C.
71.Editor's Note: The words "Examining Board of Plumbers" have been changed here and
throughout this chapter to "Board of Overseers," where applicable, at the request of the
city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
72.Editor's Note: The words "Examining Board of Plumbers" have been changed here and
throughout this chapter to "Board of Overseers," where applicable, at the request of the
city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 228-12 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-15
228:299

ARTICLE III
Inspections and Tests
§ 228-16. Inspections to ensure compliance.
All soil and waste lines of a plumbing system shall be inspected by the
Plumbing Inspector to ensure compliance with the requirements of the
Plumbing Code and the installation and construction of the system in
accordance with the approved plans and the permit.
§ 228-17. Notification to inspect.
It shall be the duty of the plumber to notify the Plumbing Inspector, orally
by telephone or in writing, that the work is ready to be inspected or tested.
It shall be the duty of the plumber to make sure that the work will stand the
test prescribed before giving the above notification.
§ 228-18. Materials to be furnished by plumber.
The equipment, material and labor necessary for the inspection and test
shall be furnished by the plumber.
§ 228-19. Water test.
§ 228-20. Order of tests; approval of installation.
The water test may be applied to the drainage system in its entirety or
in sections. If applied to the entire system, all openings in the piping
shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening above the roof, and
the system filled with water to the point of overflowing above the roof.
A.
If the system is tested in sections, each opening shall be tightly
plugged, except the highest opening of the section under test, and each
section shall be filled with water, but no section shall be tested with less
than a five-foot head of water.
B.
Generally.
The tests may be made separately as follows:
The house drain, including all piping to the height of five feet
above the highest point on the house drain.
(a)
The soil, waste, vent, inside conductor and drainage pipes
which would be covered up before the building is enclosed or
ready for completion.
(b)
(c) The final test of the whole system.
(1)
(2) The test required by Subsections A(1)(b) and (c) may be combined.
A.
§ 228-16 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-20
228:301
§ 228-21. Inspection required prior to covering.
§ 228-22. Defective work.
If an inspection or test shows defects, such defective work or material shall
be replaced within 10 days and the inspections and tests repeated.
§ 228-23. Issuance of certificate of approval.
Upon the satisfactory completion and final test of the plumbing system,
a certificate of approval shall be issued by the Plumbing Inspector to the
plumber to be delivered to the owner.
Written approval. After each of the above tests has been made and
proved acceptable, the Plumbing Inspector shall issue a written
approval.
B.
No drainage or plumbing system or part thereof shall be covered until
it has been inspected, tested and approved as herein prescribed.
A.
If any house drainage or plumbing system or part thereof is covered
before being regularly inspected, tested and approved as herein
prescribed, it shall be uncovered upon the direction of the proper
administrative authority.
B.
§ 228-20 HORNELL CODE § 228-23
228:302
ARTICLE IV
Standards and Installation Requirements
§ 228-24. Plans and specifications.
§ 228-25. Change in plans.
Application for a change in plans or work in the building must be made, in
writing, by the plumber, duly signed by the owner or his agent, and a written
permit obtained from the Board of Health before any part of the change is
commenced.
§ 228-26. Bond required for trench or street cuts.
If any work done under the provisions of this chapter shall necessitate
trench or street cuts, the person performing such work shall furnish to the
city a security bond in the amount required by the city.
§ 228-27. Installation of plumbing by owner.
Any owner wishing to install plumbing in his own residence only shall obtain
permission from the Plumbing Inspector73 to do such work, file proper plans
and pay the regular fees and comply with the requirements of this chapter;
and in such event, the word "owner" shall be substituted for the word
"plumber" throughout the chapter.
§ 228-28. Use of public sewers required.
Where a public sewer is accessible in a street, alley, easement or
thoroughfare to a building or premises abutting thereon, the liquid wastes
from any plumbing system in said building shall be discharged into the
public sewer unless otherwise prohibited.
Required. Plans and specifications of plumbing work, together with an
application signed by the owner or his agent for a permit, must be
submitted to the Inspector of Plumbing for approval, and a permit must
be obtained before any part of the building or work is commenced.
A.
Contents. There shall be a separate plan for each building, public or
private, accompanied by specifications describing the drainage of said
building on blanks prescribed and furnished for this purpose, showing
the size and kind of pipe, traps, closets, fixtures, etc., to be used, the
same to be examined and placed on file in the office of the Department
or Board of Health.
B.
Preparation. Plans must be made by the architect or engineer where
one is employed.
C.
73.Editor's Note: The original words "Plumbing Board" have been changed to "Plumbing
Inspector" at the request of the city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 228-24 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-29
228:303
§ 228-29. Sewage treatment and safety.
Where the liquid wastes from any plumbing system are not discharged into
a public sewer, such wastes shall be so treated or disposed of as not to
endanger any water supply that is or may be used for drinking or domestic
purposes or so as not to create any nuisance or unsanitary condition.
§ 228-30. Septic tank location.
No septic tank shall be located less than 20 feet from an occupied building,
except by special permission of the Plumbing Inspector or the Board of
Health, nor shall a septic tank be located within or under a building, nor
shall a septic tank be connected to a sewer.
§ 228-31. Corrosive or harmful wastes.
§ 228-32. Explosive or flammable wastes.
§ 228-33. Piping.
Discharge into public sewer. Corrosive or harmful wastes and wastes at
a temperature higher than 140° F. shall not be discharged into a public
sewer.
A.
Discharge into plumbing system. Such wastes shall not be discharged
into a plumbing system to which water closets, bathtubs, lavatories
or other household plumbing fixtures are connected. The plumbing
system designed to receive such wastes shall be of a material capable
of resisting the destructive action of such wastes.
B.
Use of cooling device. Where fixtures discharge wastes at a
temperature higher than 140° F., they shall be provided with a
satisfactory cooling device.
C.
Discharge into sewers prohibited. No explosive or flammable matters
shall be discharged into any sewer.
A.
Intercepting tank or pit required. Cleaning establishments, buildings
used for housing or repairing automobiles, gasoline and oil service
stations and other buildings or establishments where gasoline, oils,
calcium carbide or other explosives or flammable materials are stored,
sold or handled, the drains from which are connected to the public
sewers, must be provided with an approved intercepting pit or tank so
constructed, located and maintained as to prevent the entrance into the
sewer of such explosive or flammable matter. Such intercepting tank or
pit shall be approved by the Plumbing Inspector or the Board of Health.
B.
Grades of horizontal piping. All horizontal piping shall be run in
practical alignment and at a uniform grade of not less than 1/8 inch per
foot and shall be supported or anchored at intervals not to exceed 10
feet. All stacks shall be supported at their bases, and all pipes shall be
rigidly secured.
A.
§ 228-29 HORNELL CODE § 228-33
228:304
§ 228-34. Temporary toilet facilities.
If required, suitable toilet facilities should be provided for the use of
workmen during the construction of any building. These toilet facilities shall
be maintained in a sanitary condition.
§ 228-35. Quality and weight of materials.
Changes in direction. All changes in direction shall be made by the
appropriate use of forty-five-degree wyes, half-wyes, long-sweep
quarter bends or sixth-, eighth- or sixteenth-bends, except that sanitary
tees or offsets may be used on vertical stacks and short quarter-bends
may be used in soil and waste lines where the change in direction of
flow is from the horizontal to the vertical. Tees and crosses may be used
in vent pipes.
B.
Prohibited fittings. No T's or Y's shall be used on horizontal soil or drain
lines. The drilling and tapping of house drains, soil, waste or vent pipes
and the use of saddle hubs and bands are prohibited.
C.
Dead ends. In the installation of any drainage system, dead ends shall
be avoided.
D.
Offsets in mains. Offsets in the mains of all stacks shall be avoided,
but when unavoidable, they shall be made with fittings as described in
Subsection B.
E.
Stack; pipe supports.
All freestanding stacks shall be thoroughly supported on concrete
or masonry piers at their base, and those 40 feet or more in height
shall also be provided with footrests at their bases and also with
floor or supports at intervals of 10 feet.
(1)
The pipe supports, according to their location, shall be made either
with heavy iron posts, hangers, wall brackets or steel fittings or
concrete or masonry piers, provided that no brick pier shall be less
than eight inches square. The use of pipe hooks shall be prohibited
for larger than one-and-one-half-inch pipes.
(2)
F.
Protection of pipes against breakage and corrosion. All pipes passing
under or through walls shall be protected from breakage. All pipes
passing through or under cinder concrete or other corrosive material
shall be protected against external corrosion.
G.
Freedom from defects required. All materials used in any drainage or
plumbing system or part thereof shall be free from defects.
A.
Material to be stamped or marked. Each length of soil, pipe, fittings
and device used in a plumbing or drainage system shall be stamped
or indelibly marked with the weight or quality thereof and the maker's
mark or name.
B.
§ 228-33 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-35
228:305
New materials. Any other material than that specified in this chapter
which the Board of Overseers approves as being equally efficient may
be permitted.74
C.
Vitrified clay pipe. All vitrified clay pipe shall conform to the American
Society for Testing and Materials, Standard Specifications for Clay
Sewer Pipe, Serial Designation C 13-24.
D.
Cast-iron pipe.
Quality. All cast-iron pipe and fittings shall conform to the American
Society for Testing and Materials, Standard Specifications for Cast-
Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings, Serial Designation A 74-18.
(1)
Coating. All cast-iron pipe and fittings for underground use shall be
coated with asphaltum or coal tar pitch.
(2)
Soil pipe and fittings. All soil pipe and fittings used are to be of a
weight known as "standard," except in buildings over three stories
high, then all soil pipe and fittings used shall be of a weight known
as "extra heavy."
(3)
E.
Wrought iron pipe. All wrought iron pipe shall conform to the American
Society for Testing and Materials, Standard Specifications for Welded
Wrought Iron Pipe, Serial Designation A 72-27, and shall be galvanized.
F.
Steel pipe. All steel pipe shall conform to the American Society for
Testing and Materials, Standard Specifications for Welded and
Seamless Steel Pipe, Serial Designation A 53-27, and shall be
galvanized.
G.
Brass and copper pipe. Brass and copper pipe shall conform,
respectively, to the Standard Specifications of the American Society
for Testing and Materials for Brass Pipe, Standard Sizes, for Copper
Pipe Standard Sizes, for Copper Pipe and Fittings Standard Sizes and
for Copper Tubing, Serial Number, brass pipe, B 43-58, tube, B135-58,
copper drainage tube, D.W.V. B 306-59, and water tube, K-L-M-B 88-58,
respectively.
H.
Lead pipe; diameter and weights. All lead pipe shall be of the best
quality of drawn pipe of not less weight per linear foot than as follows:
Lead soil, waste, vent or flush pipes, including bends and traps
(extra light):
(1)
I.
74.Editor's Note: The words "Examining Board of Plumbers" have been changed here and
throughout this chapter to "Board of Overseers," where applicable, at the request of the
city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 228-35 HORNELL CODE § 228-35
228:306
Internal Diameter
(inches) Weight Per Foot
1 2 pounds
1 1/4 2 pounds 8 ounces
1 1/2 3 pounds 8 ounces
2 4 pounds
3 4 pounds 12 ounces
4 6 pounds
Sheet lead. Sheet lead shall weigh not less than four pounds per square
foot.
J.
Sheet copper or brass. Sheet copper or brass shall be not lighter than
No. 18 Brown and Sharp gauge, except that for local interior ventilating
pipe, it shall be not lighter than No. 26 Brown and Sharp gauge.
K.
Galvanized sheet iron. Galvanized sheet iron shall be not lighter than
the following Brown and Sharp gauges:
(1) No. 26 for two- to twelve-inch pipe.
(2) No. 24 for thirteen- to twenty-inch pipe.
(3) No. 22 for twenty-one- to twenty-six-inch pipe.
L.
Fittings.
Plain screwed fittings. Plain screwed fittings shall be of cast-iron,
malleable iron or brass of standard weight and dimensions.
(1)
Drainage fittings. Drainage fittings shall be of cast-iron, malleable
iron or brass, with a smooth interior waterway, with threads tapped
out of solid metal.
(2)
Malleable and cast-iron fittings. All malleable and cast-iron fittings
shall be galvanized.
(3)
Fittings for copper tubing. All fittings for copper tubing shall be
brass and shall have a smooth interior waterway reamed out of
solid material for the inserting of copper tubing.
(4)
M.
Brass caulking ferrules; weights and dimensions. Brass caulking
ferrules shall be of the best quality red cast brass, with weights and
dimensions in accordance with the following table:
N.
§ 228-35 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-35
228:307
§ 228-36. Joints and connections.
Pipe size
(inches)
Actual Inside
Diameter
(inches)
Length
(inches) Weight
2 2 4 1 pound
3 3 4 1 pound 8
ounces
4 4 4 2 pounds 4
ounces
Soldering nipples. Soldering nipples shall be of brass pipe, iron size or
of heavy, cast red brass not less than the following weights:
Diameter
(inches) Weight
1 1/4 6 ounces
1 1/2 8 ounces
2 14 ounces
2 1/2 1 pound 6 ounces
3 2 pounds
4 3 pounds 8 ounces
O.
Floor flanges for water closets. Floor flanges for water closets shall be
not less than 3/16 inch thick and of brass or cast-iron.
P.
Blowoff pipes. Blowoff pipes from boilers or heating plants shall be of
cast-iron, wrought iron or steel.
Q.
Joints and connections to be gas- and watertight. All joints and
connections mentioned under this section shall be made permanently
gas- and watertight.
A.
Vitrified pipe joints. All joints in vitrified clay pipes between vitrified
clay pipe and metal shall be yarned and poured with hot jointing
material.
B.
Caulked joints. All caulked joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or
hemp and shall be secured only with pure lead not less than one inch
deep, well caulked, and no paint, varnish or putty will be permitted until
after the joint is tested.
C.
Screw joints. All screw joints shall be American Standard screw joints,
and all burrs or cuttings shall be removed.
D.
Cast-iron joints. Cast-iron joints may be either caulked or screw joints
made in the approved manner.
E.
§ 228-35 HORNELL CODE § 228-36
228:308
Wrought iron, steel or brass to cast-iron joints. The joints may be either
screwed or caulked joints made in the approved manner.
F.
Lead pipe joints. Joints in lead pipe or between lead pipe and brass or
copper pipes, ferrules, soldering nipples, bushings or traps, in all cases
on the sewer side of the trap and in concealed joints on the inlet side
of the trap, shall be full-wiped joints, with an exposed surface of the
solder to each side of the joint of not less than 3/4 inch and a minimum
thickness at the thickest part of the joint of not less than 3/8 inch.
Except in concealed and inaccessible positions, other types of joints
may be permitted if approved by the Board of Overseers.75
G.
Sweat joints. Sweat joints shall be made by means of carrying the
liquefied solder around the entire surface between the pipe and fittings
by capillary attraction. Copper tubing is to be cut square so as to butt
square against the shoulder of the fitting.
H.
Lead to cast-iron, steel or wrought iron joints. Lead to cast-iron, steel
or wrought iron joints shall be made by means of a caulking ferrule,
soldering nipples or bushing.
I.
Slip joints and unions. Slip joints will be permitted in trap seals or on
the inlet side of the trap. Unions on the sewer side of the trap may be
slip joints if not concealed or enclosed.
J.
Roof joints. The joints at the roof shall be made watertight by use of
copper, lead or iron plates or flashings.
K.
Closet, pedestal, urinal and trap, standard slop sink and floor
connections. A brass floor connection shall be wiped or soldered to
lead pipe, an iron floor connection shall be caulked to cast-iron pipe or
an iron floor connection caulked or screwed to wrought iron pipe and
the floor connection bolted to an earthenware trap flange. A metal to
earthenware, a metal to metal union or a lead or asbestos gasket, spunrubber
gasket, putty or approved wax seal shall be used to make a tight
joint.
L.
Increasers and reducers. Where different sizes of pipes or pipes and
fittings are to be connected, proper size increasers or reducers between
the two sizes shall be used.
M.
Prohibited joints and connections. Any fitting or connection which has
an enlargement, chamber or recess with a ledge shoulder or reduction
of the pipe area in the direction of the flow on the outlet or drain side of
any trap is prohibited. No saddles shall be permitted on waste or vent
lines.
N.
75.Editor's Note: The words "Examining Board of Plumbers" have been changed here and
throughout this chapter to "Board of Overseers," where applicable, at the request of the
city, in accordance with L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 228-36 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-36
228:309
§ 228-37. Traps and cleanouts.
Expansion bolts. Connections of wall hangers, pipe supports or fixture
settings with masonry, stone or concrete backing shall be made with
expansion bolts without the use of wooden plugs.
O.
Kinds of traps required.
Generally. Every trap shall be self-cleaning. Traps for bathtubs,
lavatories, sinks and other similar fixtures shall be of lead, brass,
cast iron or of malleable iron, galvanized or porcelain-enameled
inside. Galvanized or porcelain-enameled traps shall have a fullbore
smooth interior waterway, with threads tapped out of solid
metal.
(1)
Sizes. The minimum size (nominal inside diameter) of trap and
waste branch for a given fixture shall be not less than shown in the
following table:
Kind of Fixture Size of Trap
and Branch
(inches)
Baths, foot 1 1/2
Baths, shower stall 2
Baths, sitz 1 1/2
Bathtubs 1 1/2
Bidets 1 1/2
Combination fixtures 1 1/2
Drinking fountains 1 1/4
Fountain cuspidors 1 1/4
Floor drains 2
Laundry trays 1 1/2
Lavatories 1 1/4
Sinks, dishwasher 1 1/2
Sinks, hotel or public 2
Sinks, kitchen, residence 1 1/2
Sinks, large hotel or public 2
Sinks, slop, with trap combined 3
Sinks, slop, ordinary 2
Sinks, small, pantry or bar 1 1/4
Urinals, lip 1 1/2
Urinals, pedestal 3
(2)
A.
§ 228-36 HORNELL CODE § 228-37
228:310
Urinals, stall 2
Urinals, trough 2
Water closets 3
Concealed traps. Concealed traps shall be four inches by eight
inches tapped according to the list set forth in Subsection A(2) for
trap sizes or approved deep seal brass trap.
(3)
Prohibited traps. No form of trap which depends for its seal upon the
action of movable parts or concealed interior partitions shall be used
for fixtures. Where there is an antisiphon trap already installed, such
trap may be replaced with the same type of trap.
B.
Location and number of traps; double-trap prohibited. Each fixture
shall be separately trapped by a water-seal trap placed as near to the
fixtures as possible, except that a set of not more than three laundry
trays or lavatories or a set of two laundry trays and one sink may
connect with a single trap. In no case shall the waste from a bathtub
or other fixture discharge into a water closet trap. No fixtures shall be
double-trapped.
C.
House trap and fresh-air inlet. On sanitary house sewers or drains,
there shall be placed in such sewer or drain a running trap, which trap
shall have two four-inch handholes and which shall be connected to a
Y-branch trap placed in the cellar as near as possible to the building
or foundation wall. Just ahead of the house trap, a fresh-air inlet shall
be connected and run to the outside of the building. The fresh-air inlet
shall not be less than four inches and the outside opening of the same
shall be left not less than 12 inches above finished grade and not less
than eight feet from any window, door or opening; also the opening of
the same shall be properly capped to permit free entry of air. Where
there is no cellar under the building, the house or building trap is to be
placed underground as near as possible to the outside of the building
wall.
D.
Water seal. Each fixture trap shall have a water seal of not less than two
inches and not more than five inches, except grease traps.
E.
Trap cleanouts. Each trap, except those in combination with fixtures in
which the trap seal is plainly visible and accessible, shall be provided
with an accessible brass trap screw of ample size, protected by the
water seal. All concealed traps in floors shall have not less than a fourinch
screw cleanout. The cleanout shall be accessible above the floor.
F.
Trap levels and protection. All traps shall be set true with respect to
their water seals and protected from frost and evaporation.
G.
Pipe cleanouts.
Specifications. The bodies of cleanout ferrules shall be made of
standard pipe sizes, shall conform in thickness to that required for
(1)
H.
§ 228-37 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-37
228:311
pipe and fittings of the same metal and shall extend not less than
1/4 inch above the hub. The cleanout cap or plug shall be of heavy
brass not less than 1/8 inch thick and shall be provided with a
raised nut or recessed socket for removal.
Locations and sizes. A cleanout easily accessible shall be placed at
the foot of each vertical waste or soil stack and one shall be placed
at the end of the Y-branch of the house sewer. One cleanout shall be
placed in each of the two handholes in the main house or building
trap and also at the end of any horizontal soil or waste line that
is over five feet in length. Cleanouts shall be the same size as the
waste line up to four inches and not less than four inches for larger
lines.
(2)
Manholes. All underground traps and cleanouts of a building, except
where cleanouts are extended flush with the floor, and all exterior
underground traps shall be made accessible by a manhole with proper
cover or with cleanouts carried flush with the finished grade.
I.
Cleanouts. Any floor or wall connection of fixture traps, when bolted or
screwed to the floor or wall, shall be regarded as a cleanout.
J.
Grease traps and catch basins; use and installation regulated.
Where required. In any building where quantities of grease or
oily wastes are discharged, a water-cooled grease trap shall be
provided on each fixture through which such wastes are discharged
or a grease catch basin shall be installed to intercept such wastes
before they enter the house drain or house sewer. Where a grease
catch basin is used, each fixture shall be separately trapped as
provided in Subsection C above.
(1)
Installation and protection. Whenever possible, the grease catch
basin shall be installed outside of the wall of the building as near as
possible to the fixtures from which it receives the discharge. Such
a trap or catch basin shall be protected, where necessary, against
freezing.
(2)
Prohibited discharges. No human or fresh animal excrement shall
be discharged into a grease catch basin, either directly or through
any inlet pipe.
(3)
K.
Location and specifications of grease traps. Where a grease trap is
installed, it shall be placed as near as possible to the fixture from which
it receives the discharge, and it shall have double the capacity of said
fixture. It should be self-cleaning as regards sediment solids but large
enough to chill and retain grease until manually cleaned. The outlet
leg shall be so vented or installed as to preclude the possibility of selfsiphonage.
L.
Construction and capacity of grease catch basins. A grease catch basin
shall be constructed in a watertight and substantial manner of steel,
M.
§ 228-37 HORNELL CODE § 228-37
228:312
iron, brick, concrete, vitrified clay or masonry. The outlet pipe shall be
one size larger than the inlet pipe and in no case less than four inches
in diameter. The outlet shall be provided with an inverted bend and
cleanout, it shall be submerged at least eight inches, and it shall receive
liquid as close to the bottom as possible, and the bottom shall be formed
that the sedimented solids will be scoured out at each discharge. The
catch basin shall be so vented and installed so as to preclude the
possibility of siphoning. The inlet shall enter near the water surface.
The catch basin should have a tight masonry, vitrified clay or metal
cover, readily removable and accessible for the removal of grease. The
capacity of the catch basin should be not less than the maximum hourly
inflow, except that for garages the capacity shall not be less than three
by four (3 x 4) feet, unless special permission is given by the Board of
Health.
Sand traps and catch basins.
Where required; prohibited discharge. Sand traps or catch basins
shall be installed on the waste pipe from any fixture or yard, stable,
manure pit, cellar, floor or subsoil drain or roof leader or other
waste, the discharges from which may contain sand or other gritty
or clogging matter. The passing of human excrement through a
sand trap or catch basin is prohibited.
(1)
Design and construction. Sand traps and catch basins, when
installed, shall be so designed and placed as to be readily
accessible for cleaning. They shall be so constructed in the same
general manner as provided for grease catch basins in Subsection
M above, except that they shall be at least 20 inches in inside
diameter, and where possible, the outlet shall be at least four feet
below the surface of the ground. The outlet shall be submerged at
least eight inches and shall be not less than 15 inches above the
bottom of the basin.
(2)
Ventilation. Where the waste passing through a sand trap or catch
basin may contain foul-smelling matter and said sand trap or catch
basin is located within a courtyard or within 12 feet of the outside
walls of a building or within a building or said sand trap or catch
basin is connected to a pipe or receptacle containing sewage or is
connected to a plumbing system in such manner that ventilation
through the entering soil pipe is not always possible, said sand trap
or catch basin shall be vented with a two-inch vent pipe. Said vent
pipe shall be connected to the highest practicable point in the sand
trap or catch basin.
(3)
N.
Gasoline and oil traps.
Where required; prohibited discharge. A gasoline and oil trap shall
be provided on the waste from all garages, automobile wash floors,
cleaning establishments or establishments from which gasoline,
(1)
O.
§ 228-37 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-37
228:313
§ 228-38. Water supply and distribution.
benzine or other similar substance is discharged. The passing of
human or animal excrement through such a trap is prohibited.
Construction and capacity. A gasoline and oil trap shall be
constructed in the same general manner as provided for a grease
catch basin in Subsection M above. The capacity of the gasoline or
oil trap shall be not less than twice the maximum hourly inflow.
(2)
Ventilation. All gasoline and oil traps shall be vented with a fourinch
or larger vent pipe leading from the highest practicable point
in the trap.
(3)
Floor drains; trapping regulated. All floor drains shall connect into a
trap so constructed that it can be readily cleaned and of a size to serve
efficiently the purpose for which it is intended. The drain inlet shall
be so located that it is at all times in full view. Such drains shall be
equipped with an adequate backwater valve.
P.
Backwater valves; construction. Backwater valves shall have all bearing
parts or balls of noncorrodible metal and be so constructed as to ensure
a positive mechanical seal and remain closed except when discharging
wastes.
Q.
Distribution of domestic and drinking water supply. The domestic and
drinking water supply shall be distributed through a piping system
entirely independent of any piping system conveying another water
supply.
A.
Size of water service pipe. The water service pipe of any building shall
be of sufficient size to permit a continuous ample flow of water on all
floors at a given time.
B.
Water supply to fixtures.
Generally. All plumbing fixtures shall be provided with a sufficient
supply of water for flushing to keep them in a sanitary condition.
Every water closet or pedestal urinal shall be flushed by means of
an approved tank or flush valve of at least four gallons' flushing
capacity for water closets and at least two gallons for urinals and
shall be adjusted to prevent the waste of water. The flush pipe
for water closet flush tanks shall be not less than two inches in
diameter, and the water from flush tanks shall be used for no other
purpose.
(1)
Pollution. No plumbing fixtures or device shall be supplied directly
from a water supply system through a flushometer or other valve
unless such valve is installed in a manner such as to prevent any
possibility of polluting the water supply.
(2)
C.
§ 228-37 HORNELL CODE § 228-38
228:314
Interconnection. No plumbing fixture, device or construction shall
be installed which will provide an interconnection between a
distributing system of water for drinking and domestic purposes
and a drainage, soil or waste pipe so as to permit or make possible
the backflow of sewage or waste into the water supply system.
(3)
Size of water supply pipe. The minimum size of water service pipes
from the curb to the dwelling shall be no smaller than 1/2 inch and to
fixtures as follows:
Fixture
Minimum Size
(inches)
Bathtubs 1/2
Flush valves, closets 1
Flush valves, urinals 3/4
Hot-water boilers 1/2
Laundry trays 1/2
Lavatories 3/8
Sill cocks 1/2
Sinks 1/2
Urinals 1/2
Water closet tanks 3/8
D.
Water supply control. A main shutoff on the water supply line shall
be provided between the building wall and the curbline. An accessible
shutoff shall be provided on the main supply line just inside the
foundation wall which shall control the water supply to the entire
building. Accessible shutoffs shall also be provided which shall
separately control the water supply for each flat or apartment of a
building, for each lawn sprinkler, for each hot-water tank and for each
water closet.
E.
Water supply pipes and fittings; material. All water supply pipes for a
plumbing system shall be of galvanized wrought iron or steel, brass,
copper or cast iron, with brass or galvanized malleable iron fittings. No
pipe or fittings that have been used for other purposes shall be used for
distributing water. Joints shall be caulked, screwed, sweat or swedged.
F.
Protection of water supply. All concealed water pipes and storage tanks
and all exposed pipes or tanks subject to freezing temperatures shall be
efficiently protected against freezing.
G.
Relief valves. Wherever a check valve or water meter is installed on the
cold water supply pipe between the street main and the hot-water tank,
there shall be installed on the hot-water distributing system a suitable
relief valve.
H.
§ 228-38 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-38
228:315
§ 228-39. Plumbing fixtures.
Pumps and hydrants. All pumps and hydrants shall be protected from
surface water and contamination.
I.
High-pressure steam boiler feed. The high-pressure steam boiler shall
not be supplied with water directly from public water supply pipes.
All such boilers shall be provided with a tank or other receptacle of
sufficient capacity to hold not less than six hours' supply for the boiler.
J.
Water closets, urinals and similar receptacles; materials prescribed.
All receptacles used as water closets, urinals or otherwise for the
disposal of human excreta shall be vitrified earthenware.
(1)
Where acid or water contaminated with acid is to be wasted, the
fixtures, pipe and fittings in both waste and vent lines and
connections to sewers must be of acidproof materials (lead, glass
or Dur iron).
(2)
A.
Installation generally. All plumbing fixtures shall be installed free and
open in a manner to afford access for cleaning. When practical, all pipes
from fixtures shall be run to the wall, and no lead trap or pipe shall
extend nearer to the floor than 12 inches unless protected by casing.
B.
Water closet bowls and traps. Water closet bowls and traps shall be
made in one piece and of such form as to hold sufficient quantity of
water, when filled to the trap overflow, to prevent fouling of surface and
shall be provided with integral flushing rims constructed so as to flush
the entire interior of the bowl.
C.
Frostproof closets. Frostproof closets may be installed only in
compartments which have no direct connection with a building used for
human habitation or occupancy. The soil pipe between the hopper and
the trap shall be three inches in diameter and shall be of lead or cast
iron, enameled on the inside.
D.
Flushing tanks for groups of urinals. A group of urinals on the same
floor subject to constant use, as in schools and factories, may be
supplied from one tank if provided with an automatic simultaneous
flush, provided that each individual urinal shall receive not less than
one gallon of water at each flushing and the discharge is of such force
as to cleanse each individual bowl at each flush.
E.
Automatic flushing tanks. All urinals having either intermittent or
automatic flushing devices shall be flushed at regular intervals not to
exceed 10 minutes each during the hours that such fixtures are in use.
F.
Construction of urinals. All urinals other than those heretofore
prescribed shall be constructed of enameled iron that will not corrode
under the action of urine. The lip of all stall urinals must be set below
the top of the floor so that all water or urine will drain from the floor to
G.
§ 228-38 HORNELL CODE § 228-39
228:316
§ 228-40. Ventilation of rooms.
the urinal waste outlet, or a separate floor drain shall be provided for
the toilet room.
Prohibited fixtures. Fixed wooden washtrays or sinks shall not be
installed in any building designed or used for human habitation. No new
copper-lined wooden bathtubs shall be installed, and an old fixture of
this class taken out shall not be reconnected. Pan and valve plungers,
offset washouts and other water closets having invisible seals or
unventilated space or walls not thoroughly washed at each flush shall
not be used. Long hopper closets or similar appliances shall not
hereafter be installed. No dry closet or chemical closet shall be
installed.
H.
Shower drains. A shower drain shall be considered a fixture and
provided with a strainer.
I.
Fixture strainers. All fixtures other than water closets and pedestal
urinals shall be provided with fixed strong metallic strainers with outlet
areas not less than that of the interior of the trap and waste pipe.
J.
Fixture overflow. The overflow pipe from a fixture shall be connected on
the house or inlet side of the trap and shall be so arranged that it may
be readily and effectively cleaned.
K.
Location of fixtures restricted. No trapped plumbing fixtures shall be
located in any room or apartment which does not contain a window
placed in an external wall of the building or is not provided with a
system of ventilation.
A.
Compartments containing not more than four water closets.
Compartments containing not more than four water closets or their
equivalent shall be located in an apartment containing windows, of
sufficient area to ventilate properly the compartment, placed in the
external walls of the building or shall be provided with a mechanical
means of ventilation which will change the air at a normal temperature
at least six times per hour.
B.
Compartments containing more than four water closets. Compartments
containing more than four water closets or their equivalent shall be
located either in an apartment containing windows and provided with a
gravity or mechanical system of ventilation which will change the air at
normal temperature not less than six times per hour or may be placed
in a compartment without windows in the external wall of the building,
provided that a mechanical system of ventilation is installed which will
change the air at normal temperature not less than six times per hour.
C.
Size of window or skylight. Every toilet room and every water closet or
urinal compartment, unless provided with a suitable system of exhaust
ventilation, shall be ventilated directly to the outer air by movable
windows or by skylights with fixed or pivoted louvers. Every such toilet
D.
§ 228-39 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-40
228:317
§ 228-41. Soil, waste and vent pipes.
room or compartment shall have a window or glass skylight not less
than one foot wide and an area of not less than six square feet for one
water closet or urinal, and the area of the window or skylight shall be
increased by at least one square foot for every additional water closet
or urinal.
Mechanical ventilation systems. If a mechanical system of ventilation
is used, such system shall consist of metal or smooth masonry ducts
extending from the individual toilet rooms or compartments to a fan or
fans of sufficient capacity to exhaust a volume of not less than 30 cubic
feet of air per minute for each water closet or urinal, and in no case
shall less than six changes of air in the toilet room or compartment be
allowed per hour. The exhaust duct shall discharge into the outside air
above the room and in such a manner as not to create objectionable
odors or a nuisance on the premises or adjacent premises.
E.
Ventilation from toilet rooms to be separate from other ventilating
ducts. Ventilation from toilet rooms shall be separate and distinct and
have no connection whatever with the other ventilating ducts in the
building.
F.
Materials.
Main or branch soil, waste or vent pipes. All main or branch soil,
waste and vent pipes within the building shall be of cast iron,
galvanized steel or wrought iron, lead, brass or K copper, except
that no galvanized steel or wrought iron pipe shall be used for
underground soil or waste pipes.
(1)
House or building drains. All house or building drains shall be cast
iron, with caulked joints (neoprene rings permissible) or Schedule
40 PVC (plastic pipe) ASTM D2665, except for replacement of
damaged drains. [Amended 11-28-1988]
(2)
A.
Demand load of fixtures.
The load of fixtures shall be as follows:
Fixture Occupancy
Type of Supply
Control
Load
(in fixture
units)
Bathrooms,
group
Private Flush tank for
closet
6
Bathrooms,
group
Private Flush valve for
closet
8
Bathtubs Private Faucet 2
Bathtubs Public Faucet 4
(1)
B.
§ 228-40 HORNELL CODE § 228-41
228:318
Fixture Occupancy
Type of Supply
Control
Load
(in fixture
units)
Combination
fixtures
Private Faucet 3
Lavatories Private Faucet 1
Lavatories Public Faucet 2
Shower heads Private Mixing valve 2
Shower heads Public Mixing valve 4
Showers,
separate
Private Mixing valve 2
Sinks, kitchen Hotel,
restaurant
Faucet 4
Sinks, kitchen Private Faucet 2
Sinks, service Office, etc. Faucet 3
Urinals Public Flush tank 3
Urinals Public 1-inch flush valve 10
Urinals Public 3/4-inch flush
valve
5
Water closets Private Flush tank 2
Water closets Private Flush valve 6
Water closets Public Flush tank 5
Water closets Public Flush valve 10
The sizes of individual fixture wastes and vents shall be as follows:
Size
Kind of fixture
Waste
(inches)
Vent
(inches)
Baths, foot 1 1/2 1 1/4
Bath shower stalls 2 1 1/4
Baths, sitz 1 1/2 1 1/4
Bathtubs 1 1/2 1 1/4
Combination fixtures 1 1/2 1 1/4
Drinking fountains 1 1/4 1 1/4
Fountain cuspidors 1 1/4 1 1/4
Floor drains 2 --
Laundry trays 1 1/2 1 1/4
Lavatories 1 1/4 1 1/4
(2)
§ 228-41 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-41
228:319
Size
Kind of fixture
Waste
(inches)
Vent
(inches)
Sinks, dishwasher 2 1 1/4
Sinks, hotel or public 2 1 1/4
Sinks, kitchen, residence 1 1/2 1 1/4
Sinks, slop, ordinary 2 1 1/4
Sinks, slop, with trap combined 3 2
Sinks, small, pantry or bar 1 1/4 1 1/4
Urinals, lip 1 1/2 1 1/4
Urinals, pedestal 3 2
Urinals, stall 3 2
Urinals, trough 2 1 1/4
Water closets 3 2
All concealed traps shall be four inches by eight inches, tapped
according to wastes and vents of the above schedule.
(3)
Soil and waste stacks.
Generally. Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed
shall have a soil or waste stack or stacks extending full size through
the roof. Soil and waste stacks shall be as direct as possible.
(1)
Table of sizes. The required size of a soil or waste stack shall
be determined from the distribution and totals of all fixture units
connected to the stack in accordance with the following tables,
except that no water closet shall discharge into a stack less than
three inches in diameter:
Maximum Fixture Units on One Stack
Diameter
(inches)
Maximum Units On Any
1 Stack
1 1/4 2
1 1/2 4
2 10
3 18
4 44
(2)
C.
Inlets for fixture connections for soil and waste stacks and branches.
All soil and waste stacks and branches shall be provided with correctly
faced inlets for fixture connections.
D.
§ 228-41 HORNELL CODE § 228-41
228:320
Changing soil and vent pipes in existing buildings. In existing buildings
where the soil or waste vent pipe is not extended undiminished through
or above the roof or where there is a soil or waste vent pipe and the
fixture is changed in style or location or is replaced, a soil or waste vent
pipe of the size and material prescribed for new work shall be installed.
E.
Prohibited connections. No soil or waste vent, circuit or loop vent above
the highest installed fixture on the branch or main shall thereafter be
used as a soil or waste pipe.
F.
Protection of soil and waste stack. No soil or waste stack shall be
installed or permitted outside of a building unless adequate provision is
made to protect it from frost.
G.
Roof extensions. All roof extensions of soil and waste stacks shall be
run full size at least one foot above the roof, and when the roof is used
for other purposes than weather protection, such extension shall be not
less than five feet above the roof.
H.
Roof terminals. The roof terminal of any stack or vent, if within 12 feet
of any door, window, scuttle or air shaft, shall extend at least three feet
above the same.
I.
Terminals in and adjoining high buildings.
No soil, waste or vent pipe extension of any new or existing
building shall be run or placed on the outside of a wall, but it shall
be carried up in the inside of the roof.
(1)
In the event that a new building is built higher than an existing
building, the owner of the new building shall not locate windows
within 12 feet of any existing vent stack on the lower building,
unless the owner of such new building shall defray the expenses or
shall himself make such alteration to conform to § 228-39G.
(2)
It shall be the duty of the owner of the lower or existing building
to make such alteration therein upon the receipt, in advance, of
money or security therefor sufficient for the purpose from the
owner of the new or higher building or to permit, at the election
of the owner of the new or higher building, the making of such
alteration by the owner of said new or higher building.
(3)
J.
Future vents. A vent is to be run to basements having no fixtures. Such
vent is to be capped and left accessible for future fixtures.
K.
Vents for protection of fixture traps. Every fixture trap shall be
protected against siphonage and back pressure, and air circulation
assured by means of a soil or waste stack vent, a continuous waste or
vent or a loop or circuit vent. Where it is impossible to vent a future
trap as prescribed, crown or side venting may be used.
L.
Distance of vent from trap seal. No trap shall be placed more than five
feet, horizontal developed length, from its vent, except that the distance
M.
§ 228-41 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-41
228:321
between the vent and trap may be 15 feet or less on the waste from a
surgical operating table, dental cuspidor or other similar fixture. The
distance shall be measured along the central line of the waste or soil
pipe from the vertical inlet of the trap to the vent opening.
Main vents. Main vents shall be run as straight as possible and either
shall be run full size through the roof or tied in other vents above the
highest fixture.
N.
Size of loop vents and stack vents. Circuit or loop vents and stack vents
shall be the same size as branch waste and stack waste. Such vents
shall be carried full size through the roof or tied back in the vent or in
a vent that is not smaller in size and above any fixtures that said vent
is venting. Any other branch waste that is over five feet from the main
branch waste shall be vented as heretofore prescribed.
O.
Size of branch and individual vents. No vent shall be less than 1 1/4
inches in diameter, and in no case shall a branch or main vent have a
diameter less than 1/2 that of the soil or waste pipe served. No vents
for closets shall be less than two inches.
P.
Vent pipe grades and connections. All vent and branch pipes shall be
free from drops or sags.
Q.
When circuit and loop vents permitted. A circuit or loop vent will
be permitted as follows: A branch or waste pipe to which two and
not more than 12 water closets, pedestal urinals, trap-standard slop
sinks or shower stalls are connected in the series may be vented by a
circuit or loop vent, which shall be taken off in front of the last fixture
connection. Where fixtures discharge above such branch, each branch
shall be provided with a relief vent, provided that such waste is not run
vertically more than three feet.
R.
Vents not required.
No vents will be required on a backwater trap, a subsoil catch basin
trap or on a floor drain.
(1)
No vents will be required where water closets or other fixtures are
located on opposite sides of a wall or partition or directly adjacent
to each other within the prescribed distance of the highest fixtures,
if such fixtures are connected separately and at the same level
to the stack and not more than five feet from the stack and no
vertical branch waste is over three feet in length. Such fixtures are
considered stack-vented. All other fixtures in buildings are to be
vented as heretofore described.
(2)
No vents will be required on laundry traps or sinks in the basement
of an old or new building having no vent in the same. The same may
be trapped by a four-by-ten-inch drain trap if such location is not
over 10 feet from the main waste. The waste line shall be not less
than 1 1/2 inches.
(3)
S.
§ 228-41 HORNELL CODE § 228-41
228:322
§ 228-42. House drains and sewers.
Any plumbing fixture or fixtures previously set and connected to
a sewer through an antisiphon trap may be moved to any new
location if such location is not more than 25 feet from the present
location, and such plumbing fixture or fixtures may be connected
to the sewer through an antisiphon trap.
(4)
Independent systems of plumbing and drainage.
Required. The drainage and plumbing system of each new building
and of new work installed in an existing building shall be separate
from and independent of that of any other building, except as
provided below, and every building shall have an independent
connection with a public or private sewer, when available.
(1)
Exception. Where one building stands in the rear of another
building or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
court, yard or driveway, the house drain from the front building
may be extended to the rear building and the whole will be
considered as one house drain.
(2)
A.
Use of old drains restricted. Old drains may be used in connection
with new buildings or new plumbing only when they are found, on
examination and test, to conform in all respects to the requirements
governing new drains as prescribed in this chapter. If the old work
is found defective, the proper administrative authority shall notify the
owner to make the necessary changes to conform to this chapter.
B.
Connections where sewer unavailable. When a sewer is not available,
drain pipes from buildings shall be connected with an approved septic
tank, leach bed or dry well if the same is approved prior to installation
by the Board of Health or the City Engineer.
C.
Excavations.
Generally. Each system of piping shall be laid in a separate trench.
Where a double system of drainage is installed, the sanitary and
surface house drains may be laid side by side in one trench.
(1)
Work to be open and uncovered. All excavations required to be
made for the installation of a house drainage system or any part
thereof within the walls of a building shall be open trench work. All
such trenches and tunnels shall be kept open until the piping has
been inspected, tested and approved.
(2)
D.
Entry to be below basement or cellar floor. Whenever possible, all house
drains shall be brought into the building below the basement or cellar
floor.
E.
F. Materials for house drains.
§ 228-41 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-42
228:323
Underground. The house drain, when underground, shall be of
lead, K copper, brass or cast iron.
(1)
Aboveground. The house drain, when aboveground, shall be of cast
iron, galvanized wrought iron or steel, lead, copper or brass of
approved standards. (See § 228-36A through I.)
(2)
Location of house drains. No underground house drain shall be laid
parallel to or within three feet of any bearing which might be weakened
thereby.
G.
Size of sanitary house drains.
The required size of sanitary house drains and horizontal branches
shall be determined on the basis of the total number of fixture units
drained by them in accordance with the following table:
Sanitary System Only
Diameter of Pipe
(inches)
Maximum Number of
Fixture Units
1 1/4 1
1 1/2 3
2 6
3 20
4 30
(1)
No water closet shall discharge into a drain pipe less than three
inches in diameter.
(2)
Not more than two water closets shall discharge into any three-inch
horizontal branch or house drain.
(3)
H.
Combined storm and sanitary sewer systems prohibited. No
combination storm and sanitary sewer system will be permitted.
I.
Drainage below level of main sewer.
Artificial lift required. In all buildings in which the whole or part
of the house drainage and plumbing system thereof lies below the
crown level of the main sewer, sewage or house wastes shall be
lifted by approved artificial means and discharged into the house
sewer.
(1)
Use of sumps and receiving tanks required. All house drains below
sewer level shall discharge into a watertight sump or receiving
tank so located as to receive the sewage by gravity, from which
sump or receiving tank the sewage shall be lifted and discharged
into the house sewer by pumps, compressed air or any equally
efficient method. Such sumps shall be either automatically
(2)
J.
§ 228-42 HORNELL CODE § 228-42
228:324
§ 228-43. Stormwater drainage.
discharged or be of sufficient capacity to receive the house sewage
and wastes for not less than 24 hours.
Venting of ejectors. The soil or waste pipe leading to an ejector or other
appliance for raising sewage or other waste matter to the street sewer
shall be extended full size through the roof independently from the vent
pipes of the gravity drainage system.
K.
Motors, compressors and air tanks. All motors, air compressors and air
tanks shall be located where they are open for inspection and repair at
all times. The air tanks shall be so proportioned as to be of equal cubical
capacity to the ejectors connected therewith, in which there shall be
maintained an air pressure of not less than two pounds for each foot of
height the sewage is to be raised.
L.
Ejectors for subsoil drainage below sewer level. When subsoil catch
basins are installed below the sewer level, an automatic device for
raising water or an automatic water ejector provided with a ball float
attached to the main water supply shall be used.
M.
Exhaust blowoffs and sediment and drip pipe connections. The exhaust
blowoff and sediment or drip pipe from a high-pressure steam boiler
shall not connect directly with any sewer, drain, soil or waste pipe.
Such pipes shall discharge into the top and above the line of discharge
of a suitable closed tank or condenser made of wrought or cast iron,
provided with a relief pipe of at least three inches in diameter
extending to the outer air above the roof.
N.
Hot-water discharges prohibited. Water heated to over 140° F. shall not
be allowed to enter any street sewer, drain or lateral. When blowoff
tanks discharge water at a higher temperature, they shall be provided
with a cooling device.
O.
Elevators, lifts or pressure machines; use of intermediate tank
required. All direct-connected hydraulic elevators, lifts or pressure
machines shall be provided with an intermediate tank of sufficient
capacity as to discharge its waste without pressure into any sewer,
drain, soil or waste pipe. Such tank shall be trapped, and where there
is danger of back pressure from the sewer, there shall be placed on its
outlet side a sewer or backwater valve.
P.
Drainage of yards, areas and roofs. All roofs and paved areas, yards,
courts and courtyards shall be drained into the stormwater sewerage
system. Where there are no storm sewers, available drains may empty
into dry wells of cesspools.
A.
Size of leaders.
(1) No inside leader shall be of less size than the following:
B.
§ 228-42 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-43
228:325
§ 228-44. Connection of certain fixtures.
No waste pipe from a refrigerator or icebox floor drain, soda water fountain,
bar fixture or any other receptacle where food is stored or cooked shall
Area of Roof
(square feet)
Leader
(inches)
Up to 90 1 1/2
91 to 270 2
271 to 810 2 1/2
811 to 1,800 3
1,801 to 3,600 4
3,601 to 5,500 5
5,501 to 9,600 6
Storm drain systems shall be measured as follows:
Diameter of Pipe
(inches)
Maximum Drained
Roof Area
(square feet)
3 865
4 1,860
5 3,325
6 5,315
8 11,115
10 19,530
12 31,200
14 42,600
(2)
Inside conductors.
When placed within the walls of any building or run in an inner
or interior court of ventilating pipe shaft, all conductors or roof
leaders shall be constructed of cast iron or galvanized wrought iron
or steel pipe.
(1)
Roof drains shall be of cast brass or iron having a proper strainer
and clamping device, either tapped for an iron pipe or with a
spicket end for caulking.
(2)
C.
Prohibited uses of conductors, soil, waste or vent pipes. Conductor
pipes shall not be used as soil, waste or vent pipes, nor shall any soil,
waste or vent pipes be used as conductors. No main sewer trap or fresh
air inlet shall be required for roof drains or waste.
D.
§ 228-43 HORNELL CODE § 228-44
228:326
connect directly with any house drain, soil or waste pipe. Such waste pipes
shall in all cases empty into an open sink that is properly supplied with
water connected, trapped and vented the same as other fixtures or into a
cellar floor drain, but their ends must be left open. Such waste connections
shall not be located in inaccessible or unventilated cellars.
§ 228-45. Overflow pipes and motor exhausts.
Pipes from a water supply tank or exhaust from a water lift shall not be
directly connected with any house drain, soil or waste pipe. Such pipe shall
discharge upon the roof or be trapped into an open fixture or shall discharge
in the same manner as for refrigerator wastes.
§ 228-46. Hydraulic machinery.
Wastes from hydraulic motors, hydraulic elevators or other machinery
discharging large quantities of water shall be detained in a receiving tank
of sufficient size and so connected as to prevent the discharge of the wastes
under pressure.
§ 228-47. Clear water wastes.
The waste pipe from any fixture such as a bubbling fountain, aquarium
overflow or fixture of similar nature, the waste from which is practically
clear water, may discharge untrapped into an open fixture floor drain
or gutter as provided for refrigerator drains. The waste pipes from such
fixtures need not be trapped unless connected to the plumbing system or to
a conduit or tank containing sewage. When trapped, such waste pipes shall
be properly vented.
§ 228-48. Miscellaneous industrial wastes.
Waste pipes in dye houses, bottling works, creameries, laundries and similar
establishments, where the wastes are highly diluted, may discharge directly
onto a nonabsorbent floor provided with an adequate number of floor
drains, which drains must be connected to a catch basin. The waste pipes
discharging directly upon the floor need not be trapped. Gutters that can be
easily cleaned and kept in efficient operating condition may be provided for
collecting and conducting waste to floor drains, equipped, where necessary,
with a suitable screen for arresting the coarser materials that would
otherwise enter the system.
§ 228-49. Swimming pools.
Construction. Swimming pools shall be of watertight construction.
Inside surfaces shall be of smooth, nonabsorbent material with rounded
corners, and nonskid floors and shall be constructed so as to be easily
cleaned. Pools shall be provided with a valve so that the pool can be
drained in 12 hours.
A.
§ 228-44 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-49
228:327
Drainage. Swimming pools and wading pools which have overflow
connections located at an elevation below street level shall have their
drainage outlets connected to a sanitary system by means of an indirect
waste pipe. Such drainage outlets shall include pool drains, scumgutter
drains, backwash outlets from the pool and water filters and floor
drains which serve walks around pools. When such drainage piping is
below the grade of building sewers, any existing circulation pump for
pool water may be used for pumping the waste to an elevation suitable
for gravity discharge into a fixture approved for such use.
B.
Connections between public or private water supply and minimum-flow
line. There shall be no physical connection between a public or private
water supply system and the minimum-flow line of a pool, unless such
connection is installed to prevent siphonage in the water supply system.
C.
Cleanliness. The bottom and sidewalls of artificial pools shall be kept
reasonably free from sediment, dirt and leaves.
D.
Protection. All pools are to be fenced or adequate safety protection
provided.
E.
§ 228-49 HORNELL CODE § 228-49
228:328
ARTICLE V
Protection of Water Supply and Fixtures
§ 228-50. Interconnections and unprotected waste lines.
The following are recommendations for the protection of water supplies
and fixtures against contamination through interconnections and
unprotected waste lines:
Aspirator and filter pumps: Use siphon preventer valves on
waterlines to fixtures.
(1)
Baths.
Tub, sitz and foot: Use over-rim inlets discharging above the
flood lines.
(a)
(b) Continuous flow: Use air inlet valves on waterlines to fixtures.
(2)
Bedpan washers: Use venturi air breaks on waterlines between
control valves and fixtures.
(3)
Bidets: Use siphon preventer check valves or air inlet valves on
waterlines to fixtures.
(4)
Dental cuspidors: Use siphon preventer check valves on waterlines
to fixtures.
(5)
Drinking fountains: Use fixtures complying with the
recommendations of the American Public Health Association.
(6)
Floor drains - flush rim: Avoid use where possible. When used,
provide venturi air break air inlet valves or siphon preventer check
valves on waterlines to fixtures.
(7)
Kitchen and pantry fixtures: Use fixtures having inlets discharging
above floor lines or provide breaks on waterlines to fixtures.
Provide air breaks on all waste connections.
(8)
Laundry trays: Use fixtures with over-rim inlets discharging above
flood lines.
(9)
Laundry washing machines: Use air breaks or air vents or air inlet
valves on waterlines to submerged inlets. Use air breaks on all
waste connections.
(10)
Lavatories: Use fixtures with over-rim inlets discharging above
flood lines.
(11)
(12)Photo developing tanks: Use air breaks on waterlines to fixtures.
(13)Pump primers: Use air breaks on priming lines to pumps.
(14)Sinks.
A.
§ 228-50 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-50
228:329
Slop: Use fixtures with over-rim inlets discharging above flood
lines.
(a)
Flush rim: Use siphon preventer check valves or air inlet valves
on waterlines to rim.
(b)
Spray heads, movable: Use siphon preventer check valves or air
inlet valves on waterlines to fixtures.
(15)
Sterilizers: Use leak protected valve and air breaks on waterlines
to fixtures. Use air breaks on all waste lines.
(16)
Urinals with flush valves: Use siphon preventer check valves on
waterlines to flush valves.
(17)
Water closets, flush valve: Use siphon preventer check valves on
waterlines to flush valves.
(18)
Water distribution systems: Use elevated tanks or air relief valves
on cold-water risers. Connect laterals to risers above the top of the
fixtures served by laterals.
(19)
Whenever possible, existing fixtures should be provided with venturi
air breaks between the water supply valves and fixtures. Where this is
not possible because of fixture design, siphon preventer check valves
should be used.
B.
Air relief valves on risers are not considered necessary in ordinary
residential or small institutional installations.
C.
§ 228-50 HORNELL CODE § 228-50
228:330
Chapter 235
RECORDS, PUBLIC
§ 228-50 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 228-50
228:331

ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
[Adopted 3-10-1975]
§ 235-1. Purpose and scope; construal of provisions.
§ 235-2. Records access officer.
The people's right to know the process of government decisionmaking
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic
to our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
A.
These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by
which records may be obtained.
B.
Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records
required by the Freedom of Information Law76 and those which were
furnished to the public prior to its enactment.
C.
Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
D.
The City Clerk is responsible for ensuring compliance with the
regulations herein and is designated as the records access officer.
[Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
A.
The records access officer is responsible for ensuring appropriate
agency response to public requests for access to records. However, the
public shall not be denied access to records through officials who have
in the past been authorized to make records or information available.
B.
The records access officer shall assure that personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester to identifying requested records, if necessary.
Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions in
accordance with § 235-5B:
(a) Grant access to the records.
Deny access to the records, in whole or in part, and explain, in
writing, the reasons therefor.
(b)
(3)
Upon request for copies of records:
Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 235-7; or
(a)
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(4)
C.
76.Editor's Note: See Art. 6 of the Public Officers Law.
§ 235-1 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 235-2
228:333
§ 235-3. Fiscal officer.
§ 235-4. Location of records; hours for public inspection.
§ 235-5. Requests for access.
Upon request, certify that a transcript is a true copy of records
copied.
(5)
Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
The City of Hornell is not the legal custodian for such records;
or
(a)
The records of which The City of Hornell is a legal custodian,
after diligent search, cannot be found.
(b)
(6)
The City Chamberlain is designated the fiscal officer who shall certify
the payroll and respond to requests, in accordance with § 235-5B for
an itemized record setting forth the name, address, title and salary of
every officer or employee of the agency.
A.
The fiscal officer shall make the payroll items listed above available
to any person, including bona fide members of the news media, as
required under the Freedom of Information Law.77
B.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at 82 Main
Street,78 Hornell, New York, or at the location where they are kept.
A.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records
produced during all hours regularly open for business. These hours are
9:00 a.m. through 4:00 p.m.
B.
Where a request for records is required, such request may be oral or
in writing. However, written requests shall not be required for records
that have been customarily available without written request.
A.
Response to requests.
Except under extraordinary circumstances, officials shall respond
to a request for records no more than five business days after
receipt of the request, whether the request is oral or in writing.
(1)
If, because of extraordinary circumstances, more than five business
days are required to respond to a request, receipt of the request
shall be acknowledged within five business days after the request
is received. The acknowledgment shall state the reason for delay
and estimate the date when a reply will be made.
(2)
B.
77.Editor's Note: See Art. 6 of the Public Officers Law.
78.Editor’s Note: The address in Subsection A was updated at the request of the City.
§ 235-2 HORNELL CODE § 235-5
228:334
§ 235-6. Denial of access.
A request for access to records should be sufficiently detailed to
identify the records. Where possible, the requester should supply
information regarding dates, titles, file designations or other
information which may help identify the records. However, a request
for any or all records falling within a specific category conforms to the
standard that records be identifiable.
C.
List of records.
A current list, by subject matter, of all records produced, filed
or first kept or promulgated after September 1, 1974, shall be
available for public inspection and copying. The list shall be
sufficiently detailed to permit the requester to identify the file
category of the records sought.
(1)
The subject matter list shall be updated periodically, and the date
of the most recent updating shall appear on the first page. The
updating of the subject matter list shall not be less than
semiannual.
(2)
To assist requesters, a copy of the subject matter list may be filed
with regulations governing access to records.
(3)
D.
No records may be removed by the requester from the office where the
record is located without the permission of the City Clerk.
E.
Denial of access to records shall be in writing, stating the reason
therefor and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the
individual or body established to hear appeals.
A.
If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in § 235-5B
of this chapter, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of access.
B.
The Mayor of the City of Hornell shall hear appeals for denial of
access to records under the Freedom of Information Law. [Amended
12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
C.
The time for deciding an appeal by the individual or body designated
to hear appeals shall commence upon receipt of a written appeal
identifying:
(1) The date of the appeal.
(2) The date and location of the requests for records.
(3) The records to which the requester was denied access.
Whether the denial of access was in writing or was by failure to
provide records promptly as required by § 235-5B.
(4)
(5) The name and return address of the requester.
D.
§ 235-5 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 235-6
228:335
§ 235-7. Fees.
§ 235-8. Public notice.
A notice containing the job title or name and business address of the records
access officer and fiscal officer; the name, job title, business address and
telephone number of the appeal person or persons or body; and the location
where records can be seen or copied shall be posted in a conspicuous
location wherever records are kept and/or published in a local newspaper
of general circulation.
The individual or body designated to hear appeals shall inform the
requester of its decision, in writing, within seven business days of
receipt of an appeal.
E.
A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in
Subsection E of this section, shall be subject to court review, as
provided for in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
F.
Fees for inspection, search or certification. No fee is required for
inspection, search or certification of records.
A.
Fees for photocopies. The fee for photocopies not exceeding 8 1/2
inches by x 14 inches is $0.25 per page.
B.
Fees for copies of records other than photocopies which are 8 1/2
inches by 14 inches or less in size. The fee for copies of records other
than photocopies which are 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches or less in size
shall be the actual copying cost, excluding fixed agency costs such as
salaries.
C.
§ 235-6 HORNELL CODE § 235-8
228:336
ARTICLE II
Records Retention
[Adopted 5-28-199179]
§ 235-9. Schedule adopted.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to
Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law and containing legal
minimum retention periods for municipal government records, is hereby
adopted for use by all municipal officers in disposing of municipal
government records listed therein.
§ 235-10. Disposition of records.
In accordance with Article 57-A:
Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records
Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the
minimum retention period prescribed therein.
A.
Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
B.
79.Editor's Note: This resolution also superseded former Article II, Records Retention,
adopted 2-14-1989.
§ 235-9 PLUMBING STANDARDS § 235-10
228:337
Chapter 240
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 160.
§ 240-1. Removal of doors required.80
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any abandoned, unattended or
discarded icebox, refrigerator, deep freeze or other similar container of any
kind outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children
without first removing the door or doors from such icebox, refrigerator or
other similar container.
§ 240-2. Penalties for offenses.81
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in § 1-1 of this Code.
Chapter 246
REWARDS
§ 246-1. Reward offered for information concerning property
damage.
The Common Council offers to pay a reward of not more than $50 for
information given to the Police Department of the city which shall lead to
the detection, arrest and conviction of any person who may have willfully
damaged any personal property or any real property belonging to the city.
§ 246-2. Conflicting claims.
In the event that conflicting claims are made for this reward, such claims
shall be determined by a committee consisting of the Mayor and the two
directors of the Department of Public Safety. Such determination shall be
final.
§ 246-3. Payment.
Payment of such reward shall be made in the same manner as other claims
against the Department of Public Safety.
80.Editor's Note: See also Penal Law § 270.10.
81.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 235-10 HORNELL CODE § 246-4
240:338
§ 246-4. City officers and employees ineligible.
No officers, officials, agents or employees of the city shall be eligible to
receive such reward.
Chapter 252
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 142.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 228.
Openings and excavations of streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 267, Art. III.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Utilities — See Ch. 290.
Water — See Ch. 306.
§ 246-4 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 246-4
252:339

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 252-1. Definitions and word usage.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act" as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER —
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS — A duly appointed body of officials as
defined in the City Charter.
BOARD OF REVIEW OR HEARING BOARD — That Board appointed
according to provisions of Article X.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet [1.5 meters] outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public or other place of disposal.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment standards.
CITY — The City of Hornell.
CITY CHAMBERLAIN — The duly elected fiscal officer of the City.
CITY COUNCIL or COMMON COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The duly
elected legislative body of the City.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president if
the industrial user is a corporation.
(1)
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
(3)
A.
§ 252-1 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-1
252:341
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
EASEMENT — An authorization from a property owner for the use of
his property by another for a specific purpose.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City or his duly
authorized representative.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid, solid or gaseous wastes from
industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
MAYOR — The duly elected official of the City.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency
in accordance with Section 307(B) and (C) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or duly authorized representatives of said Department.
OWNER — The titleholder of real property.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The duly appointed official of the City.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of a POTW which is
designed to provide treatment, including recycling and reclamation, of
municipal sewage and industrial waste.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National
Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or
in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the
sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
§ 252-1 HORNELL CODE § 252-1
252:342
chemical or biological processes or process changes and other means,
except as prohibited by § 252-35 of this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle greater than
1/2 inch [3.27 centimeters] in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm-, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together
with such ground-, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIGNIFICANT USER — Any
industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who:
SLUDGE — Heavy, slimy deposit or sediment, as the waste, resulting
from a wastewater treatment process.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
SPDES — The state pollutant discharge elimination system.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION — The standard industrial
classification (SIC) system as found in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual. Bureau of the Budget, 1982, as amended.
Is subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NRDC consent
degree industries);
(1)
Is found by the City, the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (DEC) or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industries,
on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the
system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system;
(2)
(3) Is a manufacturing industry using substances of concern; or
Has a process discharge flow of more than 5% of the flow carried
by the Hornell POTW.
(4)
§ 252-1 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-1
252:343
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer which
carries storm- and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The duly appointed officer of the Department
of Public Works who has responsible charge of the sewer system and
water pollution control plant.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
USEPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency or duly
authorized representatives of said Agency.
WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT — An industrial wastewater
contribution permit issued for industries' contribution to the City of
Hornell's sewage collection system.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT (WPCP) — Any arrangement of
devices and structures used for treating sewage.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 252-1 HORNELL CODE § 252-1
252:344
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 252-2. Disposal of waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City of Hornell or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City any human
or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 252-3. Discharge to natural outlets.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Hornell or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 252-4. Private disposal.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
§ 252-5. Connection required.
The owner of all houses, building or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City is hereby
required, at his expense, to install suitable sanitary facilities therein and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after date of official notice
to do so or after the installation of said sewer, provided that said public
sewer is within 125 feet of the property.
§ 252-2 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-5
252:345

ARTICLE III
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 252-6. When permitted.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 252-5, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 252-7. Issuance of permit.
The Building Department shall refuse to issue a permit to build unless the
applicant submits satisfactory evidence that he has a permit to and he will
make a direct connection to a public sewer or construct for his use a septic
tank cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facility.
§ 252-8. Inspection.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Health Officer.
Inspection of the work shall be allowed at any stage of construction, and in
any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Plumbing Inspector
when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the
receipt of notice by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 252-9. Permit required; fee.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Health Officer.
The application for such permit shall be made up to the Health Officer on
a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Health Officer. A permit and inspection fee as provided in Chapter 142,
Fees, shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed.
§ 252-10. Restrictions.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of
Public Health of the State of New York.
A.
No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot
is insufficient in size and type of soil to support such facility.
B.
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public
sewer or natural outlet.
C.
§ 252-6 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-11
252:347
§ 252-11. Connection required upon availability.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 252-9, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter and
connected within 120 days. Any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge and filled
with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
§ 252-12. Installation and maintenance.
The owner shall install, operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City and to
the satisfaction of the Health Officer.
§ 252-13. Construal of provisions.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
Nothing herein contained shall in any manner abrogate the powers of the
Council under the City Charter, City ordinance or any other law to order
the installation of sewers either upon its own motion or on petition by the
people or to order the discontinuance of the use of private sewage disposal
facilities for just cause.
§ 252-11 HORNELL CODE § 252-13
252:348
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 252-14. Permit required.
No authorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 252-15. Classes of permits; application; permit and inspection
fees; liability.
§ 252-16. Costs to be borne by owner; indemnification of City.
§ 252-17. Independent building sewers for each building.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
§ 252-18. Old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Plumbing Inspector, to
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
A.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent.
B.
A permit and inspection fee as provided in Chapter 142, Fees, shall be
paid to the City at the time application is filed.
C.
The owner shall be responsible for street damage in addition to that
necessary for actual connection at the owner's sewer to the City lateral.
D.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
A.
The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
B.
§ 252-14 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-18
252:349
meet all requirements of this chapter. Such inspection shall be made by the
Plumbing Inspector.
§ 252-19. Construction standards.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval
of the Plumbing Inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less
than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall be at least 1/
4 inch per foot unless special approval is obtained from the Plumbing
Inspector.
A.
The building sewer shall be tar-coated, extra-heavy, cast-iron soil pipe
conforming to ASTM Specification A74 and American Standards
Association (ASA) Specification A-40.1 or asbestos-cement house
connection pipe conforming to ASTM Specification C-428, Type II,
minimum Class 2400. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part
of the building sewer that is located within 10 feet of a water service
pipe shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe with leaded joints.
Cast-iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the Plumbing
Inspector where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots.
If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of
cast-iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if
laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the Plumbing
Inspector. Building sewer pipe shall have a maximum length of five feet
between joints.
B.
Joints and connections.
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
No cement joints will be permitted.
(1)
Cast-iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp
and filled with molten lead not less than one inch deep. Lead shall
be run in one pouring and caulked tight. The entire joint shall
conform to AWWA Specification C600, Section 9. No paint, varnish
or other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing material until
after the joint has been tested and approved. The transition joint
between cast-iron pipe and other pipe material shall be made with
special adapters and joint materials approved by the Plumbing
Inspector.
(2)
Premolded gasket joints for the hub and plain-end, cast-iron pipe
may be used if approved by the Plumbing Inspector and shall
be a neoprene compression-type gasket which provides a positive
double seal in the assembled joint. The gasket shall be a premolded
one-piece unit designed for joining the cast-iron hub and plainend
soil pipe and fittings. The assembled joint shall be sealed by
compression of the gasket between the exterior surface of the
spigot and the interior surface of the hub. The joint shall be
assembled following the manufacturer's recommendations using
acceptable lubricant and special pipe-coupling tools designed for
(3)
C.
§ 252-18 HORNELL CODE § 252-19
252:350
§ 252-20. Inspection and connection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Plumbing
Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Plumbing Inspector.
§ 252-21. Excavations; penalties for offenses.
that purpose. The plain spigot end shall be forced into the hub end
of the pipe for the full depth of the hub itself. The lubricant shall be
a bland, flax-base, nontoxic material and shall not chemically attack
the gasket material.
Asbestos-cement pipe joints shall follow the manufacturer's
recommendations, using properly designed couplings and rubber
gaskets pursuant to the published information relating thereto.
(4)
No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any
bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be
laid at a uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible.
The changes in direction shall be made only with curved pipe and
fittings which have been approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
D.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Such means
of lifting the sewage shall be installed and maintained at the owner's
expense at no expense to the City.
E.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer or combined
sanitary and storm sewer.
F.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes82 or
other applicable rules and regulations of the City or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing
and Materials and Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the Plumbing Inspector before installation.
G.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Building Construction, and Ch. 228, Plumbing Standards.
§ 252-19 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-21
252:351
§ 252-22. Sealing of sewer lead upon demolition.
When a building is taken down and there is no other building using the
sewer lead, it shall be sealed at the old wall with concrete so that no dirt
from the cellar will wash into the sewer.
§ 252-23. Revocation or suspension of plumber's license for
violation.
In case of a violation of any of the rules and regulations of the City by
a plumber, his journeyman plumbers or other persons in his employ, the
plumber's license may be suspended or his license may be revoked by the
City.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard.
A.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
All excavations for the installation of a building sewer shall be open
trench work unless otherwise approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
Pipelaying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM
Specification (C 12), except that no backfill shall be placed until the
work has been inspected by the Plumbing Inspector.
B.
The plumber performing such work shall notify the Plumbing Inspector
when the laying of a house sewer is completed.
C.
The filling of a trench before inspection is made will subject the
plumber to whom a permit is issued to a penalty as provided in § 1-1 of
this Code for each offense, and he may be required to reopen the trench
for inspection.
D.
§ 252-21 HORNELL CODE § 252-23
252:352
ARTICLE V
Use of Public Sewers
§ 252-24. Discharge to sanitary sewers restricted.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or polluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer. The steam cleaning of automotive or other mechanical
equipment over manhole covers is prohibited, as well as the depositing of
wastes from such operation into the sewer system.
§ 252-25. Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted waters.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent and
in compliance with the applicable NYSDEC SPDES permit, to a storm sewer
or natural outlet.
§ 252-26. Prohibited discharge.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
A.
Any water or wastes containing toxic, malodorous or poisonous solids,
liquid or gases, in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other waste, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance,
interfere with the use, reuse, reclamation or disposal of sludge or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plan
or prevent entry into sewers for maintenance and repair, including but
not limited to cyanides in excess of 1.2 milligrams per liter as CN in the
wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
B.
Any water or wastes acid and alkaline in reaction having a pH lower
than 6.0, higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewage works. Free acids or alkalies must be
neutralized at all times within the above pH range.
C.
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing destruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, cardboard, beer or distillery slops, lime residues, lime
slurry, chemical residues, paint residues, cannery waste, bulk solids,
D.
§ 252-24 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-26
252:353
§ 252-27. Restricted discharge.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, that such wastes can harm either the sewers or
the sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors
as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in
the sewers, the materials of construction of the sewers, the nature of the
sewage treatment process, the capacity of the sewage treatment plant, the
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other
pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings,
entrails, paper dishes and cups, milk containers, whey, etc., either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
E.
Any stormwater, roof drains, springwater, cistern or tank overflow,
footing drain, discharge from any vehicle washrack or water motor or
the contents of a privy vault, septic tank or cesspool or the discharge of
effluent from any air-conditioning machine or refrigeration unit.
F.
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 104° F. (40° C.)
at the influent to the POTW.
A.
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 50 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° and 150° F.
B.
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Plumbing Inspector.
C.
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
D.
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials.
E.
§ 252-26 HORNELL CODE § 252-27
252:354
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent, as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the
state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge
to the receiving waters.
F.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
G.
H. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5 or less than 6.0.
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not
limited to fullers earth or lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such
as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
(1)
Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(2)
Unusual biochemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
(3)
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs, as defined herein.
(4)
I.
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed
or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent and/or sewage treatment plant sludge cannot
meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over said
sewage treatment plant and receiving waters.
J.
Waters or wastes that contain the following constituents equal to or in
excess of the limitations set forth in this section:
Pollutant or
Pollutant
Property
Maximum for Any 1
Day
(milligrams per liter)
Average of Daily Values
for 30 Consecutive
Days Shall Not Exceed
(milligrams per liter)
Cadmium (T) 0.69 0.26
Chromium (T) 2.77 1.71
Copper 3.38 2.07
Lead 0.69 0.43
Nickel (T) 3.98 2.36
Silver 0.43 0.24
K.
§ 252-27 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-27
252:355
§ 252-28. Action by Superintendent; preliminary treatment.
Pollutant or
Pollutant
Property
Maximum for Any 1
Day
(milligrams per liter)
Average of Daily Values
for 30 Consecutive
Days Shall Not Exceed
(milligrams per liter)
Zinc (T) 2.61 1.48
Cyanide M 1.20 0.65
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in §§ 252-26 and 252-27, and
which, in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(2)
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the waste not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of § 252-33.
(4)
A.
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having
a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per
million by weight or containing more than 350 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids or containing more than 15 parts per million
of chlorine demand or containing any quantity of substances having
the characteristics above the previously described limits or having
an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage
flow of the City shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent.
B.
Preliminary treatment.
When necessary, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner
shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to:
Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per
million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by
weight.
(a)
(b) Reduce the chlorine demand to 15 parts per million.
(1)
C.
§ 252-27 HORNELL CODE § 252-28
252:356
§ 252-29. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Plumbing Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall be
of a type and capacity approved by the Plumbing Inspector and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They
shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and
watertight. Proper operation must be assured by proper maintenance.
§ 252-30. Maintenance of facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities, including but not
limited to grease, oil and sand interceptors, are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner, at his expense. These facilities shall be readily
accessible and open to inspection by the Plumbing Inspector at any time.
§ 252-31. Control manhole.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 252-32. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within
the maximum limits provided for in §§ 252-26 and 252-27.
(c)
Control the quantities and rate of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
(d)
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted
to the Superintendent for approval and to the Water Resources
Commission of the State of New York, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
(2)
§ 252-28 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-32
252:357
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required. the control manhole shall be considered
to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point
at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb
and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a
twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not
always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-fourhour
composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic
grab samples.) All samplings will be made by the City or its authorized
representative, and any fee for such services is the sole responsibility of the
property owner.
§ 252-33. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor by
the industrial concern. No special agreements shall circumvent Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
§ 252-34. Federal standards.
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more
stringent than the limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under
this chapter. The Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
§ 252-35. Dilution of excessive discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process waters or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the City or state.
§ 252-36. Accidental discharge.
Accidental discharges of any waste or sewage prohibited in §§ 252-26 and
252-27 of this chapter must be reported to the Superintendent immediately.
Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit
to the Superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
§ 252-32 HORNELL CODE § 252-36
252:358
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result
of damage to the sewage works or fishkills or any other damage to person
or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter.
§ 252-36 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-36
252:359

ARTICLE VI
Protection from Damage
§ 252-37. Damage and tampering prohibited.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision
shall be subject to prosecution pursuant to law.
§ 252-37 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-37
252:361

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 252-38. Inspections and testing.
The Superintendent, duly authorized employees of the City, and
representatives of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYSDEC) and the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA), bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The Superintendent or his representatives shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical,
oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having
a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
§ 252-39. Terms of inspection.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 252-38 above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of
the City and representatives of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees, and the
City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by
City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury
or property asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operation, except as such as is caused by negligence or failure
of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in § 252-31.
§ 252-40. Inspection of easement.
The Superintendent, other duly authorized employees of the City and
representatives of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYSDEC) and the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA), bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purpose of but not limited to inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
§ 252-41. Order to halt discharge.
The Superintendent and duly authorized employees of the City have the
authority to immediately halt any discharge of pollutants which pose an
§ 252-38 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-41
252:363
imminent and substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of
persons, the environment or plant operators.
§ 252-41 HORNELL CODE § 252-41
252:364
ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 252-42. Notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except Article
VI, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
§ 252-43. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in § 252-42 shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-1 of this Code. Each day which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 252-44. Liability for expense, loss or damage.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
§ 252-45. Payment of sewer connection charge.
A charge as defined in § 252-15 for each sewer connection will be levied
against all property owners who tap in on municipal sanitary sewers.
Payment of the connection charge shall be made to the City Chamberlain
prior to issuance of the sewer connecting permit. The property owner shall
pay all costs to construct the lateral.
§ 252-46. Disposition of fees and penalties.
All fees or penalties or fines collected for permits under this chapter shall
be credited to the revenues of the general fund.
§ 252-47. Injunctive relief.
The City reserves the right to seek injunctive relief against any industrial
contributor to halt any discharge of pollutants which pose an imminent
and substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, the
environment or plant operators. The City also reserves the right to seek
injunctive relief for noncompliance by industrial users with pretreatment
standards and requirements.
§ 252-42 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-47
252:365

ARTICLE IX
Sewer Extensions
§ 252-48. Design standards.
All extensions to the sanitary sewer system owned and maintained by
the City shall be properly designed in accordance with the Recommended
Standards for Sewage Works, as adopted by the Great Lakes-Upper
Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers, and in strict
conformance with all requirements of the New York State Department of
Health. Plans and specifications for sewer extensions shall be submitted to
and approval obtained from the Superintendent and the New York State
Department of Health before construction may proceed. The design of
sewers must anticipate and allow for flows from all possible future
extensions or developments within the immediate drainage area.
§ 252-49. Costs.
Sewer extensions, including individual building sewers from the public
sewer to the property line, may be constructed by the City under public
contract if, in the opinion of the Board of Public Works, the number of
properties to be served by such extension warrants its cost. Under this
arrangement, the property owner shall pay for and install the building
sewer from the property line to his residence or place of business in
accordance with the requirements of Article IV. Property owners may
propose sewer extensions within the incorporated City by drafting
extensions within the incorporated City by drafting a written petition,
signed by a majority of the benefiting property owners, and filing it with the
Board of Public Works. The cost of such extensions may be assessed to the
benefited property owners in any manner determined by the Board of Public
Works.
§ 252-50. Private construction.
If the City does not elect to construct a sewer extension under public
contract, the property owner, builder or developer may construct the
necessary sewer extension if such extension is approved by the Board
of Public Works in accordance with the requirements of § 252-48. He or
they must pay for the entire installation, including all expenses incidental
thereto. Each building sewer installed must be installed and inspected as
previously required, and the inspection fees shall be paid. Design of sewers
shall be as specified in § 252-51.
§ 252-51. Design specifications.
The installation of the sewer extension must be subject to periodic
inspection by the Plumbing Inspector, and the expenses for this
inspection shall be paid for by the owner, builder or developer. The
Plumbing Inspector's decisions shall be final in matters of quality and
methods of construction. The sewer as constructed, must pass the
A.
§ 252-48 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-51
252:367
exfiltration test required in § 252-52 before it is to be used. The cost
of sewer extension thus made shall be absorbed by the developers
or the property owners, including all building sewers. Sewer design
shall be in accordance with the following provisions. Pipe material shall
be either asbestos-cement conforming to ASTM Specification C-428,
Type II; extra-strength vitrified clay conforming to ASTM Specification
C-200; or reinforced concrete conforming to ASTM Specification C-76.
No standard strength clay pipe or nonreinforced concrete pipe shall
be used. Minimum internal diameter shall be eight inches. Joints for
each kind of pipe shall be designed and manufactured such that O-ring
gaskets of the snap-on type are employed.
Gaskets shall be continuous, solid, natural or synthetic rubber and shall
provide a positive compression seal in the assembled joint such that
the requirements of § 252-52 are met. Joint preparation and assembly
shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Ybranch
fittings shall be installed for connection to building sewers in
accordance with § 252-17. Trench widths as measured just above the
crown of the pipe shall not exceed the following:
Pipe Diameter
(inches) Trench Width
8 3 feet 3 inches
10 3 feet 6 inches
12 3 feet 9 inches
14 4 feet 0 inches
B.
If the trench widths are found, during field inspection, to exceed the
limits in the above table, the sewer pipe shall be encased with a
minimum of six inches of concrete. Pipe shall be firmly and evenly
bedded on a minimum of three inches of No. 1A or 1 crushed stone
(New York State Department of Public Works specification).
Pipe thickness and field strength shall be calculated on the
following criteria:
(a) Safety factor: 1.5 inches.
(b) Load factor: 1.7 inches.
(c) Weight of soil: 120 pounds per cubic foot.
(d) Wheel loading: 16,000 pounds.
(1)
Utilizing the above information, the design shall then be made as
outlined in Chapter I of the Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9, Design and Construction of Sanitary and
Storm Sewers.
(2)
C.
§ 252-51 HORNELL CODE § 252-51
252:368
§ 252-52. Final exfiltration test.
Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in slopes or alignment
or at intervals not exceeding 300 linear feet. The manholes shall be
constructed with a poured three-thousand-pound-per-square-inch
concrete base 12 inches thick, steel-troweled concrete or mortar bench
walls and inverts and precast four-foot-diameter concrete manhole
barrel sections with concentric tapered top sections, as specified by
ASTM C-478. The manhole frame and cover shall be the standard
design of the City and shall be set with no fewer than two courses of
brick underneath to allow for later adjustment in elevation. All joints
shall be sealed against infiltration. No manholes shall be constructed
with steps or ladder rungs.
D.
All sewers shall satisfy requirements of a final exfiltration test before
they will be approved and sewage flow accepted from them by the City.
This test consists of filling the pipe with water to provide a head of at
least five feet above the top of the pipe or five feet above groundwater,
whichever is higher, at the highest point of the pipeline under test and
then measuring the loss of water from the line by the amount which
must be added to maintain the original level. In this test, the line must
remain filled with water for at least 24 hours prior to the taking of
measurements. Exfiltration shall be measured by the drop of water level
in a standpipe with a closed bottom end or in one of the sewer manholes
available for convenient measuring.
A.
When a standpipe and plug arrangement is used in the upper manhole
of a line under test, there must be some positive method of releasing
entrapped air in the sewer prior to taking measurements. The test
length intervals for either type of test shall be as ordered or approved,
but in no event shall they exceed 1,000 feet. In the case of sewers laid
on steep grades, the length of line to be tested by exfiltration at any one
time may be limited by the maximum allowable internal pressure on the
pipe and joints at the lower end of the line. The test period, wherein the
measurements are taken, shall not be less than two hours in either type
of test.
B.
The total leakage of any section tested shall not exceed the rate of 100
gallons per mile of pipe per 24 hours per inch of nominal pipe diameter.
For purposes of determining the maximum allowable leakage, manholes
shall be considered as sections of forty-eight-inch diameter pipe, five
feet long. The equivalent leakage allowance shall be 4.5 gallons per
manhole per 24 hours for forty-eight-inch diameter manholes. If
leakage exceeds the specified amount, the necessary repairs or
replacements required shall be made to permanently reduce the
leakage to within the specified limit and the tests shall be repeated until
the leakage requirement is met.
C.
§ 252-51 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-53
252:369
§ 252-53. Extensions to become property of City; guaranty against
defects.
All sewer extensions constructed at the property owner's, builder's or
developer's expense, after final approval and acceptance by the Board of
Public Works, shall become the property of the City and shall thereafter
be maintained by the City. Said sewers, after their acceptance by the City,
shall be guaranteed against defects in materials or workmanship for 18
months. The guaranty shall be in a form provided for by the City. At the
sole discretion of the City, a completion bond or certified check may be
demanded as part of the guaranty.
§ 252-54. Approved method of waste disposal required for building
permit.
No builder or developer shall be issued a building permit for a new dwelling
or structure requiring sanitary facilities within the City unless a suitable
and approved method of waste disposal is proposed. All new developments
shall be provided with an approved system of sanitary sewers.
§ 252-53 HORNELL CODE § 252-54
252:370
ARTICLE X
Board of Review
§ 252-55. Creation; terms of office; officers.
There is hereby created a Board of Review consisting of five members, one
appointed for a term of one year, one appointed for a term of two years, one
appointed for a term of three years, one appointed for a term of four years
and one appointed for a term of five years. At the expiration of such terms,
the terms of office of their successors shall be five years. All appointments
to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term. No member shall be on any
other board or commission in the City or need be a resident of the City. The
Board shall choose its own Chairman, and the Superintendent or his duly
authorized representative shall act as secretary but shall not vote on any
issues presented to agenda for each meeting, which shall briefly explain the
nature of each matter to be considered by the Board, and he shall send a
copy of said agenda to each member of the Board.
§ 252-56. Meetings.
The Board shall meet upon call by the Chairman.
§ 252-57. Membership.
One member of the Board should be a registered professional engineer; one
member should be a practicing sanitary engineer; one member shall be a
representative of industry or manufacturing enterprise; one member shall
be a lawyer; and one member shall be selected at large for his interest in
accomplishing the objectives of this chapter. Appointments shall be made
by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
§ 252-58. Appeals.
The Board of Review shall hear and determine appeals from any person
presented with a notice of violation in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any person requesting an appeal must notify the Superintendent of
his desire to appeal prior to the expiration of the time limit for compliance
stated in the notice of violations.
§ 252-59. Variances.
It shall be the function of the Board to vary or modify the application of any
of the provisions of this chapter when strict enforcement would result in
practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship.
§ 252-60. Oath of office; compensation.
Each member shall take the appropriate oath of office and shall be paid the
sum of $10 for each meeting attended.
§ 252-55 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-60
252:371

ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 252-61. Permit required to discharge to natural outlet.
It shall be unlawful to discharge without a City permit to any natural outlet
within the City of Hornell or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City
or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the Superintendent
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 252-62. Wastewater contribution permits.
All significant user proposing to connect or to contribute to the POTW
shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit before connecting to or
contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or
contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit
within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 252-63. Permit application; evaluation of data.
Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the City an application in the form prescribed by
the City and accompanied by a fee as provided in Chapter 142, Fees.
Existing users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within
30 days after the effective date of this amendment, and proposed new
users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing
to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Its name, address and location, if different from its address.
Its SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(2)
Its wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in § 252-27 of this chapter as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act
contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended.
(3)
(4) The time and duration of contribution.
Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(5)
Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation.
(6)
A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged.
(7)
A.
§ 252-61 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-63
252:373
The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any City, state or federal pretreatment
standards and a statement regarding whether or not pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operations and maintenance and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards.
(8)
If additional pretreatment and/or operations and maintenance will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this
schedule:
The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards, e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing the final plans, executing
contract for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction, etc.
(a)
No increment referred to in Subsection A(9)(a) shall exceed
nine months.
(b)
Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the Superintendent, including as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress
to be met on such a date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason
for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return
the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
to the Superintendent.
(c)
(9)
Each product produced, by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production.
(10)
The type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(11)
The number and type of employees and hours of operation of the
plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.
(12)
Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(13)
§ 252-63 HORNELL CODE § 252-63
252:374
§ 252-64. Permit modifications.
Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject
to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard
within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user subject to
a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard has not previously submitted
an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by § 252-63,
the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days
after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution
permit shall submit to the Superintendent within 180 days after the
promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard
information required by § 252-63.
§ 252-65. Revocation of permit.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter or applicable
state and federal regulations is subject to having his permit revoked:
§ 252-66. Permit conditions.
The City will evaluate the date furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the City may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject
to terms and conditions provided herein.
B.
Failure of a user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics.
A.
Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge.
B.
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring.
C.
D. Violation of the conditions of the permit.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the City. Permits may contain the
following:
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(1)
Limits on average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(2)
Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(3)
A.
§ 252-63 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-66
252:375
§ 252-67. Confidential information.
Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
(4)
Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(5)
(6) Compliance schedules.
Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports. (See § 252-67.)
(7)
Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the City and affording City
access thereto.
(8)
Requirements for notification of the City of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system.
(9)
(10)Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per § 252-64.
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(11)
The industrial wastewater contribution permit shall be valid for a
period of five years. The permit is not transferable from one user to
another or from one premises to another. A new permit is required
whenever new or modified processes are used to generate the
discharge to the sewer.
B.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the City that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled
to protection as trade secrets of the user.
A.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available, upon written request, to governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter, the state pollution discharge elimination system
(SPDES) permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however,
that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state
or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
B.
§ 252-66 HORNELL CODE § 252-67
252:376
§ 252-68. Reporting requirements.
Information accepted by the City as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
City until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
C.
Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of
a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards
and requirements shall submit to the Superintendent a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by the
pretreatment standards and requirements and the average maximum
daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited
by such pretreatment standards and requirements. The report shall
state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
operations and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring
the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified
professional.
A.
Periodic compliance reports. Any user subject to a pretreatment
standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard or,
in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge
into the POTW, shall submit to the Superintendent during the months
of June and December, unless required more frequently in the
pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent, a report indicating
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are
limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall
include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period,
exceeded the average daily flow reported in § 252-63 of this chapter.
At the discretion of the Superintendent and in consideration of such
factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles. etc., the
Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the above
reports are to be submitted.
B.
The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations
are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by Subsection B
of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants required by
pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall
contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including
the flow and the nature of concentration, or the production and mass,
where requested by the Superintendent, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The
frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable
C.
§ 252-67 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 252-68
252:377
pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to Section
304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 316 and amendments thereto
or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator.
Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
approved by the administrator.
§ 252-68 HORNELL CODE § 252-68
252:378
Chapter 258
SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 267. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 300.
§ 258-1. Findings.
The Common Council of the City of Hornell hereby finds that it is in the
best interest of the public to regulate the use of skateboards and scooters
within the business district of the City. The rapid growth of the use of
skateboards and scooters in the business district has led to a growing
concern for the safety of pedestrians, motorists, and the general public, as
well as increased vandalism to public and private property. The adoption of
appropriate restrictions will ensure unobstructed access to public areas.
§ 258-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The north boundary shall be the south side of
Canacadea Creek; the south boundary shall be Elm Street; the west
boundary shall be Maple City Drive; the east boundary shall be Church
Street at Canacadea Creek to Genesee Street, to Hakes Avenue to Center
Alley and then to Elm Street.
IN-LINE SKATES — Shoes, skates or footwear with a single row of roller
wheels.
ROLLER SKATES — Shoes, skates, or footwear with two or more rows of
roller wheels.
SCOOTER — A vehicle with a long footboard between two small end wheels,
and is controlled by an upright steering handle attached to the front wheel.
SKATEBOARD — A narrow board of wood, fiberglass, plastic or similar
material with roller skate or other type of wheels attached to each end, and
used for gliding or moving on any hard surfaces, without a mechanism or
other device for steering while being used, operated or ridden.
§ 258-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to operate a skateboard or scooter in any manner upon
any public streets, curbs, or sidewalks in the downtown business district of
the City of Hornell.
§ 258-4. Restrictions.
§ 252-68 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 258-4
252:379
§ 258-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense and shall pay a fine not to exceed $50 for each offense.
Chapter 267
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 160.
Farmers market — See Ch. 190.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 252.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Utilities — See Ch. 290.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 300.
Water — See Ch. 306.
State arterials — See Ch. A340.
In all districts of the City of Hornell, every person operating a
skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates, or scooter shall yield to the
right-of-way to pedestrians and motorists.
A.
All operators of skateboards, in-line skates, roller skates, and scooters
shall be subject to traffic safety rules, regulations and laws.
B.
§ 258-4 HORNELL CODE § 258-5
267:380
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Art. I of Ch. 22 of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 267-1. Deposits on streets and sidewalks.
§ 267-2. Building materials on streets and sidewalks.
§ 267-3. Water on sidewalks.
No person shall conduct or allow to be conducted from any building owned
by him, through any pipe, gutter, trough, spout or otherwise, any water
upon any sidewalk; nor shall such water be made to run in a pipe or covered
groove below the walk; nor shall any roof or eaves project over the walk
unless there shall be an eave trough so placed under the same as to prevent
the water from falling on the walk.
Deposit generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw,
deposit or leave in any public street, sidewalk, highway, alley, park or
place in the city any stones, bricks, sand, building material, leaves,
grass, ashes, rubbish, bottles, glass or any refuse matter of any nature
whatsoever without the written consent of the Superintendent of Public
Works.
A.
Deposit of injurious materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully throw, drop or place or cause to be thrown, dropped or placed
upon any street, sidewalk, alley, lane or public place within the city
any glass, broken crockery, tacks, nails or pieces of metal or other
substance which might puncture or otherwise injure any vehicle tire.
B.
Permission required. No person shall place or cause to be placed or
suffer to remain where so placed any stones, bricks, lumber or other
materials for building in or upon any street, sidewalk or public place
without the permission of the Mayor or the Common Council.
A.
Manner of placing materials. In case permission is granted, the
materials must be placed so as not to prevent travel on more than 1/3
of the width of the street, sidewalk or roadway and must be placed on
the side of the street next to the building where the same are to be used
and so placed as not to obstruct the gutter.
B.
Materials to be guarded at night. During every night such materials
shall so remain, the person placing them or causing them to be placed
shall keep a lamp or lamps continually lighted near such materials so
as clearly and distinctly to cast light upon both ends of the pile nearest
the center of the street.
C.
Revocation of permission. The Mayor or the Common Council, by a 2/3
vote of all the members elected thereto, may revoke permission granted
pursuant to this section.
D.
§ 267-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 267-4
267:381
§ 267-4. Obstructions to sidewalks generally.
§ 267-5. Removal of snow and ice.
§ 267-6. Removal of icicles.
Duty of owner. Every owner or person in charge of any lot or premises
within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of said lot or premises
clean and free from obstructions.
A.
Effect of noncompliance. In case of failure on the part of the owner
or occupant to comply with the provisions of Subsection A, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall cause such obstructions to be
removed, and the costs thereof shall be assessed as provided in
§ 267-5B. In addition thereto, the owner shall be liable for any and all
damages that occur as a result of the owner's failure to maintain said
sidewalk. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
B.
Duty of owner. Every owner or the person in charge of any lot or
premises within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of the same
clean and free from snow and ice and shall clear such sidewalk from
snow and ice by 9:00 a.m. of each day if the same shall have
accumulated thereon in the night. If the storm causing such
accumulation of snow or ice shall have occurred in the daytime, then
the sidewalk in front of such property shall be cleared of such snow and
ice within one hour after such storm shall have ceased.
A.
Failure to remove; removal by city; assessment of costs. In case of
failure on the part of the owner or occupant to comply with the
provisions of Subsection A, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent
of Public Works to cause such snow and ice to be removed. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall make out and deliver to the
Common Council, at its next meeting, an account or statement of the
expense of removing such snow and ice, which account or statement
shall contain a recital of the place or location and a description of the
lot or premises, the name of the owner, if the same is known to him,
and also the name of the occupant or person having charge thereof,
which account or statement shall be verified by the Superintendent
to the effect that he believes it to be true. The City Clerk shall enter
such statement or the substance thereof in the minutes of the Common
Council, and the amount of such expense shall be therein stated to be a
lien or charge upon the lot or premises so described, and the same shall
be assessed upon the owner of the property and added to the amount
of his next annual city tax. In addition thereto, the owner shall be liable
for any and all damages that occur as a result of the owner's failure to
maintain said sidewalk. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
B.
"Icicle" defined. The word "icicle," as used herein, shall mean any
accumulation of frozen water or frozen snow which is hanging from
the exterior of any building fronting or abutting any street, sidewalk,
highway, traveled road, public lane or alley within the city.
A.
§ 267-4 HORNELL CODE § 267-6
267:382
§ 267-7. Games in streets.
No person shall play any game of ball, tennis or other game or enter into
any amusement or practice or do any other act in any street, highway, lane
or alley in the city in such manner as shall tend to injure or annoy persons
or to injure or endanger property.
§ 267-8. Encroachments generally.
§ 267-9. Gates.
No gate shall be made or hung so as to open and swing over any sidewalk.
§ 267-10. Awnings.
Duty of owner or occupant. The occupant of any building or the owner
of any unoccupied building from which icicles are hanging, as
hereinbefore defined, shall be required to keep such building free of
hanging icicles.
B.
Failure to remove. If the occupant of any building or the owner of any
unoccupied building from which icicles are hanging, as hereinbefore
defined, fails to remove icicles from such building within two hours
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., after receiving personal notice from
any member of the Police Department or the Fire Department, such
occupant or owner, as the case may be, shall be punished as provided
in § C-176 of the City Charter. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation or failure to
comply with this section occurs or continues.
C.
Prohibited.
No person shall erect or cause to be erected any building, piazza,
steps, fence or other structure so as to encroach upon any street,
sidewalk, lane, alley or public place.
(1)
The erection of a barn, stable or shed within 20 feet of the line of
a street shall be unlawful; but the Common Council may, by a twothirds
vote, by resolution, permit such an erection.
(2)
A.
Declared nuisance; abatement by city. Any fence, building or other
structure which shall encroach in whole or in part upon any of the
streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes or public grounds in said city is hereby
declared a nuisance, and upon a previous notice, in writing, of 10 days,
signed by the Superintendent of Public Works, said Superintendent
shall remove or abate the same, and all the expenses thereof shall be
charged against the person or property of anyone so offending.
B.
Cloth awnings permitted. No awning other than of cloth shall
hereinafter be placed, constructed or maintained over any street or
sidewalk or portion of the same.
A.
§ 267-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 267-10
267:383
§ 267-11. Booths and merchandise stands.
No person shall, without the permission of the Mayor or the Common
Council, erect or establish upon or within any street or public ground any
booth or stand for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods,
wares or merchandise.
§ 267-12. Stairway openings and cellars.
No person shall build, construct or maintain any cellarway or stairway
opening into the sidewalk or street without the consent of the Mayor or the
Common Council, and all persons having stairways or cellarways projecting
or opening into any sidewalk or street shall guard the same with a suitable
and sufficient railing to be approved by the Common Council. Any person
neglecting or refusing to comply with the requirements of this section, after
being notified by the Superintendent of Public Works, shall be punished as
provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
§ 267-13. Display of merchandise; loading and unloading.
No person shall place or cause to be placed upon any sidewalk any box,
showcase, goods, wares or merchandise or any article, except as may
be necessary for transporting such articles across the sidewalk. Nothing
contained in this section shall prohibit the owner or occupant of any store
or building from exposing for sale goods, wares and merchandise next
adjoining the outer wall of such store or building within three feet thereof
or two feet from the outer curbline towards the building on such walk where
the sidewalk is 10 feet or more in width to the outer curbline. For walks and
curbs of less than 10 feet, they may occupy two feet from the building line
and one and one-half (1 1/2) feet from the outer curbline. Nothing contained
herein shall prohibit the placing of goods, merchandise, household furniture
or other commodities upon the sidewalk for the purpose of loading or
unloading where they do not obstruct free passage thereon, provided that
such articles are removed without any unreasonable delay and within one
hour.
§ 267-14. Moving buildings.
No person shall move or cause to be moved a building or other structure
into, across or along any street without permission of the Mayor or the
Common Council.
Required distance from street or sidewalk. No person shall maintain,
place or attach any awning over any portion of any street or sidewalk of
any street in the city unless such awning and all parts thereof, including
the flap and brace, shall be at least seven feet above the portion of
said street or sidewalk above or over which any such awning shall be
maintained or attached.
B.
§ 267-10 HORNELL CODE § 267-15
267:384
§ 267-15. Poles and wires.
No person shall string or set any telegraph, telephone or other wire or wires
or place or set any poles for the stringing of the same unless such person
shall first obtain a permit so to do from the Common Council; and in case
such permission shall be obtained from the Common Council, said wires
shall be strung and such poles set under the direction of the Superintendent
of Public Works.
§ 267-16. Obstruction of ditches.
§ 267-17. Trees and shrubs projecting into street.
Prohibited without permission. No person shall obstruct any of the
ditches in the streets of the city, by means of a driveway or otherwise,
unless the written permission of the Superintendent of Public Works is
first obtained, which permission shall only be granted on the condition
that a suitable drain, tile or pipe is placed so as to allow the free flow
of water along the ditch, and such drain, tile or pipe shall be of such
size, material and capacity as shall be approved by the Superintendent
of Public Works.
A.
Violations; notice to remove; failure to obey notice. If any driveway
or other obstruction is placed in the ditches aforesaid in violation of
the Subsection A, the owner or owners of the lands adjacent thereto
shall remove the same within 10 days after written notice from the
Superintendent of Public Works to do so; and in the event of failure to
comply with said notice, the Superintendent of Public Works may cause
the same to be removed at the expense of such owner or owners and
may cause the same, if necessary for the purposes of a driveway, to be
rebuilt and reconstructed, with a suitable opening through the same as
provided in Subsection A, which shall also be at the expense of such
owner or owners. Any expense incurred as aforesaid shall be collected
as provided in § C-176 of the Charter of the city.
B.
Duty to trim; clearance prescribed. Trees, shrubs and other plants
standing on any lot or land adjacent to any street, public highway
or public place and having branches projecting into the street, public
highway or public place shall be kept trimmed by the owner or owners
or occupant of the property on which such plants are growing so that
the lowest branches shall not be less than 15 feet above the roadbed
and not less than seven feet above the sidewalk level or where, in the
opinion of the Department of Public Safety, the sight distance for motor
vehicles is obstructed by hedges, bushes or small trees standing over
two feet above ground level.
A.
Authority of city. The City of Hornell shall have the right to plant, trim,
spray, preserve and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines
of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes and public grounds and shall have
the right to enter upon private grounds within the city when it shall
be necessary, in its opinion, to do so in order to prevent breeding or
B.
§ 267-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 267-17
267:385
§ 267-18. Trimming or removal of trees by city.
§ 267-19. Location of ornamental and shade trees.
All ornamental or shade trees or posts hereafter placed or set out in any
street shall be placed or set out within 2 1/2 feet of the curb and between
said curbline and the line of the street nearest thereto.
§ 267-20. Injury to trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to mar or injure, deface or destroy
any shade or ornamental tree in any street, lane or alley or on any public
grounds.
§ 267-21. Requirements for acceptance of new streets by city.
scattering of any disease, and further when, in its opinion, any plant
or part thereof or dead or diseased tree is in an unsafe condition or in
any other manner may cause a hazard to his/her or any other adjoining
property owner or tenant.
Notice to remove. The city shall cause to be mailed to the owner or
agent of the owner of such premises at his last known address notice to
remove, at least 10 days before such removal, unless, in the opinion of
the city, immediate removal is necessary for public safety.
C.
Noncompliance with notice. If the person upon whom notice is served,
as authorized in Subsection C above, fails, neglects or refuses to comply
with said notice within 10 days after service of such notice and the city
undertakes to do that which is deemed necessary, any costs incurred in
connection therewith shall be borne by the owner of the premises. Such
costs shall be in addition to the penalties hereinafter provided. 83
D.
Authority of Superintendent of Public Works. The Superintendent of
Public Works shall be and is empowered to trim or remove any trees
located in the city streets outside of the curbline and between the curb
and sidewalk whenever he finds, in his discretion, that such trimming
or removal is reasonably necessary for the better lighting of said streets
or for the better use of such streets and sidewalks as public streets and
sidewalks.
A.
Notice to property owner. Whenever it is necessary to remove or
destroy such trees, the abutting property owner shall be given at least
10 days' notice by the Superintendent of Public Works to the effect
that the removal or destruction of such tree is required, giving the
abutting landowner the privilege of removing such tree himself. Such
notice, however, shall not be required where the tree is only trimmed,
as distinguished from being removed or destroyed.
B.
83.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 22-17.1(e), Violations and penalties, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II. See now § 267-22, Penalties for offenses.
§ 267-17 HORNELL CODE § 267-21
267:386
§ 267-22. Penalties for offenses.84
Any violation of this Article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of this
Code.
Description and map. A complete description and map must be filed
with the Department of Public Works showing the distances and
directions of the property to be conveyed.
A.
Profile. A profile of the proposed street must be filed showing the center
line, gutter lines and property lines and also the proposed grade for
sewers.
B.
Establishment and approval of grade. A grade must be established on
said profile by the Superintendent of Public Works and approved by the
Department of Public Works.
C.
Minimum width of street. No street of less than 24 feet in width shall
be accepted.
D.
Sidewalks; crosswalks. Sidewalks and crosswalks must be complete.
The standard width of sidewalk for streets less than 30 feet shall be
three feet and for streets 30 to 40 feet shall be four feet and for streets
40 feet or over shall be five feet wide.
E.
Street surface; improvements.
The surface of the street shall consist of not less than four inches
compacted gravel or cinders and shall conform to the established
grade and crown.
(1)
If streets are improved other than with gravel or cinders, the
improvement shall be made in accordance with the specifications
of the Department of Public Works.
(2)
F.
Curbing requirements. Streets of widths of 24 feet to 30 feet shall not
be curbed with less than 18 feet between the curbs, and streets of over
30 feet shall not be curbed less than 24 feet in width.
G.
Sewers. No sewer shall be constructed of less than eight-inch vitrified
tile with standard manholes not less than 250 feet apart. A standard
manhole shall be installed where a new or proposed sewer enters the
city sewer system.
H.
84.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 267-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 267-22
267:387

ARTICLE II
Merchandise Displays85
[Adopted as Sec. 16-3 of Ch. 16 of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 267-23. Sale on Sundays.
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose for sale or display upon the
sidewalk in front of the premises occupied by him any merchandise of any
kind or character at any time of the day known as the first day of the week,
commonly called "Sunday."
§ 267-24. Applicability.
This Article shall not apply to any regular news dealer, who may display his
or their papers, magazines and periodicals on racks or easels in front of the
place so occupied by him at a distance not exceeding eight inches from the
outside wall of said building so occupied.
§ 267-25. Penalties for offenses.86
Any violation of this Article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-1 of this
Code.
85.Editor's Note: See also § 267-11, Booths and merchandise stands, and § 267-13, Display of
merchandise; loading and unloading.
86.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 267-23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 267-25
267:389

ARTICLE III
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted as Art. II of Ch. 22 of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 267-26. General requirements.
§ 267-27. Underground utility projects.
§ 267-28. Excavations.
The following conditions and regulations apply to all work authorized
within street boundaries of the City of Hornell for repair and/or
installation of water, gas, sewer, telephone and electric utilities and
miscellaneous structures. These conditions and any special conditions
which may be added to the street opening permit shall be enforced by
the Department of Public Works.
A.
All work in connection with an issued street opening permit shall
commence within 30 days from the date of permit issuance, unless
extensions are requested and approved by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
B.
All underground crossings shall be accomplished without disturbance
to pavement unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
A.
Plans for underground utility projects shall be submitted and approved
by the Superintendent of Public Works prior to commencement of the
work. Such plans shall be to scale and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The general scope of the work.
(2) The type of equipment and construction procedures to be followed.
(3) The size, type, locations and quantities of materials to be installed.
The method of abandonment of any utilities retired upon
completion of the work.
(4)
Standard details showing the method of pavement restoration,
topsoil and seeding, where required, and the method of replacing
any other items removed or caused to be damaged because of the
work.
(5)
(6) Necessary maintenance and the protection of traffic.
B.
Installation, repair, replacement or maintenance of utilities requiring
open excavation shall be permitted only by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
A.
Pavement removal shall be accomplished in such a way that will allow
for proper restoration of the replacement section. Straight vertical cuts
B.
§ 267-26 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 267-28
267:391
§ 267-29. Maintenance and protection of traffic.
of the pavement will be required. Pavement that becomes undermined
shall be cut back and removed.
Upon completion of the work, excavations shall be backfilled in such
a way as to obtain maximum compaction. Gravel material for backfill
shall be well-graded from coarse to fine and shall not exceed such size
as will pass through a two-inch square hole; 30% to 65% by weight,
shall pass through a one-fourth-inch square sieve, and not more than
10%, by weight, shall pass the No. 200 mesh sieve. Fill materials shall
be placed in lifts and thoroughly compacted with no lift exceeding six
inches in depth after compaction.
C.
Pavement restoration shall be accomplished by placement of two
courses consisting of an asphalt binder and an asphalt top material.
Depth of the binder and top courses shall be thoroughly rolled to
produce a smooth and uniform surface flush to the adjoining existing
pavement.
D.
All restoration work, including temporary patching until permanent
restoration can be accomplished, is the sole responsibility of the permit
holder. The city will, upon request, furnish the pavement restoration
service at its cost. The cost of this work will be quoted to the contractor
at the time the street opening permit is issued; and if the contractor
chooses to utilize this service, the cost will be included in the street
opening permit fee.
E.
All other areas, such as curbing, grass lawns, sidewalks and any other
features disturbed by the contractor, shall be repaired or replaced in
kind.
F.
Sidewalk replacement shall be performed in a neat and workmanlike
manner. Handicapped person ramps shall be required at intersections.
G.
No excavations will be allowed to remain open overnight except in
extraordinary cases. By approval of the Superintendent of Public
Works, steel cover plates may be used to cover the excavated area.
H.
Traffic shall be maintained at all times during the progress of the work,
and adequate signs, barricades and lights shall be provided. A plan for
the maintenance and protection of traffic may be required. No lanes
shall be closed without prior approval. Every contractor shall have
an on-site representative who is responsible for the maintenance and
protection of traffic.
A.
The contractor shall erect and maintain suitable barricades around all
trenches while the work is in progress and place advance warning
signs for the protection of the public. All barricades and signs shall be
suitably lighted by yellow lights at night.
B.
§ 267-28 HORNELL CODE § 267-29
267:392
§ 267-30. Interpretation of requirements.
Any interpretation of these requirements shall be made by the
Superintendent of Public Works, who will decide matters of contractor
compliance with the specifications.
§ 267-31. Failure to comply.
Failure to comply with these requirements will result in revocation of the
street opening permit and suspension from performing future excavations
within the street boundaries of the City of Hornell.
§ 267-32. Penalties for offenses.87
Any violation of the provisions of this Article shall be punishable as provided
in § 1-1 of this Code.
No pavement openings are to be left unfilled over night except in
extraordinary circumstances, and in such cases, precautions shall be
taken to protect traffic. Prior approval must be obtained to use steel
plating. Any open trenches in the street shall be barricaded and lighted
at night. The Superintendent of Public Works, at his discretion, may
require the contractor to provide a flagman during the progress of the
work.
C.
During winter conditions, the contractor must perform the work in such
a way so that the street is free of obstructions that would interfere with
snow and ice control operations.
D.
87.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 267-29 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 267-32
267:393
Chapter 275
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 142.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 267.
Zoning — See Ch. 315.
§ 267-32 HORNELL CODE § 267-32
275:394
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 275-1. Title; definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, which shall be known and may be cited
as "Hornell Subdivision Regulations," certain words used herein are defined
as follows:
COUNCIL — The duly elected Common Council of the City of Hornell.
ENGINEER — The duly appointed Superintendent of Public Works.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The appropriate state district health office
serving Steuben County and the City of Hornell.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive plan approved by the City Planning
Board which indicates the general locations recommended for the various
functional classes of public works, places and structures and for the general
physical development of the City of Hornell and includes any unit or part
of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts
thereof.
PLAT — The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of
subdivision is presented to the Council for approval and which, if approved,
will be submitted to the County Clerk for recording.
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT — The preliminary drawings indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Council for its
consideration.
STREET — A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane
or place or however otherwise designated.
ARTERIAL OR MAJOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — Those used
primarily for fast or heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and principal
streets for circulation within such a development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
§ 275-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-1
275:395
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into more than four lots,
plots, blocks or sites, with or without streets, for the purpose of offering
such lots, plots, blocks or sites for sale to the public. This also includes
resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots, sites or parcels;
provided, however, that the sale or exchange of parcels of land between
adjacent property owners, where such sale does not create additional lots,
shall not be considered a "subdivision" of land.
§ 275-1 HORNELL CODE § 275-1
275:396
ARTICLE II
Procedure
§ 275-2. Application for approval.
Whenever any subdivision of land, as hereinbefore defined, is proposed to
be made and before any contract for the sale of or any offer to sell such
subdivision or any part thereof is made, the subdividing owner thereof or his
agent shall apply, in writing, to the Council for approval of such subdivision.
He shall first file with the Council a preliminary layout and subsequently a
formal plat as hereinafter specified.
§ 275-3. Preapplication procedure.
Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the
preliminary layout, the subdivider may submit general site information, a
location map and a sketch plan with a request for informal consideration
and advice. This step does not require formal application, fee or the filing
of a plat. The purpose of the preapplication procedure is to afford the
subdivider an opportunity to consult early and informally with the Planning
Board before preparation of the preliminary layout in order to save time and
money and to make the most of opportunities for desirable development.
§ 275-4. Procedure for conditional approval of preliminary layout.
On reaching conclusions regarding his general program and objectives,
the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary layout, together
with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified
in Article V. Three copies of the preliminary layout and required
supplementary material shall be submitted to the Council, with written
application for conditional approval, at least five days prior to a
regularly scheduled meeting. Two copies shall be referred by the
Council to the Planning Board for study and recommendation.
A.
Following review of the preliminary layout and other material
submitted therewith and negotiations with the subdivider on changes
deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made
by him in accordance with the requirements of Article IV, the Planning
Board shall act thereon as submitted or as modified. If the preliminary
layout is approved, the Planning Board shall recommend its approval as
conditional approval and state the specific conditions of such approval,
if any. If the preliminary layout is disapproved, the Planning Board shall
state the reasons for its disapproval.
B.
The action of the Planning Board shall be noted on two copies of the
preliminary layout, to which shall be attached referenced statements of
any conditions and requirements determined by the Planning Board in
accordance with these regulations.
C.
§ 275-2 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-5
275:397
§ 275-5. Subdivision filing fees. 88
A filing fee as provided in Chapter 142, Fees, shall be paid to the City Clerk
and by the Clerk credited to the city general fund when the preliminary
layout is filed in the Clerk's office for the conditional approval of the
Council.
§ 275-6. Procedure for approval of subdivision plat.
The final subdivision plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary
layout as approved. If desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary layout which he proposes to
record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms to
all requirements of these regulations.
A.
Application for approval of the subdivision plat shall be submitted, in
writing, to the Council at least five days prior to the meeting at which it
is to be considered and shall include three copies of the plat and other
exhibits required for approval as specified in Article V. Such application
shall be submitted within six months after approval of the preliminary
layout; otherwise such preliminary approval shall become null and void,
unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the Council.
B.
The Council may submit the final plat to the Planning Board for
examination. In such case, the Planning Board will forward the plat to
the Council with recommendations to approve, modify and approve or
disapprove such plat within 45 days after the application for approval
of the plat was filed. On receipt of the plat with recommendations
of the Planning Board or after a lapse of 45 days after application
for approval of the plat was filed, the Council will approve, modify
or disapprove the plat. Approval, however, shall not be deemed final
until the subdivider has complied with the provisions of § 275-17 with
respect to certification that required improvements have been
completed or bond satisfactory to the Council has been posted in lieu
thereof.
C.
The subdivider will be required to tender offers of cession, in a form
certified as satisfactory by the City Attorney, of all sewers, drains,
waterlines and all land included in streets, parks or other public areas
not specifically reserved by him, but approval of the plat by the Council
does not constitute an acceptance by the city of the dedication of these
facilities.
D.
After the completion of the foregoing details and notation to that effect
upon the application, the plat shall be signed by the City Clerk and
shall be deemed to have final approval. Within 90 days thereafter, the
developer shall file the plat in the office of the Council Clerk; otherwise
such approval shall expire.
E.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 275-5 HORNELL CODE § 275-6
275:398
ARTICLE III
Design Standards
§ 275-7. Streets.
Conformity to Master Plan and Official Map. The arrangement,
character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform
to the Master Plan and to the Official Map, if any, and shall be
considered in their relation to other existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions and to public convenience and safety and in
their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served and/
or abutted by such streets.
A.
Streets not shown on Master Plan. Where not shown in the Master Plan,
streets in a subdivision shall:
Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas; or
(1)
Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by
the Council to meet a particular situation where topographical or
other conditions make continuance of or conformance with existing
streets impracticable.
(2)
B.
Laying out of minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their
use by through traffic will be discouraged.
C.
Subdivision abutting on arterial or major street. Where a subdivision
abuts on or contains an existing or proposed arterial or major street,
the Council may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with
screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear
property line, deep lots with or without rear service alleys or such other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential
properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
D.
Subdivision bordering on or containing railroad right-of-way or
controlled access highway right-of-way. Where a subdivision borders
on or contains a railroad right-of-way or controlled access highway
right-of-way, the Council may require a street approximately parallel
to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for
the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts or for business, commercial or industrial purposes
in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with
due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade
separations.
E.
Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets, water
plants or sewage treatment plants or to other land dedicated or to be
dedicated to public use shall be prohibited except where their control is
definitely placed in the city under conditions approved by the Council.
F.
§ 275-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-7
275:399
Street jogs. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be avoided.
G.
Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial or major and collector streets.
H.
Streets to intersect at right angles. Streets shall be laid out so as
to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall
intersect any other street at less than 75°. The Council may waive this
requirement if adequate channelizing or divisional islands are provided
to ensure traffic safety.
I.
Property lines at intersections. Property lines at street intersections
shall be rounded with a radius of 10 feet or with a greater radius where
the Council may deem it necessary. The Council may permit comparable
cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners.
J.
K. Curb radii. Curb radii at intersections shall be not less than 20 feet.
Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the
Master Plan, and where not shown thereon, shall be not less than as
follows:
Street Type
Minimum Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Arterial or major 80*
Collector 60
Minor 60
Marginal access 40
*NOTE: Not including right-of-way for marginal access streets, if any.
L.
Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to
the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the
other requirements of these regulations; and where the Council finds
it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when
the adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall
be platted within such tract.
M.
Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently,
shall not be longer than 500 feet in general and not longer than 600 feet
in any case and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround
having an outside roadway diameter of at least 100 feet and a street
property-line diameter of at least 120 feet.
N.
Names. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be
subject to the approval of the Council.
O.
§ 275-7 HORNELL CODE § 275-7
275:400
§ 275-8. Alleys.
§ 275-9. Easements.
§ 275-10. Blocks.
Grade. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following,
with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves and with not less
than 200 feet between changes of grade:
Street Type
Maximum Grade
(percent)
Arterial or major 4
Collector 6
Minor 8
Marginal access 8
P.
Facilitation of drainage. In order to facilitate drainage, no street grade
shall be less than 0.4%, when possible, but in no event less than 0.3%.
Q.
Generally. Alleys must be required in business, commercial and
industrial districts, but it is recommended that other definite and
assured provisions be made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the
uses proposed.
A.
B. Width. The width of an alley, if required, shall not be less than 20 feet.
Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but
if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at
the closed end, as required by the Council.
C.
Generally; width. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot
lines shall be provided for utilities, where necessary, and shall be at
least 12 feet wide.
A.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse. Where a subdivision
is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there
shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such
further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose.
B.
Length and width. Block lengths generally shall not exceed 1,600 feet
nor be less than 400 feet. Block widths shall not be less than 250 feet.
A.
Intersections with arterial or major streets. Intersections with arterial
or major streets should be held to a minimum and preferably spaced at
least 1,000 feet apart.
B.
§ 275-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-10
275:401
§ 275-11. Lots.
Pedestrian crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks with a right-of-way not
less than 10 feet wide shall be required where deemed essential to
provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities.
C.
Area, width and setback. The area, width and minimum building
setback lines shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 315, Zoning,
and to the following standards:
Residential lots not served by public sewers shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 315, Zoning, in usable area. The term
"usable area," as used herein, includes the general area of the lot
or plot which may be utilized for the proposed construction and for
the normal and reasonable development of the area for the type of
occupancy proposed, exclusive of lakes, streams, ponds, swamps or
areas of exposed or underlying rock, hardpan or other impervious
stratum within four feet of the surface or marginal areas subject to
flooding or along streams or other bodies of water, unless specified
approval is obtained from the Council and Health Department.
(1)
The depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business,
commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide
for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type
of use and development contemplated, as required by Chapter 315,
Zoning.
(2)
A.
Land subject to flooding. Land subject to flooding shall not be platted
for residential occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase
danger to life or property or aggravate the flood hazard.
B.
Access to public street. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to
provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access
to an existing public street.
C.
Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots; screening. Double-frontage
and reverse-frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to
provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or
to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
planting screen easement at least 10 feet wide, across which there shall
be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting
such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use.
D.
Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street lines.
E.
Subdividing tract into parcels larger than normal building lots. Where
a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than normal building lots, such
parcels shall be planned to permit the opening of future streets and
logical further resubdivision.
F.
§ 275-10 HORNELL CODE § 275-12
275:402
§ 275-12. Public sites and open spaces.
§ 275-13. Recreation site fees in lieu of dedication of land.
When required. Where deemed essential by the Council upon
consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the
subdivision, and especially in large-scale neighborhood unit
developments not anticipated in the Master Plan, the Council may
require the dedication or reservation of areas or sites of a character,
extent and location suitable to the needs created by such development
for a park or parks, playgrounds or other recreational uses.
A.
Purchase. Where a proposed park, playground or other recreational or
public site shown in a Master Plan is located, in whole or in part, in
a subdivision, the following procedure will be followed: The Council
will request the appropriate local authority to negotiate for the outright
purchase of necessary sites in accordance with the Master Plan.
B.
Amount of fee per lot. In lieu of or in addition to the dedication or
reservation of areas or sites for playgrounds or other recreational uses,
the Council may require the payment of a playground or recreation
site fee as provided in Chapter 142, Fees, where appropriate conditions
require.89
A.
Payment of fee; use and disposition of fee. Such fee shall be paid to the
City Clerk prior to the approval of the final plat. If the Council shall
have established a Recreation Commission, such fees shall be made
available to such Commission to be used by it to develop and equip
parks, playgrounds or other recreational areas. If the Council shall not
have established a Recreation Commission, such fees shall be credited
to the city general fund.
B.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 275-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-13
275:403

ARTICLE IV
Improvements
§ 275-14. Monuments and bench marks.
§ 275-15. Utilities and streets.
Location, material, size and length. Monuments shall be placed at
such block corners, angle points and points of curves in streets and
at intermediate points as approved by the Council or its designated
official. The monuments shall be of such material, size and length as
may be approved by the engineer.
A.
Survey. As buildings are completed and surveyed, a copy of the survey
shall be furnished to the Building Department or appropriate city
officer.
B.
Permanent bench mark. A permanent bench mark shall be established
referenced to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey and tied to the
elevations shown on all plans, subject to approval of the engineer.
C.
Standards and requirements generally. Utility and street
improvements, when required in each new subdivision, shall be in
accordance with the standards and requirements described in the
following schedules.
A.
Standards and specifications for each general type of development. The
standards and specifications for each general type of development shall
be as follows:
For apartments, row houses and other residential types other than
one-family detached dwellings, improvements shall be in accord
with Standard B.
(1)
For one-family detached dwellings, improvements shall be in
accord with Standard A.
(2)
For business, commercial, industrial and other types,
improvements shall be as determined by the Council with the
advice of the engineer.
(3)
B.
Schedule of required utilities and street improvements standards.
Standard
B A Improvement
x (x) Public water: per plans approved by the engineer and the
Health Department. (Public water shall be required for
subdivisions within existing water districts.)
x x Public sewer: per plans approved by the engineer and the
Health Department
C.
§ 275-14 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-15
275:405
x x Arterial or major streets: cross sections in accordance with
the Master Plan and as set forth in the preceding § 275-7L
and so designated on the major trafficways plan
Collector streets:
x 60-foot right-of-way; 30-foot pavement; 5-foot sidewalks
x 60-foot right-of-way; 30-foot pavement; 4-foot sidewalks
Minor streets:
x 60-foot right-of-way; 30-foot pavement; 5-foot sidewalks
x 60-foot right-of-way; 28-foot pavement; 4-foot sidewalks
Marginal access streets (1-way traffic and 1-side parking):
40-foot right-of-way; 20-foot pavement; 5-foot sidewalks
40-foot right-of-way; 18-foot pavement; 4-foot sidewalks
x x Streets along development boundaries and streets
connecting developments with existing improved street
system: cross sections as determined by the engineer and
the Planning Board
x x Alley: paved full width, per plans and specifications
approved by the engineer
x x Grading and center-line gradients: per plans and profiles
approved by the engineer.
x x Storm sewer system or other drainage improvements: per
plans approved by the engineer
x x Curb: per plans and specifications approved by the engineer
x x Curb and gutter: (alternative to curb, above) per plans and
specifications approved by engineer
x x x x Pavement, base, etc.: as specified by the engineer and city
ordinance Wearing surface: as specified by the engineer
x x Sidewalks: as specified by the engineer
§ 275-15 HORNELL CODE § 275-15
275:406
ARTICLE V
Plats and Data
§ 275-16. Preapplication plans and data.
§ 275-17. Preliminary layout for conditional approval.
General site information shall describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development to the extent
necessary to supplement the location map and sketch plan. Information
may be required on existing covenants, land characteristics, available
community facilities and utilities and information describing the
subdivision proposal, such as the number of residential lots, the typical
lot width and depth, price range, business areas, playgrounds, parks
and other public areas, proposed protective covenants and proposed
utilities and street improvements.
A.
The sketch plan on the topographic survey shall show, in simple sketch
form, the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation
to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch
made directly on a print of the topographic survey. In any event, the
sketch plan should include either the existing topographic data listed in
§ 275-17A below or such of these data as the Council may require for its
consideration of the proposed sketch plan, as well as the scale, North
point and date.
B.
Existing conditions data shall include the following, except when
otherwise specified by the Council:
(1) A key plan showing the location and boundaries of the tract.
Property lines and easements: the location, width and purpose of
easements and existing platting, if a resubdividing project.
(2)
Streets on and adjacent to the tract, including all streets shown
in the Official Map: the name and right-of-way width and location;
the type, width and elevation of surfacing; any legally established
center-line elevations; and walks, curbs, gutters, bridges, culverts,
etc.
(3)
Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: the location, size and invert
elevation of sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, ditches or
other facilities for drainage; the location and size of water mains;
and the location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone
poles and streetlights. If water mains and sewers are not on or
adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and approximate
distance to and the size of the nearest ones, showing the invert
elevation of sewers or culverts. Where drainage is to be a natural
watercourse or drainage ditch, the elevation of water in such
watercourse or ditch at the recognized flood stage shall be shown.
(4)
A.
§ 275-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-17
275:407
Ground elevations on the tract based on a datum plane approved by
the engineer (United States Geographical Survey recommended):
for land that slopes less than approximately 2%, spot elevations
at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales and
at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions;
for land that slopes more than approximately 2%, either contours
with an interval of not more than five feet, if the ground slope is
regular and such information is sufficient for planning purposes, or
contours with an interval of not more than two feet, if necessary
because of irregular land or the need for more detailed data for
preparing plans and construction drawings.
(5)
Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Council: the
location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock
and groundwater conditions, the depth to groundwater, unless test
pits are dry at a depth of five feet; and the location and results
of soil percolation tests, if individual sewage disposal systems are
proposed.
(6)
Other conditions on the tract: watercourses, marshes, rock
outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more
in diameter, houses, other buildings and other significant features.
(7)
Other conditions on adjacent land: the approximate direction and
gradient of the ground slope, including any embankments or
retaining walls; power lines and towers; and the owners of adjacent
unplatted land. For adjacent platted land, refer to the subdivision
plat by the name, recording date and number.
(8)
Land title and survey: the deed description according to official
records; the names and addresses of record owners; the map of the
survey of the tract boundary, including all pertinent bearings and
distances, made and certified by a registered land surveyor, tied
into established city reference points and, where possible, related
to the state system of plan coordinates; and notations stating the
acreage, scale, North point, datum, bench marks and date of
survey.90
(9)
The preliminary subdivision plan shall be at a scale of not more than
200 feet to the inch (preferred scale: one inch equals 100 feet). It shall
show or be accompanied by the existing conditions data required above
in § 275-16A and shall show all proposals, including the following:
Streets: the names, rights-of-way and roadway widths, approximate
grades and gradients, and similar data for alleys, if any.
(1)
(2) Other right-of-way or easements: the location, width and purpose.
(3) The location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits.
B.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 275-17 HORNELL CODE § 275-17
275:408
§ 275-18. Subdivision plat for final approval.
The final subdivision plat shall be printed on linen or canvas-backed paper
or drawn with pen and India ink on tracing cloth on sheets twenty by
forty (20 x 40) inches. The scale shall be 100 feet to the inch or larger.
Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets, accompanied by an
index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final
plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections
satisfactory to the Council. The final plat shall show the following:
(4) The lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers.
The sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds
or other public uses.
(5)
The sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry or other nonpublic uses, exclusive of singlefamily
dwellings.
(6)
The site data, including the number of residential lots, the typical
lot size and acres in parks, etc.
(7)
The subdivision name or title, under which to be eventually
recorded; also the scale, North point and date; and the name and
address of the subdivider and designer.
(8)
Other preliminary plans. When required by the Council, the preliminary
layout should include profiles showing existing ground surface and
proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance
beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision, typical cross sections of
the proposed grading, roadways and sidewalks; preliminary designs of
any bridges and culverts which may be required; a preliminary plan
of the proposed water mains to connect with the existing public water
supply or alternative means of water supply approved by the Health
Department; a preliminary plan of the proposed sanitary sewers, with
grades and sizes indicated, connecting with existing sanitary sewerage
systems or alternative means of treatment and disposal approved by
the Health Department; and a preliminary plan for collecting and
discharging storm drainage. All elevations shall be based on a datum
plane approved by the engineer (United States Geological Survey
recommended).
C.
Drafts of protective covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development shall be included.
D.
The primary control points, approved by the engineer, or descriptions
and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
A.
The tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other
B.
§ 275-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-18
275:409
sites, with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii,
arcs and central angles of all curves.
C. The name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
D. The locations, dimensions and purposes of any easements.
A number to identify each lot or site in numerical order within blocks
and a letter to identify each block.
E.
The purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved.
F.
The location and description of monuments (shown thus: "X"), lot
corner markers (shown thus: "O"), and bench marks (shown thus:
"BM").
G.
H. The names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
References to recorded subdivision plats or adjoining platted land by
record name, date and number.
I.
Certification by a registered land surveyor (including his name,
address, New York state license number and seal), certifying to the
accuracy of the survey and plat.
J.
K. Certification of the title, showing that the applicant is the landowner.
The water and sewer disposal requirements, with details and
certification of approval by the Health Department. Where any wateror
sewer line, water plant or sewage treatment plant is to be installed
by the developer outside existing districts, the establishment or
enlargement of a water district and/or a sewer district may be required.
L.
M. The title, scale, North point and date.
Cross sections and profiles of streets, drains and sewers, showing
grades approved by the engineer. The profiles shall be drawn to
standard scales and elevations and shall be based on a datum plane
approved by the engineer (United States Geological Survey
recommended).
N.
Statements by the engineer certifying that the subdivider has complied
with one of the following alternatives:
That all required improvements have been installed in accord with
these regulations and the requirements of the Council giving
conditional approval of the preliminary layout; or
(1)
That a bond or certified check has been posted, which is available
to the city and in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all
required improvements.
(2)
O.
§ 275-18 HORNELL CODE § 275-18
275:410
Offers of cession by dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites
for public uses and agreements covering the improvement and
maintenance of unceded public spaces and the conditions and time
limits, if any, applying to site reservations.
P.
A statement by the City Attorney approving as to legal sufficiency all
offers of cession, all covenants governing the maintenance of unceded
public open space and any action taken to establish or extend water
and/or sewer districts and also approving the sufficiency of any bond
offered in lieu of the completion of required subdivision improvements.
Q.
Protective covenants, in form for recording, including covenants
governing the maintenance of unceded public spaces or reservations.
R.
Other requirements: such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or
other agreements as may be required by the Council in the enforcement
of these regulations. In special cases where there are potential hazards
of flooding, dangers from mining operations or other hazards, in the
opinion of the engineer, the city may require the services of an
independent engineer or expert to recommend conditions under which
the subdivision may be approved. The expense of such engineer or
expert shall be borne by the subdivider.
S.
§ 275-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-18
275:411

ARTICLE VI
Variances
§ 275-19. General power.
Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of these regulations, the Council shall have the
power to vary or modify the application of any of the requirements herein
relating to the use, layout and platting of land for subdivision so that the
spirit of the regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured
and substantial justice done.
§ 275-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 275-19
275:413
Chapter 278
(RESERVED)
Chapter 280
TAXATION
§ 275-19 HORNELL CODE § 275-19
275:414
ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted as Subpart E of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 280-1. Tax imposed. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 20-b of the General City Law of the
State of New York, as amended, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income is
hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in the City of Hornell
which is subject to the supervision of the State Department of Public
Service, except motor carriers subject to such supervision under § 240 et
seq. of the Transportation Law, and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating
income is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in the City
of Hornell, which taxes shall have application only within the territorial
limits of the City of Hornell and shall be in addition to any and all other
taxes and fees imposed by any other provision of law. Such taxes shall
not be imposed on any transaction originating or consummated outside the
territorial limits of the City of Hornell notwithstanding that some act is
necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 280-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross
income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the City of Hornell, including cash, credits and property of
any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service is
rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost
of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services or
other cost, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever; also
profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real property
growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also
profits from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on
hand at the close of the period for which a return is made); also receipts
from interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the City
of Hornell, other than such as are received from a corporation a majority of
whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction
therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the
receipt thereof; and also profits from any transaction, except sales for resale
and rentals, within the City of Hornell whatsoever.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony
or telegraphy or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption
or use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph
§ 280-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-2
275:415
service in the City of Hornell, including cash, credits and property of any
kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of
the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other
costs, interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of either
division of the State Department of Public Service, except persons engaged
in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars
or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway
and elevated railroads, and also includes every person, whether or not such
person is subject to such supervision, who shall engage in the business of
selling gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy
delivered through mains, pipes or wire or of furnishing gas, electric, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraph service by means of mains,
pipes or wires.
§ 280-3. Records.
Every utility subject to tax under this Article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the City Chamberlain of the City of Hornell
may require, and such records shall be preserved for a period of three
years, except that the City Chamberlain of the City of Hornell may consent
to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept
longer.
§ 280-4. Returns.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before September
25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for the three calendar
months preceding each such return date, including any period for which
the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective, each of
which returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income for
the period covered by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the City
Chamberlain on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall
contain such other data, information or matter as the City Chamberlain may
require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this section, any utility whose average gross income or average gross
operating income, as the case may be, for each of the aforesaid threemonth
periods is less than $1,500 may file its returns annually as follows:
on the 15th day of June in each year while this Article is in effect. The
City Chamberlain may require at any time a further or supplemental return,
which shall contain any data that may be specified by the City Chamberlain.
Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility
making the same or of the owner or of a copartner thereof or of a principal
§ 280-2 HORNELL CODE § 280-4
275:416
officer of the corporation, if such business is conducted by a corporation, to
the effect that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 280-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this Article, each utility shall pay
to the City Chamberlain of the City of Hornell the tax imposed by this Article
for the period covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at
the time of filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last
day on which the return is required to be filed.
§ 280-6. Absent or insufficient returns.
In case any return filed pursuant to this Article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the City Chamberlain and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice
from the City Chamberlain or if no return is made for any period, the City
Chamberlain shall determine the amount of tax due from such information
as he is able to obtain and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis
of external indices or otherwise. The City Chamberlain shall give notice of
such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom
it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to the City Chamberlain for a hearing or unless the
City Chamberlain, of his own motion, shall reduce the same. After such
hearing, the City Chamberlain shall give notice of his decision to the person
liable for the tax. The decision of the City Chamberlain may be reviewed
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York if application therefor is made within 30 days after
the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such decision
shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed,
with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the
City Chamberlain and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount and
with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the
effect that if such proceeding (order) is dismissed or the tax confirmed, the
applicant (for the order) will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in
the prosecution of such proceedings or, at the option of the applicant, such
undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties,
costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be
required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to
the granting of such order.
§ 280-7. Notices.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this Article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this Article or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
§ 280-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-7
275:417
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this Article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of the mailing of such notice.
§ 280-8. Penalties for failure to file return or pay tax.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax
or any portion thereof within the time required by this Article shall be
subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax
for each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after
such return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the City
Chamberlain of the City of Hornell, if satisfied that the delay was excusable,
may remit all or any portion of such penalty.
§ 280-9. Refunds.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the City Chamberlain or
the Court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the City Chamberlain shall refund
the amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a
refund may be so made on the initiative of the City Chamberlain. However,
no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination
of the City Chamberlain as hereinbefore provided unless the City
Chamberlain, after a hearing as hereinbefore provided or of his own motion,
shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established
in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal.
All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this Article. An
application for a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an
application for the revision of any tax or penalty complained of, and the City
Chamberlain may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After
making his determination, the City Chamberlain shall give notice thereof to
the person interested and he shall be entitled to an order to review such
determination under said Article 78, subject to the provisions hereinbefore
contained relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 280-10. Tax to be part of operating cost.
The tax imposed by this Article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 280-11. Proceedings to enforce payment of tax.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by
this Article, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the City
Chamberlain of the City of Hornell, bring an action to enforce payment of
the same. The proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action shall
§ 280-7 HORNELL CODE § 280-11
275:418
be paid to the City Chamberlain of the City of Hornell. Each such tax and
penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to pay the
same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and penalty
imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 280-12. Administration of provisions.
In the administration of this Article, the City Chamberlain of the City of
Hornell shall have power to make such reasonable rules and regulations not
inconsistent with law as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and
the performance of his duties and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports
and other records relating to the administration and enforcement of the
tax, to take testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter
within the line of his official duty under this Article and to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers
and documents.
§ 280-13. Secrecy provisions; penalties for offenses.
Except in accordance with the proper judicial orders or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the City Chamberlain of the
City of Hornell or any agent, clerk or employee of the City of Hornell
to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross income
or gross operating income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in
any return under this Article. The officer charged with the custody of
such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence
of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court,
except on behalf of the City of Hornell in an action or proceeding under
the provisions of this Article or on behalf of the State Tax Commission
in an action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the
State of New York or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding
under the provisions of this Article when the returns or facts shown
thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of
which events the Court may require the production of and may admit in
evidence so much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are
pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall
be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his duly authorized
representative of a copy of any return filed by him nor to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular returns and the items thereof or the publication of delinquent
lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at
the time and in the manner provided for by this Article, together with
any relevant information which, in the opinion of the City Chamberlain
of the City of Hornell, may assist in the collection of such delinquent
taxes; or the inspection by the Corporation Counsel or other legal
representatives of the City of Hornell of the return of any person who
shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon or against
whom an action has been instituted in accordance with the provisions
of this Article.
A.
§ 280-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-13
275:419
§ 280-14. Disposition of funds.
All taxes and penalties received by the City Chamberlain of the City of
Hornell for taxes herein or hereafter imposed under this Article shall be
handled and deposited by him in the general fund of the City of Hornell.
Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both; and if the offender is an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the City of Hornell, he shall be dismissed from
office and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in the
City of Hornell for a period of five years thereafter.
B.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the City Chamberlain
of the City of Hornell may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any
other city in the State of New York information contained in returns
filed under this Article, provided that such other city grants similar
privileges to the City of Hornell and provided that such information is
to be used for tax purposes only, and the City Chamberlain of the City
of Hornell, shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with
any information contained in such returns.
C.
§ 280-13 HORNELL CODE § 280-14
275:420
ARTICLE II
Sales and Use Tax
[Adopted as Subpart J of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ 280-15. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECTOR — The officer in whom the Common Council shall vest the
powers and duties of administering the law and provisions of this Article.
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, society, association, jointstock
company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, combination
of any group of individuals and any person acting in a fiduciary and
representative capacity appointed by a court or otherwise.
PURCHASER — A person who purchases tangible personal property the
receipts from which are taxable under this Article.
RECEIPT — The amount of the sale price of tangible personal property
valued in money, whether received actually in money or otherwise in the
trade-in or exchange of property of any kind or nature or otherwise as a
credit. In arriving at the sale price, no deduction shall be allowed for the
cost of the personal property to the vendor nor other expense, such as
material used, transportation of service cost, interest or discount.
RETURN — The report of sales required by this Article and rules and
regulations of the director.
SALE or SELLING — Any transfer of title or possession or both, exchange
or barter, license to use, license to consume, conditional or otherwise in any
manner of means whatsoever for a consideration or any agreement therefor
of tangible personal property.
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes all corporeal personal
property of every kind and nature and shall include gas, electricity, steam
and refrigeration.
USE — The exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property
by a purchaser to consume, wear or use in any manner for any purpose
for any period of time, to place in storage and to affix to any real property,
except a purchase for purposes of resale.
VENDOR — A person selling tangible personal property upon the receipts
from which a tax is imposed by this Article. Whenever the principal is
undisclosed to the director, the term shall include any agent, salesman,
canvasser, distributor or other person representing the undisclosed
principal employer or supervisor and he shall be jointly responsible for the
collection and payment of the tax imposed under this Article.
§ 280-16. Sales.
§ 280-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-16
275:421
Imposition of tax. Effective June 1, 1968, there shall be paid a tax of
2% upon the amount of the receipts from every retail sale and sale at
retail of tangible personal property within the City of Hornell, except as
hereinafter made exempt from the tax. In addition to the sale of such
tangible personal property, the tax is imposed on the same services
of producing, fabricating, processing and printing, and including the
repair, alterating or reconditioning of tangible personal property on
behalf of the owner thereof to refit it for the use for which it was
originally produced, except as hereinafter made exempt from such tax.
A.
Exemptions. The following sales of tangible personal property shall be
exempt from the imposition of the tax:
A sale for purposes of resale in the form of tangible personal
property.
(1)
(2) A sale consummated prior to March 1, 1961.
A sale for the purpose of incorporation of such property, as a
material or a part, into or for use or consumption directly and
limited exclusively in the production of tangible personal property
for sale by manufacturing, processing, assembling, refining,
mining, extracting, farming, agriculture, horticulture or
floriculture.
(3)
A sale of food and food products sold for human consumption,
including but not limited to cereals and cereal products, milk and
milk products, meat and meat products, fish and fish products,
eggs and egg products, vegetables and vegetable products, fruits,
spices and salt, sugar and sugar products, candy and confectionery,
coffee and coffee substitutes, beer or similar malt beverages, tea,
cocoa and cocoa products, water when delivered to the consumer
through mains or pipes, drugs, medicines, eye glasses, hearing
aids, artificial limbs and other similar devices to correct or alleviate
physical incapacities or handicaps when sold upon a physician's
prescription, eye glasses furnished upon an optometrist's
prescription, newspapers and periodicals and cigarettes. Soft
drinks, sodas and beverages as are ordinarily dispensed at bars
and soda fountains, other than those mentioned as exempt, shall be
taxable.
(4)
A sale by or to the United States, the United Nations or other
similar worldwide organization of which the United States is a
member or a public corporation created by compact between states
or between nations.
(5)
A sale by or to the State of New York or any county, city, town,
village, school district, fire district, special improvement district
or other civil division or public authority where it is the seller,
purchaser, user or consumer, except sales of gas and electricity by
a municipally owned system, which is taxable.
(6)
B.
§ 280-16 HORNELL CODE § 280-16
275:422
§ 280-17. Compensating use tax.
A sale to any person or group of persons, such as a corporation,
association, society, trust, fund, foundation or community chest,
when operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational
purposes or prevention of cruelty to children or animals and no part
of any net earnings inures to the benefit of any private shareholder
or individual. A sale to any person carrying on a business or trade
for profit is taxable, even though a portion of its earnings is paid to
such nonprofit organization.
(7)
A sale when the property is delivered or caused to be delivered to a
purchaser residing or having his place of business outside the City
of Hornell.
(8)
A sale of an automobile or other conveyance to veterans of the
armed forces of the United States as may be determined by the
President of the United States or concurrent resolution adopted by
Congress under the provisions of the laws of the United States.
(9)
Imposition of tax. Effective June 1, 1968, there shall be paid a tax of 2%
upon the use of tangible personal property within the City of Hornell
when purchased at retail, except as hereinafter made exempt from the
tax. A nonresident of the City of Hornell shall be deemed a resident of
the City of Hornell and holding for the tax imposed when the person
lives, is the owner of real property or carries on any business, trade,
profession, vocation or commercial activity within the City of Hornell.
A.
Exemptions. The following uses of tangible personal property
purchased at retail shall be exempt from the imposition of the tax:
A use of tangible personal property upon which a tax was imposed
or is subject to a tax to be imposed under the provisions of
§§ 280-16 and 280-18 of this Article or of any other state or political
subdivision of this or another state.
(1)
A use following a purchase of tangible personal property
consummated prior to March 1, 1961.
(2)
A use of tangible personal property purchased at retail by a person
or unit of government entitled to an exemption from the imposition
of the sales tax under the provisions of § 280-16 of this Article.
(3)
A use of tangible personal property upon which a compensating
use tax was imposed or is subject to a compensating use tax to be
imposed by any other state or any political subdivision of this or
another state.
(4)
(5) A use of paper in the publication of newspapers and periodicals.
B.
§ 280-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-17
275:423
§ 280-18. Alcoholic beverages in restaurants, bars and similar
establishments.
§ 280-19. Certificates of registration.
On or before June 1, 1968, each vendor in the City of Hornell shall file
in the office of the Director a certificate of registration in such form and
content as the Director may prescribe. Vendors opening business within the
City of Hornell after June 1, 1968, shall file in the office of the Director
such certificate or registration within 10 days after the commencement or
opening of business. A vendor selling tangible personal property outside the
City of Hornell to be used by a purchaser within the city may likewise file a
certificate of registration.
§ 280-20. Certificates of authority to collect tax; public display of
certificate.
Upon the filing of the certificate or registration, the Director shall issue
to a vendor a certificate of power and authority to collect the tax herein
imposed from the purchaser. The certificate shall not name the vendor and
the location of his business. The certificate shall not be assignable nor
transferable and shall be surrendered to the Director upon ceasing to do
business. A sufficient number of duplicate certificates shall be furnished to
the vendor to be prominently displayed in the place of business. A vendor
having no regular place of business shall display the certificate upon the
stand, truck or other merchandising device. The failure of a vendor within
the city to possess and display the certificate shall not relieve him from the
payment of the tax herein imposed and which should have been imposed
and collected from the purchaser.
A use by which the tangible personal property is converted into or
becomes a part of or is attached to any to be sold with, any produce
produced or manufactured for purposes or sale or resale at retail.
(6)
Where the aggregate amount paid by any one user from a vendor
located outside the city does not exceed $25 during any quarterly
period of a calendar year.
(7)
Imposition of the tax. Effective June 1, 1968, there shall be paid a tax
of 2% upon the receipts of sales of alcoholic beverages at retail to
be consumed on the premises by a human being in restaurants, cafes,
bars and similar establishments within the City of Hornell, except as
hereinafter made exempt from the tax.
A.
Exemptions. The following sales of alcoholic beverages shall be exempt
from the imposition of the tax:
(1) Beer and similar malt beverages.
Drinks enumerated as being exempt from the imposition of the
sales tax under the provisions of § 280-16B of this Article.
(2)
B.
§ 280-17 HORNELL CODE § 280-21
275:424
§ 280-21. Vendor to collect tax.
Every vendor within the city, whether he possesses the certificate of
authority or not, shall, at the time of making the sale, become responsible
to collect the tax and becomes liable for any amount which should have
been collected from the purchaser. The tax shall be charged and collected
separate from the sale price. No vendor shall advertise or hold out to the
public that the tax is not considered an element in the price charged the
purchaser.
§ 280-22. Payment of tax by purchaser.
Whenever a tax has not been collected by a vendor located within the city,
the purchaser may pay the same to the Director. The purchaser shall be
liable and he shall pay to the Director any use tax imposed by this Article
upon which the tax has not been paid by the vendor.
§ 280-23. Tax schedules.
Under such restrictions as the Common Council may impose, the Director is
empowered to adopt schedules and methods of determining, in a practical
manner, the amount of the tax to be paid to the Director and to avoid
fractions of a cent and details of each and every sale.
§ 280-24. Presumption of tax.
In the administration of this Article and to prevent evasion of the tax, all
sales of tangible personal property at retail and all purchases upon which
a use tax is imposed and all sales of alcoholic beverages to be consumed
upon the premises by human beings are presumed to be subject to the tax
until the contrary is established by the person liable to pay the same. The
Director shall furnish all necessary certificates or other forms for use by
vendors and purchasers showing sales for purposes of resale or otherwise
rendering the transaction exempt from the tax.
§ 280-25. Records and returns.
The Director shall keep such books and records as shall be prescribed
by the State Department of Audit and Control and by the Common
Council.
A.
Each vendor and purchaser located within the city shall keep such
books and records as the Director may prescribe, and they shall be
open to inspection and examination by the Director and any duly
authorized representative of the Director. Such books and records shall
not be destroyed except in accordance with a direction or rule of the
Director.
B.
Each vendor within the city shall file with the Director a quarterly
return of the taxes in such form and contents as the Director may
prescribe. The Director may by direction or rule fix a different period
C.
§ 280-21 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-25
275:425
§ 280-26. Payment of tax by vendor.
All taxes collected by a vendor shall be deemed held in trust for the City of
Hornell. At the time of filing the return and for the period covered by the
return, the vendor and purchaser shall pay the Director the amount of all
taxes collected under this Article or purported to have been collected under
this Article.
§ 280-27. Bond to secure payment of tax.
Whenever the Director has reason to believe a vendor is about to cease
business, abscond, dissipate his assets or for any other cause whereby the
payment of the tax is rendered insecure, he may require such vendor to
furnish a bond with surety authorized to do business in the State of New
York in such reasonable amount as the Director deems adequate. Such
bond shall be furnished within five days after demand by the Director, in
writing, unless within that period the vendor demands a hearing thereon at
which the necessity for the bond and the amount shall be determined by the
Director. In lieu of such bond, the Director is authorized to accept cash to
be held in escrow until the amount of the tax is determined.
§ 280-28. Determination of tax due.
§ 280-29. Review of determination.
for practical reasons. The Director may fix a different period for
vendors located outside the city to whom authority has been granted to
collect the use tax and for the return by purchasers.
Every return shall be kept secret, and neither the Director nor any
of his authorized representatives or employees shall divulge or make
known any information contained in the certificate of registration or
return relating to the business of the person filing the same, except as
may be authorized by law.
D.
New, amended and corrected returns may be required by the Director
at any time upon such reasonable notice as the Director may prescribe.
E.
The Director shall determine the amount of the tax due the City of
Hornell.
A.
If a return has not been filed or is incorrect or the amount paid with
the return is not correct, the Director may require an amended or
supplemental return or he may determine the tax from the best
information he has available and notify the vendor or purchaser of such
tax.
B.
Review before Director. Within 90 days after the Director has given
notice of the amount of the tax, a vendor or purchaser may demand a
review before the Director. The Director shall grant such hearing upon
not less than 10 days' notice in writing. The hearing may be held before
A.
§ 280-25 HORNELL CODE § 280-29
275:426
§ 280-30. Payment of receipt to Treasurer.
Within five days after the receipt of any moneys collected under this Article,
the Director shall pay the same over to the City Treasurer of the City of
Hornell. The City Treasurer shall keep such books and records as may
be prescribed by the State Department of Audit and Control and by the
Common Council.
§ 280-31. Refunds.
§ 280-32. Collection of tax; enforcement.
the Director or one of his staff authorized to do so by him, and counsel
for the vendor and purchaser may attend and examine all witnesses,
documents and records. Adequate minutes and testimony shall be taken
down, upon which a proper return can be prepared for a review in
the Supreme Court as hereinafter provided. After such hearing, the
Director shall determine the tax, and it shall be final.
Review under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. The final
tax as determined by the Director shall be reviewable by a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such proceeding
may not be instituted without a payment of the tax and interest to be
held in escrow by the City Treasurer or by furnishing an undertaking
in such amount and with such sureties as the Supreme Court may
determine to the effect that, if the proceeding be dismissed or the tax
is confirmed, the petitioner will pay the tax and all costs.
B.
Whenever any moneys have been held in escrow or the Director
determines that the vendor or purchaser is entitled to a refund of a part
of all of the tax and interest paid by him, he shall issue a warrant to
the City Treasurer directing such payment. The warrant shall state the
reason for the refund and amount.
A.
In a proper case, the Director may credit the amount of a refund upon
payments due from the vendor or purchaser.
B.
The Director shall furnish to vendors and purchasers the form and
content of applications for a refund. An application for a refund shall be
deemed a demand for a review before the Director, and the same rights
and procedure shall govern as provided in § 280-29.
C.
No refund shall be granted when the vendor or purchaser has failed to
avail himself of the remedies provided in the Article.
D.
Interest on tax. Interest on unpaid taxes shall be at the rate of 6% per
annum calculated from the date the tax becomes due to the city.
A.
Docketing tax warrant. Whenever a tax shall remain unpaid for a period
of 10 days after it has become due and payable to the city, the Director
may docket in the City Clerk's office of Hornell a warrant in such
form and content as he shall prescribe to give the same information
B.
§ 280-29 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-32
275:427
§ 280-33. Double taxation.
This Article shall be administered and interpreted to avoid the payment of
more than one tax on the sale of tangible personal property at retail or upon
the use of tangible personal property.
§ 280-34. Notices.
Any notice authorized or directed by this Article shall be in writing and
either served personally or by mail to the last known address appearing in
the records in the office of the Director from information furnished by the
person. Mail not returned by the postal authorities shall be presumptive
evidence that it was received. Periods of time shall start to run from the
personal service or mailing.
§ 280-35. Powers of Director.
Subject to such restrictions as may be imposed by law and by the Common
Council, the Director shall have the power to:
as a judgment docketed in that office. The warrant shall be deemed a
judgment for all intents and purposes of the law, and the City Clerk may
issue an execution thereon in the same manner as upon a transcript of
judgment from a court not of record. Transcripts of the judgment may
be issued and enforced in the same manner as other judgments.
Action to recover tax. As an additional and alternative remedy, the
Director may refer the unpaid tax to the City Attorney; and upon
request of the Director, the City Attorney shall bring an action to
enforce payment of the tax.
C.
Warrant to the Sheriff. Whenever the Director has good reason to
believe that the vendor or purchaser owing the tax part past due
has ceased business or is about to cease business or to abscond or
otherwise dissipate his assets and with intent to make the tax
uncollectable, the Director may issue a warrant directed to the Sheriff
and empowering him to levy and sell any real or personal property
of the tax debtor and to make return thereof to the Director within
60 days. The warrant may be extended by the Director, and the same
procedure shall be followed as govern sales of real and personal
property under a property execution under the provisions of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
D.
Limitations of time. Whenever an error has been made in any return
or in the tax paid and the Director shall discover the error, he shall
notify the vendor or purchaser and make an added assessment of the
tax or refund, as the case may be. No added assessment of tax shall
be imposed more than three years after the return was filed. When no
return was filed, an assessment of the tax can be imposed at any time.
By agreement, in writing, signed by the Director and the vendor or
purchaser, the limitation of time can be extended.
E.
§ 280-32 HORNELL CODE § 280-35
275:428
§ 280-36. Disposition of funds.
All moneys collected under this Article shall be paid into the treasury of the
city and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund thereof and
used for general city purposes.
§ 280-37. Construal of provisions.
This Article shall be enforced and interpreted in conformity with Chapter
278 of the Laws of 1947, as amended.91
Make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate and deemed
necessary to administer the powers and duties granted under this
Article.
A.
Require, furnish and prescribe the form and contents of applications,
certificates, returns, notices and other papers deemed necessary to
properly administer the powers and duties granted under this Article.
B.
Extend the time to any vendor or purchaser to file returns and other
reports.
C.
D. Prescribe the books and records to be kept by a vendor or purchaser.
Assess, reassess, determine, revise, adjust, readjust and compromise
the taxes imposed by this Article.
E.
Delegate to any employee the authority, in writing, to inspect the books
and records of a vendor or purchaser, to conduct hearings and to
perform other acts deemed necessary to administer this Article.
F.
Administer an oath to a witness and take oaths on any papers filed in his
office, and this power may be delegated to any employee of his office.
G.
Issue and cause to be served a subpoena to require the attendance
of a witness and the production of books and records pertinent to the
performance of powers and duties under this Article.
H.
Request information of the Treasury Department of the United States
and State Department of Taxation and Finance and any other source of
information pertinent to the performance and duties under this Article.
I.
Prescribe methods of determining the value of tangible personal
property.
J.
Have such powers and perform such duties as may be provided by law
or by the Common Council.
K.
91.Editor's Note: Chapter 287 of the Laws of 1947 was repealed by Chapter 93 of the Laws of
1965. See now Tax Law Articles 28 and 29.
§ 280-35 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-37
275:429

ARTICLE III
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 9-24-1984 as L.L. No. 1-1984 (Subpart V of the 1970
Municipal Code)]
§ 280-38. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to provide that no exemption from real
property taxes shall be granted pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax
Law of the State of New York.
§ 280-39. No exemption granted.
Pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision 4 of § 458-a of the Real Property
Tax Law of the State of New York, no exemption from real property taxes
shall be granted pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law for
purposes of real property taxes levied for the City of Hornell.
§ 280-38 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-39
275:431

ARTICLE IV
Foreclosure of Tax Liens
[Adopted 3-12-1991]
§ 280-40. Adoption of waiting period.
Pursuant to Title 3, entitled "Foreclosure of Tax Lien by Action in Rem,"
§ 1120, Subdivision 2, of the Real Property Tax Law, the City of Hornell,
hereinafter referred to as the "Tax District," elects to adopt the two-year
waiting period in order to commence the foreclosure by action in rem when,
according to the Tax District, the city owns a tax lien which has been due
and unpaid for a period of at least two years from the date on which the tax
or other legal charges represented thereby became a lien as defined in the
Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
§ 280-40 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-40
275:433

ARTICLE V
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 5-24-2004 by L.L. No. 2-200492]
§ 280-41. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide real estate tax relief to qualified
persons 65 years of age or older.
§ 280-42. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Article 4 of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, as amended.
§ 280-43. Short title.
This article shall hereafter be known as the "City of Hornell Over 65 Real
Property Tax Exemption Law."
§ 280-44. Real property exemption.
Real property located in the City of Hornell and owned by one or more
persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over, or real property owned by
husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be exempt
from taxation by the City of Hornell to the extent of 50% of the assessed
valuation thereof.
§ 280-45. Limitations on exemptions.
No real property shall be entitled to the exemption granted by this
article:
If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners
for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of making
application for exemption exceeds the sum of $18,000. Income tax
years shall mean the twelve-month period for which the owner or
owners filed a federal personal income tax return, or if no such
return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in either the
husband or wife, their combined income may not exceed such sum.
Such income shall include social security and retirement benefits,
interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or exchange of a capital
asset in the same income tax year, net rental income, salary or
earnings, and net income from employment, but shall not include
a return of capital, gifts or inheritances. In computing net rental
income from self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be
allowed for the exhaustion, wear and tear or real personal property
held for the production of income.
(1)
A.
92.Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Art. V, Senior Citizens Tax Exemption,
adopted 5-9-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994.
§ 280-41 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-45
275:435
§ 280-46. Application for exemption.
Application for the exemption allowed by this article must be made by the
owner, or all of the owners of the property, on forms prescribed by the
State Board to be furnished by the appropriate assessing authority and
shall furnish the information and be executed in the manner required or
prescribed in such forms, and shall be filed in the Assessor's office on or
before the appropriate taxable status due.
§ 280-47. Penalty for false statement.
In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any conviction of having
made any willful false statement in any application for real property
Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner
or one of the owners of the property for at least 24 consecutive
months prior to the date of making application for exemption;
provided, however, that in the event of the death of a husband or
wife in whose name title of this property shall have been vested at
the time of death and then becomes vested solely in the survivor
by virtue of devise by or descent from deceased husband or wife,
the time of ownership of the property by the deceased husband or
wife, shall be deemed also a time of ownership by the survivor, and
such ownership shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of
computing such period of 24 consecutive months; provided further,
that in the event of a transfer by either a husband or wife to the
other spouse of all or part of the title to the property the time
of ownership of the property by the transferor spouse shall be
deemed also a time of ownership by the transferee spouse, and
such ownership shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of
computing such period of 24 consecutive months; and provided
further that where property of the owner or owners has been
acquired to replace property formerly owned by such owner or
owners and taken by eminent or other involuntary proceeding,
except a tax sale, the period of ownership of the former property
shall be combined with the period of ownership of the property
for which application is made for exemption and such periods of
ownership shall be deemed to consecutive for purposes of the local
law. Where a residence in the City of Hornell is sold and replaced
with another within one year in the City of Hornell, the period
of ownership of the former property shall be combined with the
period of ownership of the replacement residence and deemed
consecutive for exemption from taxation by the City of Hornell.
(2)
(3) Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes.
Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the owner or by all owners of the property.
(4)
No exemption will be granted in respect to an undivided of a portion of
a single parcel.
B.
§ 280-45 HORNELL CODE § 280-47
275:436
exemption under this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$100 and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption
for a period of five years.
§ 280-48. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, sentence or phrase of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ 280-48.1. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately but shall apply to any real property
taxes levied by the City of Hornell for the year commencing April 1, 2005,
and beyond.
§ 280-47 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-48.1
275:437

ARTICLE VI
Tax Exemption for Capital Improvements
[Adopted 12-11-1995 as L.L. No. 3-1995]
§ 280-49. Exemption provided.
Residential buildings reconstructed, altered or improved for residential
purposes subsequent of the date of this Article shall be exempt from
taxation and special ad valorem levies to the extent provided herein.
§ 280-50. Limitations; terminology.
Such buildings as defined in § 280-49 shall be exempt for a period of
one year to the extent of 100% of the increase in assessed value thereof
attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or improvement and for
additional period of seven years; provided, however, that the extent of
such exemption shall be decreased by twelve and one-half per centum
(12 1/2%) of the initial exemption each year during such additional
period, provided, further, that such exemption shall be limited to
$50,000 in increased market value, of the property attributable to such
reconstruction, alteration or improvement and any increase in market
value greater than such amount shall not be eligible for the exemption
pursuant to this section. For the purpose of this section, the market
value of the reconstruction, alteration or improvement shall be equal
to the increased assessed value attributable to such reconstruction,
alteration or improvement divided by the most recently established
state equalization rate or special equalization rate established for the
city by the State Board, except where the state equalization rate or
special equalization rate equals or exceeds 95%, then the increase
in assessed value attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or
improvement shall be equal to the market value of such reconstruction,
alteration or improvement.
A.
No such exemption shall be granted for reconstruction, alterations or
improvements unless:
Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement was commenced
subsequent to the date the local law is enacted.
(1)
The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement
exceeds $3,000.
(2)
The greater portion, as so determined by square footage, or the
building reconstruction, altered or improved is at least five years
old.
(3)
The work has been completed pursuant to the New York State
Building Code and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
City of Hornell for said reconstruction, alteration or improvement.
(4)
B.
§ 280-49 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-50
275:439
§ 280-51. Application for exemption.
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of such
building on a form prescribed by the State Board pursuant to Real Property
Tax Law § 421-f, the original such application shall be filed with the City
Assessor on or before the 1st day of January of each year, the appropriate
taxable status date for the city.
§ 280-52. Approval of application.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article, the Assessor shall approve the application and such
building shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem
levies as herein provided commencing with the assessment roll prepared
after the taxable status date referred to in § 280-51 of this article. The
assessed value of any exemption granted shall be entered by the Assessor
on the assessment roll with the taxable property with the amount of the
exemption shown in a separate column.
§ 280-53. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any building or structure designed and
occupied exclusively for residential purposes by not more than two families.
§ 280-54. Rescindment of exemption.
In the event that a building granted an exemption pursuant to this article
ceases to be used primarily for residential purposes or title thereto is
transferred to other than heirs or distributees of the owner, the exemption
granted pursuant to this article shall cease.
For the purposes of this section, the terms "reconstruction,"
"alteration" and "improvements" shall not include ordinary
maintenance and repairs.
C.
§ 280-50 HORNELL CODE § 280-54
275:440
ARTICLE VII
Tax Exemption for Living Quarters for Parents and Grandparents
[Adopted 9-24-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 280-55. Legislative intent.
The City of Hornell recognizes the role of the family in the care of the
aging and the contribution to family life that can be made by encouraging
the aging to share their decades or wisdom and experience with the youth
of their families. Although nursing homes provide a valuable service to
the community, even the high cost of such care cannot replace the family
environment. The City of Hornell hereby finds that is in the best social
and economic interests of the city to encourage the care for the aging
to be provided within the family. To that end, by providing the following
exemption, it is the intent to so encourage families to provide for their
aging.
§ 280-56. Assessment exemption granted.
The City of Hornell does hereby provide for an exemption from taxation to
the extent of any increase in assessed value of residential property resulting
from the construction or reconstruction of such property for the purpose of
providing living quarters for a parent or grandparent who is 62 years of age
or older. Such exemption shall not exceed:
§ 280-57. Limits on exemption; applicability.
The increase in assessed value resulting from construction or
reconstruction of such property; or
A.
Twenty percent of the total assessed value of such property as
improved; or
B.
Twenty percent of the medial sale price of residential property as
reported in the most recent statistical sales summary published by the
State Board for the county in which the property is located, whichever
is less.
C.
No such exemption shall be granted unless:
The property is within the geographical area in which such
construction or reconstruction is permitted; and
(1)
The residential property so constructed or so reconstructed is the
principal place of residence of the owner; and
(2)
(3) The parent or grandparent resides within said property.
A.
Such exemption shall be applicable only to construction or
reconstruction which occurred subsequent to January 1, 2002, and
shall only apply during taxable years where at least one such parent
B.
§ 280-55 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-57
275:441
§ 280-58. Application for exemption.
Such exemption from taxation shall be granted upon an application made
annually, upon a form to be promulgated by the City Assessor, by the owner
of such property to the Assessor of the City of Hornell on or before the
appropriate taxable status date of the city. If the Assessor is satisfied that
the property is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this article, he/she shall
approve the application, and such residential improvements shall be exempt
from taxation and special ad valorem levies as provided in this article.
§ 280-59. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARENT or GRANDPARENT — Includes the natural or adopted parent or
grandparent of the owner or of the spouse of the owner.
or grandparent maintains a primary place of residence in such living
quarters.
§ 280-57 HORNELL CODE § 280-59
275:442
ARTICLE VIII
Alternative Veterans Exemption Limits
[Adopted 8-18-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008]
§ 280-60. Legislative intent.
It is the legislative intent of the within article to exercise the option relative
to limitations of the exemption of taxation as provided in Real Property Tax
Law § 458-a(2)(d)(ii) so as to permit the maximum exemption allowable in
Real Property Tax Law § 458-a(2), Paragraphs a, b, and c to be limited to
$9,000, $6,000, and $30,000, respectively.
§ 280-61. Election of limitations reducing the maximum exemption.
The maximum exemption allowable in Paragraphs a, b, and c of Subdivision
2 of Real Property Tax Law § 458-a be and the same hereby is established at
$9,000, $6,000, and $30,000, respectively.
§ 280-62. When effective.
The within article shall be effective immediately upon passage, subject to
Real Property Tax Law § 458-a(4).
§ 280-60 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-62
275:443

ARTICLE IX
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 8-18-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008; amended in its entirety
11-20-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 280-63. Legislative intent.
It is the legislative intent of the within article to adopt a local law to provide
a qualified owner an exemption for qualifying residential real property from
taxation to the extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property, which
exemption shall not exceed $9,000 and, in addition, to provide a disability
exemption to the multiple of 50% of the disability rating, not to exceed
$30,000, all as set forth in the Real Property Tax Law, § 458-b.
§ 280-64. Exemption granted.
§ 280-65. When effective.
The within article shall be effective immediately upon passage, subject to
Real Property Tax Law § 458-b.
As is authorized by Real Property Tax Law, § 458-b, the City of Hornell
does hereby provide that qualifying residential real property shall be
exempt from taxation to the extent of 15% of the assessed value of
such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
$9,000 or the product of $9,000 multiplied by the latest state
equalization rate of the assessing unit, or, in the case of a special
assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
A.
In addition, as is authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 458-b, to the
exemption provided by Subsection A of this section where the Cold
War veteran received a compensation rating from the United States
Veterans Affairs or from the United States Department of Defense
because of a service-connected disability, qualifying residential real
property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product of
the assessed value of such property, multiplied by 50% of the Cold War
veteran disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption shall
not exceed $30,000, or the product of $30,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate for the assessing unit, or, in the case of a special
assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
B.
§ 280-63 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-65
275:445

ARTICLE X
Tax Abatement for Rehabilitated Commercial and Mixed-Use
Properties
[Adopted 10-22-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
§ 280-66. Exemption granted.
The City of Hornell hereby opts into § 485-N of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 280-67. Incentive board.
The members of the Common Council Planning and Development
Committee and the Mayor for the City of Hornell shall hereby constitute the
incentive board as defined in Section 2(b) of § 485-N of the Real Property
Tax Law.
§ 280-68. Implementation.
Such board shall present a plan for implementation of this article as defined
within Section 2(b) of § 485-N of the Real Property Tax Law for approval to
the Common Council.
§ 280-66 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 280-68
275:447
Chapter 285
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 300.
§ 285-1. Applicability; construal of provisions.
§ 285-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them:
TAXICAB — Any vehicle offered for hire in the city and so designed and
constructed as to seat seven persons or fewer in the interior thereof.
TAXICAB DRIVER — The operator of a taxicab.
TAXICAB LIVERY — Any establishment maintained for the purpose of
receiving calls for and dispatching taxicabs to transport fares.
TAXICAB STAND — Any space designated by the Department of Public
Safety on the streets of the city for taxicabs to park while waiting for
business.
§ 285-3. License required.
No person shall keep for hire within the limits of the city any taxicab or
maintain a taxicab livery and no person shall operate any taxicab along any
street, avenue or public place in the city without first obtaining the licenses
hereinafter provided for.
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all licenses and
to all persons, firms, copartnerships or corporations holding any license
or licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
A.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit or restrict
any person, firm, copartnership or corporation from operating and
maintaining any motor bus transportation system upon the streets of
the city upon regular routes and schedules, provided that such owner
or operator of such motor buses or other motor transportation system
has been duly authorized by the Public Service Commission of the State
of New York to maintain and operate such transportation system.
B.
§ 280-68 HORNELL CODE § 285-4
285:448
§ 285-4. License fees.93
The annual fees for licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
be as provided in Chapter 142, Fees.
§ 285-5. Issuance of license; refusal to issue.
§ 285-6. Taxicab license application.
All applications for taxicab licenses shall contain the following information:
§ 285-7. Taxicab driver's license application.
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue such licenses as are
provided for in this chapter upon receipt of a proper application
countersigned and approved by the Chief of Police and the payment of
the annual fee as herein provided for.
A.
Any license required by this chapter may be refused to any applicant
for good and sufficient reason.
B.
A brief description of the car to be operated in substantially the same
form as appears on the registration of the vehicle for which a license is
sought.
A.
A certificate of inspection by a qualified mechanic stating that the
vehicle to be licensed as a taxicab is in a safe mechanical condition.
B.
The vehicle owner's name, address and the registration number of the
vehicle.
C.
D. Such other information as the Chief of Police may require.
Information required. Application for a taxicab driver's license shall
contain the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, address and age.
The number of the applicant's chauffeur's license issued by the
State of New York.
(2)
(3) The name and address of the applicant's employer, if any.
(4) Such other information as may be required by the Chief of Police.
A.
Photographs. Each applicant shall also furnish not fewer than two
unmounted photographs, two by three (2 x 3) inches in size, which shall
be recent photographs and which shall be a substantial likeness of the
applicant.
B.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 285-4 TAXICABS § 285-7
285:449
§ 285-8. Taxicab livery license application.
Application for a taxicab livery license shall contain the following
information:
§ 285-9. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire May 31
after issuance.
§ 285-10. Revocation of license.
Any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, before
the expiration thereof, be revoked by the Department of Public Safety upon
the recommendation of any person, and such license may be taken up and
all privileges terminated after a hearing and opportunity is given to the
holder thereof to be heard.
§ 285-11. Use of license by others.
No taxicab owner shall permit any other person to use his license.
§ 285-12. Change in ownership or address.
In case of any change in ownership or address of a taxicab livery during the
life of any license to operate such taxicab livery, the Chief of Police shall be
immediately notified of such change and the license corrected or amended
in accordance therewith.
§ 285-13. Inspection of taxicabs.
All taxicabs shall be inspected as often as the Chief of Police shall direct,
and if said taxicab shall be found not reasonably safe for operation, the
Chief of Police shall order the taxicab withdrawn from service, and no such
taxicab shall thereafter be used or operated as a taxicab until such defects
are remedied and approved by the Chief of Police.
Recommendations. Each applicant shall also present recommendations
of two reputable citizens certifying the good record of the applicant, his
honesty, sobriety and good moral conduct.
C.
The name and address of the owner or owners and, if the owner is a
corporation, the names and addresses of the officers thereof.
A.
B. The address at which such business will be conducted.
C. A list of the cars to be dispatched from such livery.
D. Such other information as the Chief of Police may require.
§ 285-7 HORNELL CODE § 285-14
285:450
§ 285-14. Display of licenses.
Every taxicab licensed under this chapter shall have affixed in a
conspicuous place in the interior thereof the taxicab license issued by
the City Clerk and the taxicab driver's license of the person driving and
operating said taxicab.
§ 285-15. Schedule of rates.
Each taxicab shall have posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab a
printed schedule of rates for one or more passengers, which schedule of
rates shall be of sufficient size to be read easily by all passengers. A
duplicate of the schedule shall also be filed with the City Clerk.
§ 285-16. Withdrawal of vehicle from service; substitution.
Any motor vehicle licensed as a taxicab under this chapter may be
withdrawn from service during the term of the license and some other
motor vehicle substituted in the place thereof, provided that notice is filed
with the City Clerk and authorization obtained from the Chief of Police
before such substituted motor vehicle is placed in service. The requirements
for the substituted vehicle shall be the same as the requirements for the
vehicle originally licensed.
§ 285-17. Record of calls.
All taxicab owners shall keep a written record of all taxicab calls on a form
approved by the Chief of Police, and all such records must be retained at
least one year.
§ 285-18. Attachment of trailer.
No taxicab shall be driven or operated to which a trailer is attached.
§ 285-19. Doors and windows.
§ 285-20. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all persons to whom a taxicab
driver's license has been issued under this article:
Every taxicab shall be provided with means for fastening the doors so
that they may be readily opened on the inside by a passenger.94
A.
Every taxicab shall provide windows in the tonneau of the cab sufficient
in number and of such size and dimensions so that at all times persons
may be readily seen through the windows with sufficient distinctiveness
as to identify such persons.
B.
94.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 23-37, Chains required during periods of snow and ice, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 285-14 TAXICABS § 285-20
285:451
Disorderly conduct; obstructing sidewalks. No taxicab driver shall,
while waiting for employment in any place, engage in any disorderly
conduct or obstruct any sidewalk.
A.
Driver to remain in vehicle. Every taxicab driver, while waiting for
employment in any established taxicab stand, shall be and remain in the
taxicab of which he is in charge.
B.
Willful misrepresentation. No taxicab driver shall induce any person to
be carried by any taxicab by willful misrepresentation.
C.
Duty to keep vehicle clean. Every taxicab driver shall at all times keep
the inside of taxicabs operated by him in a clean and sanitary condition,
and every taxicab driver shall at least once each day thoroughly clean
the inside of every taxicab operated by him.
D.
Driver to await employment at stand. No taxicab driver shall wait
for employment in any stand or place of public resort except at an
established taxicab stand.
E.
Manner of seeking employment. No taxicab driver shall seek
employment by repeatedly and persistently driving a cab to and fro
in a space before or by otherwise interfering with the proper and
orderly access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, public resort,
railroad station or terminal or other place of public gathering, nor
shall any taxicab solicit employment by driving at such low speed as to
interfere with or impede traffic; provided, however, that taxicab drivers
shall obey the instructions of police officers who may in emergency
give instructions relating thereto as will relieve traffic congestion and
conserve the safety and convenience of the public.
F.
Intoxication. No taxicab driver shall drive or operate a taxicab while he
is intoxicated, nor shall he drink intoxicating liquor while on duty.
G.
Locking doors. No taxicab driver shall at any time so fasten or lock the
doors on the taxicab so that it is impossible for a passenger to open the
same from the inside.
H.
Use of taxicab by persons other than those hiring the same. No taxicab
driver shall permit any person other than the passenger who hires the
use of the taxicab and such person or persons as such passengers shall
designate to be or remain in or upon said taxicab while any passenger
is being solicited therefor and conveyed therein.
I.
Changes of address or employer. All taxicab drivers shall promptly
report changes of addresses and of all changes of employer.
J.
Refusal to convey passengers. No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect
to convey any orderly person or persons upon request unless previously
engaged or unable so to do.
K.
§ 285-20 HORNELL CODE § 285-20
285:452
§ 285-20.1. Base station radio interference. [Added 4-28-1993]
Radio dispatch operations of base stations are hereby prohibited in
residentially zoned areas.
§ 285-21. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable
as provided in § 1-1 of this Code. Each day that any violation occurs or
is repeated shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the
punishment provided, a conviction for violation of this chapter shall
automatically revoke any license which may have been granted under the
terms of this chapter to the person so convicted.
Chapter 288
TREES
Articles left in taxicab. Every taxicab driver shall search the interior of
the cab after the termination of each trip for any article left or lost in
the cab and shall immediately take such property to the police station.
L.
Use of license by others. No taxicab driver shall permit any other
person to use his license.
M.
Hours of operation. No taxicab driver shall operate any cab for more
than 12 hours of any continuous twenty-four-hour period, with the
exception of an allowance of eight hours or one day in each week for
changing shifts.
N.
Inspection of vehicle; report of mechanical failures. Every taxicab
driver shall, at the conclusion of each period of duty, inspect all lights
on the taxicab he has been driving, test the horn or other signaling
device and report any failures together with any brake failures or other
mechanical failures to his employer, if any, and all such failures shall be
corrected before the cab is again placed in service.
O.
§ 285-20 TREES § 285-21
288:453

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 288-1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to
which the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the city.
§ 288-1 TREES § 288-1
288:455

ARTICLE II
City Tree Board
§ 288-2. Creation and establishment.
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City of
Hornell, New York. The City Tree Board will consist of the Board of Public
Works of the City of Hornell, which includes three members, citizens and
residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval
of the Common Council.
§ 288-3. Term of office.
The term of the three persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be two
years, except that the term of one of the members appointed to the first
Board shall be for only one year, and the term of two members of the first
Board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during
the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of that term.
§ 288-4. Compensation.
Members of the Board shall serve in a voluntary capacity without
compensation.
§ 288-5. Duties and responsibilities.
It shall be the responsibility of the City Tree Board to study, investigate,
counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan
for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or
disposition, of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public
areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the City Common Council
and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official
comprehensive city tree plan for the City of Hornell, New York. The Board,
when requested by the City Common Council, shall consider, investigate,
make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question
coming within the scope of its work.
§ 288-6. Operation.
The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations
and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a
quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 288-2 TREES § 288-6
288:457

ARTICLE III
Placement and Maintenance
§ 288-7. Spacing.
No trees may be planted closer together than the following small trees: 30
feet (9.1 m); medium trees, 40 feet (12.2 m); and large trees, 50 feet (15.2
m); except in special plantings designed or approved by the Department of
Public Works.
§ 288-8. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
No trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following:
§ 288-9. Distance from street corners and fireplugs.
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet (10,67 m) to any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines.
No street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet (3.05 m) to any fireplug.
§ 288-10. Utilities.
No street trees other than small trees may be planted under or within 10
lateral feet (3.05 m) of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five
lateral feet (1.52 m) of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission
line or other utility.
§ 288-11. Public tree care.
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or
to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
The City Tree Board may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree
or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its
nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or
other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect
or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by
adjacent property owners, provided that the selection and location of said
trees is in accordance with §§ 288-7 through 288-10 of this chapter.
§ 288-12. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
"Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
A. Small trees: two feet (.61 m).
B. Medium trees, three feet (.91 m).
C. Large trees: four feet (1.22 m).
§ 288-7 TREES § 288-12
288:459
than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree
so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be
exempted from this chapter at the determination of the City Tree Board.
§ 288-13. Pruning; corner clearance.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet (2.43 m) above the surface
of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or
dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the
safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub
on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along
the street from a streetlight, or interferes with the visibility of any traffic
control device or sign.
§ 288-14. Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a
hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease that constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the city. The City Tree Board will notify
in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners
at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In
the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the City shall
have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on
the owner's property tax notice.
§ 288-15. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground.
§ 288-16. Interference with City Tree Board.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees,
park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
§ 288-12 HORNELL CODE § 288-16
288:460
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 288-17. Review by City Common Council.
The City Common Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts
and decisions of the City Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any
ruling or order of the City Tree Board to the City Common Council, which
may hear the matter and make a final decision.
§ 288-18. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction or a
plea of guilty, subject to a maximum fine of $250 or 15 days in jail.
§ 288-17 TREES § 288-18
288:461
Chapter 290
UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Openings and excavations of streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 267, Art. III.
Urban Renewal Agency — See Chs. 80 and
A345.
§ 288-18 HORNELL CODE § 288-18
290:462
ARTICLE I
Underground Utility Installation in Maple City Urban Renewal
Project Area
[Adopted 12-22-1969 as L.L. No. 1-1970 (Subpart T of the 1970
Municipal Code)]
§ 290-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MAPLE CITY URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA — That area bounded
by Main Street, Allen Street, Buffalo Street, Cass Street, Canisteo Street,
Broadway, Loder Street and Center Street.
MAPLE CITY URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT IN THE CITY OF HORNELL
— Described in the Maple City Urban Renewal Plan, adopted by the City
Common Council on June 28, 1967.
UTILITY CORPORATIONS — Electric corporations, gas and electric
corporations, telegraph corporations, telephone corporations and telegraph
and telephone corporations, as each is defined in the Transportation
Corporation Law of the State of New York.
§ 290-2. Purpose; applicability.
The underground installation of all electrical, telephone and telegraph and
television equipment in the Maple City urban renewal project area is hereby
deemed required by public necessity in furtherance of said urban renewal
project. Public necessity shall include but shall not be limited to the safety,
security, welfare, convenience and aesthetic value of the public use in the
Maple City urban renewal area by the prohibition and elimination of the
aboveground installation of said equipment. The provisions of this Article
shall apply to those corporations defined in § 290-1 hereinabove and to
any other business or legal entity doing business in said Maple City urban
renewal area.
§ 290-3. General regulations.
It shall be unlawful, as provided hereinafter, to install or maintain any
equipment aboveground in the Maple City urban renewal area for the
purpose of:
(1) Transmitting, distributing and furnishing electricity.
The transmission of electric current impulses, sounds, voices or
communications.
(2)
Transmitting, receiving or distributing any electrical current or
signal in connection with cable television operations.
(3)
A.
§ 290-1 UTILITIES § 290-3
290:463
§ 290-4. Costs.
All utility corporations and any other entity doing business within the Maple
City urban renewal project area in the installation of new equipment or
relocation of existing installations, as required by public necessity, shall
make the necessary underground installation at their own cost, expense and
charge.
§ 290-5. Penalties for offenses.95
The installation or maintenance of any and all equipment, as such is
contemplated by this article, in violation of the terms and intent of this
Article, shall be unlawful and constitute an offense, punishable as provided
in § 1-1 of the Code, for each day that the same exists.
Installing or maintaining any pole or mast to support or hold such
equipment, except those poles used only for illumination purposes
and the illuminating equipment thereon.
(4)
New installations. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all
buildings hereinafter constructed in the Maple City urban renewal
area, and the installation of all and any equipment described in
Subsection A hereinabove is prohibited.
B.
Existing installations. All presently existing equipment, as hereinabove
described in Subsection A, shall be relocated underground, such
relocation being required by public necessity. All relocation
installations shall be done pursuant to plans and specifications
approved by the City Engineer, and such installation shall be performed
under the City Engineer's supervision and certified approval. Existing
installations of such equipment aboveground shall be relocated within
12 months of the effective date of this Article. Extensions of time
thereafter may be granted by the City Engineer with the consent of the
Common Council.
C.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 290-3 HORNELL CODE § 290-5
290:464
Chapter 296
VEHICLES AND PARTS, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 300. Zoning — See Ch. 315.
§ 296-1. Outside storage limited. [Amended 11-15-2010;
10-15-2018]
In all resident, commercial, business or industrial districts, there shall be
no outside storage of any unregistered and/or unlicensed motor vehicles for
a period longer than 10 days in any calendar year. Such unregistered or
unlicensed motor vehicles shall be at all times while being so stored kept in
such condition and maintained that it will meet the minimum requirements
to pass the New York State motor vehicle inspection standards as provided
for by the Vehicle and Traffic Law of New York and all rules and regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles for the specific
inspection of motor vehicles in New York State, as the same may be
amended from time to time. The outside storage of any other motor vehicle
is prohibited except for such unregistered or unlicensed motor vehicles
belonging to a member of the armed forces of the United States who is
serving in active military duty. Any storage for junkyards, garages or car
repair shops is permitted for a period of no longer than 15 days. After
such time, said vehicles must be and shall be removed from the City of
Hornell. There shall be no outside storage in any resident or district of
motor vehicles bodies or motor vehicle parts at any time.
§ 296-2. Notice of violation sticker. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L.
No. 4-1992]
A sticker will be placed on vehicles in violation of this chapter stating that
"this vehicle may be impounded if it is not removed within 24 hours."
§ 296-3. Reclaiming of vehicle; charges; disposition of unclaimed
vehicles. [Amended 10-15-2018]
Any vehicle so removed may be reclaimed and shall be subject to a
mandatory charge of $100, plus a storage charge of $15 per day. In addition
thereto, the owner of said reclaimed vehicle will be responsible to pay any
and all towing fees that are due and owed as a result of the towing of said
vehicle. If a vehicle is not claimed within 30 days from impounding, the City
shall dispose of said vehicle in an approved and sanitary manner so as not
to create a nuisance to the general public.
§ 290-5 UTILITIES § 296-4
290:465
§ 296-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-28-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
Anyone who shall violate any provision of this chapter, in addition to any
other charges imposed by removal and storage of said vehicle, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-1 of the Code.
Chapter 300
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 77.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 267.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 285.
Storage of vehicles and parts — See Ch. 296.
State arterials — See Ch. A340.
§ 296-4 HORNELL CODE § 296-4
290:466
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 300-1. Definitions.
§ 300-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Chief of Police shall install and maintain traffic control devices when
and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make effective the
provisions of this chapter, and may install and maintain such additional
traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide
traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, subject
to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 300-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
A.
The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
B.
For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VII of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
A.
Regulations shall be adopted by the Common Council in accordance
with provisions of the General City Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law,
or by an officer or agency authorized by the Common Council to adopt
regulations pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
B.
§ 300-1 UTILITIES § 300-3
290:467

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 300-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 300-47), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 300-5. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 300-48), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 300-6. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in
Schedule III (§ 300-49), attached to and made a part of this chapter, in the
areas described in said schedule, during school days between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 300-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 300-50), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 300-8. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule V (§ 300-51), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 300-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 300-52), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 300-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VII (§ 300-53),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 300-11. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 300-54), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 300-4 UTILITIES § 300-12
290:469
§ 300-12. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 300-55), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 300-13. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
§ 300-14. Areas closed to vehicular traffic.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle
or snowmobile in or upon any of the locations described in Schedule XI
(§ 300-57), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
Trucks in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule X (§ 300-56), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
A.
Tractors and vehicles with lugs, spikes or projections on the wheels
shall not be driven or operated on any of the public streets of the city.
B.
§ 300-12 HORNELL CODE § 300-14
290:470
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 300-15. Application of Article.
The provisions of this Article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 300-16. General parking restrictions.
§ 300-16.1. Stopping, standing and parking prohibited in specified
places.
Parking of trucks designed and used for transportation of volatile and
flammable liquids or materials.
The standing or parking of loaded or empty vehicles designed
and used for the transportation of gasoline, fuel oil, kerosene,
petroleum or any other highly volatile and flammable or highly
explosive liquid or material on any street in the city is hereby
prohibited.
(1)
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the standing or parking
of such vehicles on any street in the city for a reasonable length
of time for the purpose of making delivery of any material being
transported by such vehicle.
(2)
A.
Parking within marked spaces. Where parking spaces have been
designated and marked either on public streets or in municipal parking
lots, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle outside or across the lines of
the marked parking space.
B.
Overnight parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause or allow to be
parked any motor vehicle on the front lawn or within the curbline
of residential property for the purpose of overnight parking, except
that such parking will be allowed in the evening, from 8:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m., and that parking is restricted on the street adjacent to
such property if said property has no driveway.
(1)
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause or allow to be
parked a trailer, as defined herein, or a boat upon any street or
public parking lot or in any front lawn within the City of Hornell
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. A "trailer" includes
any vehicle, not propelled by its own power, which can be drawn
on a public highway by a motor vehicle, as defined in § 125 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
(2)
C.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
A.
§ 300-15 UTILITIES § 300-16.1
290:471
§ 300-16.2. Parking of commercial vehicles in residential areas.
[Added 10-14-1998]
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
On any of the public sidewalks of the city or between any sidewalk
and curb line.
(1)
In front of any private driveway in such a way as to obstruct
entrance to the driveway.
(2)
Within 25 feet of the intersection of any street, when properly
posted as recommended by the Chief of Police and approved by the
Board of Public Safety. [Amended 12-27-2005]
(3)
In any designated taxicab stand or bus stand, except by vehicles
authorized to use such stands.
(4)
(5) On any crosswalk.
(6) On any bridge.
In any safety, loading or no parking zone, or space, marked off or
designated by official traffic signs, signals or markings.
(7)
(8) Within an intersection.
After the effective date of this amendment no motor vehicle shall be
repaired while parked on any public street, public parking lot, lane
or alley within the city. This amendment shall not prohibit emergency
repairs of any motor vehicle which becomes disabled while being
operated on any public street, public parking lot, lane or alley, and
repairs are necessary to permit the vehicle to be driven or towed off
such public street, parking lot, lane or alley.
B.
Any vehicle or trailer registered with any state as a commercial vehicle
having a gross weight per axle exceeding 10,000 pounds, with a width
exceeding 84 inches, shall be deemed a vehicle for the purposes of this
section.
A.
It shall be unlawful for said vehicles to park on any street in the City of
Hornell which is located in a residentially zoned neighborhood between
the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
B.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the standing or parking of
such vehicles on any street in the City of Hornell for a reasonable
length of time for the purpose of making delivery of any material being
transported by such vehicle.
C.
Any vehicle parking within any residential area within the City of
Hornell shall be subject to a fine of $50.00.
D.
§ 300-16.1 HORNELL CODE § 300-17
290:472
§ 300-17. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 300-58), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 300-18. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 300-59), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 300-19. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 300-60), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 300-20. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XV
(§ 300-61) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 300-21. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 300-62) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 300-22. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVII
(§ 300-63) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 300-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 300-64) at any time between the hours listed in said
schedule of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 300-24. Handicapped parking.
§ 300-17 UTILITIES § 300-24
290:473
§ 300-25. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XX (§ 300-66), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 300-26. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 300-67), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 300-27. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 300-68), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
Parking spaces shall be designated for any person who has any one or
more of the following impairments, disabilities or conditions which are
permanent in nature:
(1) A person who has limited or no use of one or both lower limbs.
A person who has a neuromuscular dysfunction which severely
limits mobility.
(2)
A person who has a pulmonary or cardiovascular condition which
limits mobility or severely limits the individual's activities in the
open air.
(3)
A person who has a physical or mental impairment or condition
other than those specified above but is of such a nature as to
impose unusual hardships in utilization of public transportation
facilities, when such condition is certified by a physician duly
licensed to practice medicine in this state as constituting an equal
degree of disability (specifying the particular condition) so as to
prevent the individual from getting around without great difficulty.
(4)
A child with any one or more of the impairments or conditions listed
above.
(5)
A.
The locations described in Schedule XIX (§ 300-65), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as reserved for the
use of handicapped persons.
B.
The areas designated as parking spaces for the use of the handicapped
shall be designated by signs and markings on the pavement to indicate
that such areas are set aside for the use of the handicapped.
C.
§ 300-24 HORNELL CODE § 300-28
290:474
§ 300-28. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXIII (§ 300-69), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 300-28 UTILITIES § 300-28
290:475

ARTICLE IV
Metered Parking
§ 300-29. Designation of parking meter zones and municipal
parking fields.
The Common Council may from time to time designate areas, streets or
portions of streets as parking meter zones or may change such areas,
streets or portions of streets situate, lying and being within the city as may
be required. The Common Council may also from time to time designate any
land or area owned, leased or hereafter otherwise acquired by the city as
a metered municipal parking field. Such areas, streets, parts of streets or
lands which have been designated as parking meter zones and municipal
parking fields are enumerated in Schedule XXIV (§ 300-70), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 300-30. Installation of meters.
The Chief of Police, with the aid and assistance of the Superintendent of
Public Works, is hereby authorized and directed to install meters in all
parking meter zones, established pursuant to § 300-29 by the Common
Council, in such numbers and in such places as in his judgment may
be necessary for the regulation, control and inspection of the parking of
vehicles therein.
§ 300-31. Placement of meters.
Parking meters installed in parking meter zones shall be installed upon
the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces herein
described, which shall be in all respects identical to the individual parking
spaces, and each parking meter shall be so constructed and adjusted as to
show, when properly operated, a signal that the space adjacent to which it
is installed is or is not legally in use.
§ 300-32. Indication of spaces.
The Chief of Police, with the aid and assistance of the Superintendent of
Public Works, shall have lines or markings painted upon the curb or street
adjacent to each parking meter designating the parking space in which
such meter is to be used. Such parking lines or markings shall be repainted
whenever the necessity therefor is determined by the Department of Public
Safety.
§ 300-33. Manner of parking in metered spaces.
Each vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall park within said
lines or markings, and it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any
such line or marking or to park a vehicle in such a position that it shall not
be entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings.
§ 300-34. Hours of operation.
§ 300-29 UTILITIES § 300-34
290:477
§ 300-35. Parking time limits.
§ 300-36. Special parking meters.
In order to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic, the Chief
of Police, with the aid and assistance of the Superintendent of Public Works,
shall have the authority to install special parking meters providing for a
limited length of time for parking at any place where the installation of a
parking meter has been authorized by the Common Council. Such meters
providing for a limited length of time of legal parking shall be painted red
so as to be distinct and different from the normal parking meters in use in
the city and shall contain instructions on said meter clearly indicating that
such parking space may be used only for a limited period of time.
§ 300-37. Overtime and illegal parking.
No person shall park in any space in which a parking meter is installed for a
period longer than the maximum parking time permitted for that particular
parking space, and in no event shall any person park in any space adjacent
to which a parking meter is installed for more than two hours at any time
during which the meter is in operation, and no person shall park at any time
in any space adjacent to which a meter is installed during any time in which
the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use,
other than such time as is necessary to operate the meter to show legal
parking.
Parking meters shall be operated in parking meter zones between the
hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays,
Fridays and Saturdays and between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 8:30
p.m. on Thursdays. Sundays and legal holidays are excepted from the
provisions of this section.
A.
The Common Council may by resolution prescribe and designate days
and hours when parking meters in municipal parking fields shall be in
operation.
B.
Parking meters, when installed and properly operated, shall be so
adjusted as to permit legal parking for a period of 12 minutes for each
one-cent coin deposited in said meter to and including a period of 120
minutes; 60 minutes for each five-cent coin deposited in said meter to
and including a period of 120 minutes, and cumulative time at the rate
herein established for the deposit of any combination of one-cent coins
with a single five-cent coin to and including a period of 120 minutes.
Payments of money for the above periods shall be pay for parking in the
areas designated as parking meter zones.
A.
The Common Council may by resolution prescribe and designate
parking time limits for parking meters in municipal parking fields.
B.
§ 300-34 HORNELL CODE § 300-38
290:478
§ 300-38. Use of slugs prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter
any slug, device or metallic substance for a one-cent or five-cent coin of the
United States of America.
§ 300-39. Tampering with meters.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to open or for any reason to
deface, injure, tamper with or willfully break or destroy any parking meter
installed pursuant to this Article.
§ 300-40. Purpose of meter revenues.
The specific coins required to be deposited in the parking meter as provided
herein are hereby levied and assessed to provide for the proper regulation
and control of traffic and of parking upon the public streets and are not
assessed or levied primarily as an income-producing measure.
§ 300-41. Collection and disposition of meter revenues.
The City Chamberlain is hereby authorized and directed to collect or to
designate some person or persons to make regular collections of money
deposited in parking meters and to count said money and to deposit the
same and expend the same as required by law and/or as provided for in
any contract heretofore or hereafter made and entered into between the
city and any company or companies, firm or individual manufacturing and
selling parking meters to the city.
§ 300-38 UTILITIES § 300-41
290:479

ARTICLE V
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 300-42. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 300-43. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this Article, the Police
Department may store or cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place
at the expense of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle
may redeem the same upon payment to the person with whom stored of the
amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such
removal and storage, such storage charges not to exceed $10 per day or
fraction thereof.
§ 300-44. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to ascertain to the extent
possible the owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in charge
and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the
amount which will be required to redeem same. Said Police Department
shall also, without delay, report to the City Clerk the removal and
disposition of any vehicle removed as provided in this Article.
When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this city during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway
or parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the Police
Department.
A.
When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the city where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the
Police Department.
B.
§ 300-42 UTILITIES § 300-44
290:481

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 300-45. Notice of traffic infraction.
§ 300-46. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
A person who has received a notice of a traffic infraction through the
police may, within the time specified in such notice, answer at the
Traffic Violations Bureau to the charges set forth therein, except as
limited in Subsection B of this section, either in person or by power
of attorney, by paying a prescribed fine and, in writing, waiving a
hearing in court, pleading guilty to the charge and giving power of
attorney to the person in charge of the Bureau to make such a plea
and pay such a fine in court, or a person may answer said notice at
said Traffic Violations Bureau by depositing cash bail equal to double
the prescribed fine for appearance in court at a time specified by the
Bureau. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the
Bureau shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the infraction, and
the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
A.
Any person charged with speeding or who has been guilty of more
than three traffic infractions during the current calendar year or who is
charged with a misdemeanor or other crime shall not be permitted to
pay any fine at the Traffic Violations Bureau but must appear in court
at the time specified by the Bureau.
B.
Any person to whom a notice of a traffic infraction has been delivered
by a police officer and who willfully violates his written promise to
appear in answer of such notice of traffic infraction shall be subject
to arrest upon a warrant issued pursuant to a sworn information or
complaint, setting forth the specific violation for which said notice of
traffic violation was originally issued.
C.
Any person who willfully neglects to answer to the charge set forth in
any notice of traffic infraction affixed to a vehicle by a police officer
shall be subject to arrest upon a warrant issued pursuant to a sworn
information or complaint, setting forth the specific violation for which
the hereinbefore-stated notice was originally issued.
D.
§ 300-45 UTILITIES § 300-46
290:483

ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 300-47. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
Loder Street, River Street and Jane Street [Added 6-27-2005]
§ 300-48. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-5, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
City Lot Nos. 2 and 3
connector road [Added
9-25-2000]
10 Entire length
Cottage Avenue [Added
11-12-200196]
25 Entire length
Crosby Street [Added
6-30-2010]
25 From its intersection with
Grand Street then westerly
upon Crosby Street to the City
of Hornell's corporate limit
Myrtle Avenue 15 Entire length
Thacher Street [Added
7-28-2008]
25 Between Main Street and
Adsit Street
Unnamed access road for
Parking Lot No. 2
15 Entire length
§ 300-49. Schedule III: School Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-6, no person shall drive a vehicle
in excess of the speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below,
during school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:
96.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that traffic flow on Cottage Avenue be limited
to local traffic only.
§ 300-47 UTILITIES § 300-49
290:485
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Bryant School 15 From East Avenue
Presbyterian Church to East
Main Street at Leach Avenue
East VanScoter Street 15 At the bridge over Crosby
Creek and Monroe Avenue
Erie Avenue 15 In the vicinity of Saint Ann's
School
Unnamed road to the rear of
the Senior High School
15 Between West Genesee Street
and Kansas Avenue
§ 300-50. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-7, the following described streets
or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Adsit Place [Repealed
6-25-2012]
Armory Place West From Seneca Street to West
Genesee Street
Bostwick Place -- Entire length
Canisteo Avenue [Added
10-12-1999]
West From East Avenue to Fourth
Street
Catherine Street [Added
12-28-1992]
Northeast From East Main Street to
Emmett Street
Harris Avenue North From Main Street to Genesee
Street
Hill Street [Added
10-27-2008]
West From Cass Street to West
Street
Olive Place [Added
7-22-2013]
-- From Main Street to Buffalo
Street
Preston Avenue West From Seneca Street to West
Genesee Street
Raider Drive [Added
9-12-2005; repealed
8-21-2017]
Ransom Street [Added
10-14-2002]
East From Thatcher Street to
Ransom Street Extension
§ 300-49 HORNELL CODE § 300-50
290:486
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Wells Street East From East Main Street to
Catherine Street
West Genesee Street North From Preston Avenue to
Washington Street
West Genesee Street North From State Street to Adsit
Street
Willow Place East From Seneca Street to Frank
Street
§ 300-51. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-8, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Canisteo Street Entire length
Main Street Entire length
Seneca Street Entire length
West Main Street Between West Street and the westerly city
line
§ 300-52. Schedule VI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-9, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following intersections:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
Parking lot off
ramp
-- Left All At the northwest
corner of the Harvey-
Carey Building
Taylor Street -- Left All Buffalo Street
§ 300-53. Schedule VII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-10, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on
Red Signal Onto
Church Street [Added
5-29-2007]
South Main Street
Main Street West Seneca Street
§ 300-50 UTILITIES § 300-53
290:487
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on
Red Signal Onto
Main Street [Added
8-23-1999]
West In front of Steuben Trust
Company
State Street East Seneca Street
Thacher Street South West Main Street
West Street East Main Street
§ 300-54. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-11, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Ada Street East Fairview Avenue
Adam Avenue East Hill Street
Adsit Place South Main Street
Adsit Place West Thacher Street
Albion Street East Canisteo Street
Albion Street West Mill Street
Allen Street North Main Street
Allen Street South Buffalo Street
Alley Avenue West East Main Street
American Legion Driveway South West Genesee Street
Arlington Place South Mill Street
Armory Place West West Genesee Street
Bank Street South Main Street
Bemis Avenue North Platt Street
Bennett Parkway North Spencer Avenue
Bennett Street East Dennis Avenue
Bennett Street West North Church Street
Bennett Street West Seneca Street
Blaine Street West East Avenue
Brickman Lane South Loder Street
Broadway [Added
9-25-2000]
South City Lots Nos. 2 and 3
connector road
Broadway South Loder Street
Brown Street North Bennett Street
§ 300-53 HORNELL CODE § 300-54
290:488
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Brown Street South East Washington Street
Buffalo Street Both Cass Street
Buffalo Street East Allen Street
Buffalo Street East Taylor Street
Buffalo Street West West Street
Buffalo Street [Added
10-17-2016]
West Taylor Street
Cameron Avenue South Maple Street
Canisteo Street Both Canisteo Street
Canisteo Street Both Crosby Street
Canisteo Street [Added
7-26-2010]
Both Spencer Avenue
Canisteo Street East MCD (Route 36)
Canisteo Street North East VanScoter Street
Canisteo Street North Franklin Street
Canisteo Street South West VanScoter Street
Cass Street South Buffalo Street
Cass Street South Hill Street
Catherine Street Both Emmett Street
Catherine Street North Glen Avenue
Catherine Street West East Main Street/East Avenue
Cedar Street Both Duane Street
Cedar Street Both Ontario Street
Cedar Street East Park Drive
Center Alley [Added
5-9-2005]
Both Pedestrian crosswalk
Center Street Both Elm Street
Center Street North Main Street
Center Street South Loder Street
Chaddock Avenue West Sawyer Street
Charles Street North Mill Street
Charles Street South Pine Street
Church Street Both Maple Street
Church Street Court North East Washington Street
Church Street Court West North Church Street
City Lot No. 1 exit North Genesee Street
§ 300-54 UTILITIES § 300-54
290:489
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
City Lot No. 2 island West Between Burger King and
Brooks Street
City Lot Nos. 2 and 3
connector road [Added
9-25-2000]
Both Broadway
City Lot No. 3 East Sears Driveway
City Lot No. 3 (Medical
Center)
East Center Street
City Lot No. 3 (YMCA) East Center Street
City Lot No. 3 exit South Elm Street
City Lot No. 4 East Church Street
City Lot No. 4 East Patrick Opticle
City Lot No. 4 West Seneca Street
Church Street [Added
10-24-2011]
Both Genesee Street
Clay Street East West Street
Clay Street West Webster Street
Collier Street Both Genesee Street
Collier Street North Maple Street
Collier Street South Main Street
Conklin Street West East Avenue
Cook Street West Canisteo Street
Cottage Avenue North Main Street
Crosby Street Both Grand Street
Crosby Street East Canisteo Street
Davenport Lane South Bank Street
Davenport Lane West Davenport Street
Davenport Street North Walnut Street
Davenport Street South Main Street
Dealy Avenue South Buffalo Street
Delaware Avenue Both East Elm Street
Delaware Avenue Both River Road
Dennis Avenue/ Florence
Street
South East Main Street
Depot Street South Mill Street
Duane Street Both Cedar Street
§ 300-54 HORNELL CODE § 300-54
290:490
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Duane Street North James Street Park exit
Duane Street South James Street Park entrance
Dye Street North Steuben Street
East Avenue [Added
10-27-2008]
North East Main Street
East Avenue [Added
10-27-2008]
North Terry Street/East Main Street
East Avenue [Added
10-27-2008]
West East Avenue
East Elm Street Both Deleware Avenue
East Elm Street East East Main Street
East Main Street [Added
6-25-2001]
Both River Street
East Main Street North Catherine Street
East Main Street West Florence Street/Dennis
Avenue
East VanScoter Street East Duane Street
East VanScoter Street West Canisteo Street
East Washington Street Both North Church Street
East Washington Street West Seneca Street
Elizabeth Street North River Road
Ellsworth Street East High Street
Elm Street Both Center Street
Elm Street Both Erie Avenue
Elmwood Place South Elm Street
Emmett Street West East Main Street
Erie Avenue Both Elm Street
Erie Avenue North Main Street
Erie Avenue South Loder Street
Erie Court South Elm Street
Fairlawn Apartment Road South Wood Street
Fairview Avenue South Spencer Avenue
Florence Street West Dennis Avenue
Fourth Street North Terry Street
Fourth Street South Canisteo Avenue
Francis P. Hogan Drive North Spencer Avenue
§ 300-54 UTILITIES § 300-54
290:491
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Frank Street North East Washington Street
Frank Street South Willow Place
Franklin Street East Canisteo Street
Franklin Street West Hill Street
Front Street North River Road
Fulton Street Both North Church Street
Genesee Street [Added
10-24-2011]
Both Church Street
Genesee Street Both Collier Street
Genesee Street East Pearl Street
Glen Avenue West Florence Street
Glen Court West East Main Street
Grand Street Both Crosby Street
Grand Street North Spruce Street
Grand Street [Added
11-18-2013]
Both West Pine Street
Greeley Avenue Both Hart Street
Greeley Avenue Both Rockwell Street
Greeley Avenue Both Tuttle Street
Greeley Avenue North Blaine Street
Greeley Avenue South Henry Street
Greeley Avenue/ Summer
Street
South Blaine Street
Hakes Avenue North Genesee Street
Hart Street West East Avenue
Hart Street [Added
6-24-2013]
Both Greeley Avenue
Hartshorn Street [Added
7-24-2006]
Both Adams Avenue
Hartshorn Street [Added
7-24-2006]
Both Ellsworth Street
Hartshorn Street [Added
1-23-2006]
Both Ravine Street
Hartshorn Street [Added
7-24-2006]
Both Sherman Street
Hartshorn Street South Wood Street
Hartshorn Street West West Street
§ 300-54 HORNELL CODE § 300-54
290:492
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Henry Street West East Avenue
High Street South Ravine Street
High Street South Wood Street
Hill Street Both West Street
Hill Street South Spruce Street
Hill Street [Added
10-27-2008]
West Cass Street
Hill Street West Webster Street
Hillside Place East Hill Street
Hornell Street Both Adsit Street
Hornell Street Both State Street
Hornell Street South Washington Street
Horton Street West Seneca Street
Howard Street West East Avenue
Irving Place West Hornell Street
Jane Street South Elm Street
Jane Street South Loder Street
John Street North Elm Street
John Street South River Road
Kansas Avenue West Hornell Street
Leach Avenue West Deleware Street
Lilly Street North Crosby Street
Lincoln Street South Upper Bennett Street
MCD (Route 36) exit North Elm Street
MCD (Route 36) exit ramp South Cass Street
Madison Avenue South Steuben Street
Maple Court Homes West MCD (Route 36)
Maple Street Both Church Street
Maple Street Both Pearl Street
Maple Street West Seneca Street
Marshall Avenue West East Main Street
Maxwell Street North Crosby Street
Mays Avenue North Vanity Lane
Mays Avenue West Seneca Street
McDougal Avenue North Main Street
§ 300-54 UTILITIES § 300-54
290:493
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
McLean Avenue [Added
11-22-1999]
Southeast Old Almond Road and North
Main Street
McLean Avenue West West Main Street (Route 21)
Mercy Avenue North Scott Street
Merrill Lane Both Crosby Street
Merrill Lane (VFW) North Pleasant Street
Mill Street Both MCD (Route 36)
Mill Street West Canisteo Street
Monroe Avenue North East VanScoter Street
Monroe Avenue South DeSayles Hall
Morrison-Knudson Drive North River Road
Morrison-Knudson Drive (2
signs)
-- Loder Street/River Street
Mrytle Avenue North Terry Street
Mrytle Avenue South Canisteo Street
North Church Street
[Added 9-10-2012]
Both Bennett Street
North Church Street Both East Washington Street
North Church Street Both Fulton Street
North Main Street Both Steuben Street
North Main Street North North Main Lumber Drive
North Main Street South Cemetery entrance
Oak Street North Elm Street
Oak Street South River Road
Olive Place North Main Street
Ontario Street Both Cedar Street
Ontario Street South East VanScoter Street
Orchard Street East Canisteo Street
Orchard Street [Added
2-4-2013]
West Rose Avenue
Pardee Street North Main Street
Pardee Street South Elm Street
Park Drive South East Avenue
Park Drive/Ice House Road North East Avenue
Pearl Street [Added
2-9-1993]
Both Genesee Street
§ 300-54 HORNELL CODE § 300-54
290:494
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Pearl Street North Maple Street
Pearl Street South Main Street
Pine Street Both MCD (Route 36)
Pine Street East Ontario Street
Pine Street West Canisteo Street
Platt Street East Sawyer Street
Platt Street West Church Street
Pleasant Street East Canisteo Street
Pleasant Street West Grand Street
Prindal Avenue East East Main Street
Prindal Avenue West Delaware Avenue
Prospect Street North Sherman Street
Prospect Street South Spruce Street
Ransom Street West Thacher Street
Ravine Street East Grand Street
Reynolds Avenue East Grand Street
Riverside Lane West Riverside Place
Riverside Place North Main Street
Riverside Place South Elm Street
River Street [Added
6-25-2001]
East East Main Street
Robinson Lane North Ravine Street
Robison Lane West High Street
Rockwell Street West East Avenue
Rose Avenue North West VanScoter Street
Rose Avenue [Added
10-22-2012; repealed
2-4-2013]
School Street East South Division Street
School Street West Grand Street
Scott Street Both Ontario Street
Scott Street East Duane Street
Scott Street West Canisteo Street
Sears Road exit North Main Street
Seward Street West Catherine Street
Seymour Street South Ravine Street
§ 300-54 UTILITIES § 300-54
290:495
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Sheldon Court South Maple Street
Sheldon Street East Madison Avenue
Sherman Street East Hill Street
Sherwood Avenue North Emmett Street
South Division Street Both South VanScoter Street
South Division Street North West Pine Street/Canisteo
Street
South Division Street South Spencer Street
South Street East Front Street
South Street West Elizabeth Street
Spencer Avenue Both Canisteo Street
Spruce Street East Canisteo Street
State Street West Thacher Street
State Street West West Genesee Street
Stephens Lane East Park Drive/Ice House Road
Stephens Lane North East Avenue
Stephens Street South Hart Street
Stephens Street Project South Tuttle Street
Steuben Street Both Thacher Street
Steuben Street East Hornell Street
Steuben Street West North Main Street
Summer Street Both Howard Street
Sutherby Street North Howard Street
Swan Street East East Avenue
Swyer Street South Maple Street
Taylor Street South Hill Street
Telephone Company Alley
(driveway)
North Genesee Street
Terry Street East East Main Street
Terry Street West Deleware Street
Thacher Street [Added
7-28-2008]
Both State Street
Thacher Street Extension
[Amended 7-28-2008]
South Adsit Street
The Circle South Main Street
Tobes Hill South Dennis Avenue
§ 300-54 HORNELL CODE § 300-54
290:496
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Tuttle Street West East Avenue
Upper Bennett Street West Dennis Avenue
Vincent Street North Spruce Street
Vincent Street South Ravine Street
Walnut Street West Pearl Street
Washington Street Both Thacher Street
Washington Street East Seneca Street
Washington Street West West Genesee Street
Wells Street West East Main Street
Welsey Street West Sawyer Street
West Genesee Street North Adsit Street
West Genesee Street North State Street
West Genesee Street North Washington Street
West Pine Street East Canisteo Street
West Pine Street West Grand Street
West VanScoter Street East Canisteo Street
William Street West Seneca Street
Willow Place East North Church Street
Wood Street East High Street
§ 300-55. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Brickman Lane North Elm Street
Center Alley North Main Street
Center Alley South Elm Street
Conklin Street East Greeley Avenue
East Avenue [Repealed 10-27-2008]
East Avenue [Repealed 10-27-2008]
Hartshorn Street [Repealed 7-24-2006]
Lincoln Street North Upper Bennett
Lisi Lane North Elm Street
§ 300-54 UTILITIES § 300-55
290:497
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Miles Avenue West Dennis Avenue
North Main Street East Thacher Street
Pave Alley (east end) East Church Street
Pave Alley (east end) East Seneca Street
Pave Alley (west end) West Seneca Street
Prangen Lane East Collier Street
Prangen Lane West Church Street
Seymour Street North Spruce Street
Sunset Road West Tobes Hill
Webster Street North Hill Street
§ 300-56. Schedule X: Certain Trucks Excluded.
Weight limits. In accordance with the provisions of § 300-13A, trucks in
excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following
streets or parts thereof, except for the pickup and delivery of materials
on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight
limit
(tons) Location
Hornell Street [Added
2-10-2003; amended
6-27-2005]
5 From State Street to Adsit
Street
State Street [Added
2-10-2003]
5 From Route 36 to Thatcher
Street
Steuben Street [Added
2-10-2003]
5 From Thatcher Street to
Hornell Street
Wood Street 5 Entire length
A.
Length of vehicles. Vehicles in excess of the lengths indicated are
hereby excluded from the following streets or parts thereof.
Name of Street Length Location
Franklin Street [Added
4-8-200297]
Entire length
B.
97.Editor's Note: This ordinance prohibits through truck traffic on Franklin Street. Pursuant
to the City, the prohibition applies to vehicles too long to successfully negotiate turns.
§ 300-55 HORNELL CODE § 300-57
290:498
§ 300-57. Schedule XI: Areas Closed to Vehicular Traffic.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-14, all vehicular traffic is hereby
excluded from the following areas:
Name of Area
Any of the earth abutments which run adjacent to the Canisteo River,
Crosby Creek or Canacadea Creek, which abutments were constructed in
conjunction with the Hornell Flood Control Project
Broadway Mall, from Main Street to Maple City Drive
Bryant School Playground
Canisteo Street Underpass
East Avenue Playground
James Street Park
Little League Park
Madison Avenue Playground
Maple City Park
Steuben Street Underpass
Union Park
West Genesee Street Underpass
§ 300-58. Schedule XII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-17, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Adams Avenue Both Entire length
Adsit Street [Added
6-27-2005]
South 130 feet to intersection of
State Route 36
Adsit Street South From Hornell Street west for
30 feet
Alley Avenue South From East Main Street to
Sherwood Avenue
Bank Street East From Main Street Centerline
Station 29+90 to Bank Street
Station 12+50 right98
Bank Street West From Main Street Centerline
Station 28+10 left to Bank
Street Station 11+10 left99
98.Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
99.Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
§ 300-57 UTILITIES § 300-58
290:499
Name of Street Side Location
Bennett Street South From Seneca Street east for
114 feet
Blaine Street South From East Avenue east for 55
feet
Bostwick Place/ Adsit Place
connection
North From 393 feet north of Main
Street east for 325 feet
Bostwick Place/ Adsit Place
connection
South From 368 feet north of Main
Street east for 186 feet
Broadway [Added
4-26-1999]
----- Northernmost spot next to
dead end at Route 36 fence
line north
Broadway Both From Loder Street to the dead
end
Brown Street [Added
4-26-1999]
West From the corner of East
Washington Street to Bennett
Street, approximately 292 feet
Buffalo Street Northeast From Broadway northeast for
96 feet
Buffalo Street West From West Street to Taylor
Street
Buffalo Street/ Loder Street West From West Street to Erie
Avenue
Canisteo Street East From O'Connor Avenue north
for 25 feet
Canisteo Street East From O'Connor Street north
for 15 feet
Canisteo Street West From Spruce Street north for
15 feet
Cass Street/ Elm Street Both From Buffalo Street to Center
Street
Catherine Street [Added
11-20-2017]
West From the now existing "no
parking between signs" area all
the way south to Emmett
Street
Catherine Street West From Wells Street south for
185 feet
Cedar Street West Along the James Street Park
Center Street East In front of the YMCA
Center Street West Entire length
Charles Street East Entire length
§ 300-58 HORNELL CODE § 300-58
290:500
Name of Street Side Location
Charles Street West From Pine Street north for 75
feet
Church Street West From Genesee Street to Main
Street
Church Street West From Maple Street to the
Church Street Bridge
Collier Street West From Genesee Street to Maple
Street
Cook Street North From Canisteo Street east for
228 feet
Cook Street North From Canisteo Street east for
98 feet
Cottage Avenue Both Entire length
Crosby Street North From 136 feet west of Grand
Street west for 60 feet
Crosby Street North From 25 feet east of Merrill
Avenue to 15 feet west of
Merrill Avenue
Davenport Street West Entire length
Davenport Street West From 113 feet south of Walnut
Street south for 66 feet
Dealy Avenue Both Entire length
Dennis Avenue East From Dennis Avenue Station
12+65 right to the intersection
of the westerly bounds of Tobes
Hill Road100
Dennis Avenue East From Tobes Hill north for 300
feet
Dennis Avenue West From East Main Street north
for 727 feet
Dennis Avenue West From Main Street Centerline
Station 31+30 left to Dennis
Avenue Station 12+65 left101
East Avenue East From 100 feet north of
Canisteo Street to 100 feet
south of Canisteo Street
100. Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
101. Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
§ 300-58 UTILITIES § 300-58
290:501
Name of Street Side Location
East Avenue [Added
10-27-2008]
East From the northerly curbline of
Henry Street to the southerly
curbline of Hart Street
East Avenue [Repealed 9-25-2000]
East Avenue [Added
9-25-2000; amended
10-27-2008]
West From the southerly curbline of
Hart Street to the southerly
curbline of Terry Street
East Elm Street North For 28 feet in front of Richard
Caruso's garage
East Main Street East From Catherine Street to Alley
Avenue
East Main Street East From Chauncey Run Bridge to
Glen Court
East Main Street East From Main Street Centerline
Station 33+60 left to Florence
Street Station 11+15 right102
East Main Street East From Wells Street south for 40
feet
East Main Street South From Centerline Station 27+45
right to Centerline Station
33+15 right103
East Main Street Bridge Both Entire length
Ellsworth Street North From High Street to Hartshorn
Street
Elm Street South From John Street east for 20
feet
Elm Street South From John Street east for 66
feet
Elmwood Place West Between the signs placed at
each end of the fence
Elmwood Place West From Elm Street south for 150
feet
Emmett Street South From East Avenue east for 85
feet
Erie Avenue East From Loder Street to the
driveway at No. 86
Erie Court West Entire length
102. Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
103. Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
§ 300-58 HORNELL CODE § 300-58
290:502
Name of Street Side Location
Fairview Avenue [Added
11-17-2003]
East Entire length, from Gypsy Hill
to the dead end
Florence Street North From Florence Street Station
11+15 left to Tobes Hill Road
Station 10+30 right104
Florence Street North From Glen Avenue to East
Main Street
Florence Street South From Main Street Centerline
Station 33+60 left to Florence
Street Station 11+15 right105
Fourth Street West From the north end of Jack
Smith's driveway north for 30
feet
Fourth Street [Added
11-22-1999]
West From Terry Street to Delaware
Avenue
Front Street West From River Street south for
110 feet
Fulton Street [Amended
2-24-2009]
North At the southwest corner of
Fulton Street and Seneca
Street
Fulton Street South From Seneca Street east for
120 feet
Genesee Street North In front of the library
Genesee Street [Added
3-17-2014]
North From Pearl Street west for 150
+/- feet
Genesee Street [Added
10-27-2014]
South From Church Street to Hakes
Avenue
Glen Avenue North From Catherine Street to
Florence Street
Grand Street [Added
2-4-2013]
-- Near driveway at 327 Grand
Street
Grand Street [Added
11-17-2003]
Both Beginning at the southerly
curbline of West VanScoter
Street continuing southwest to
the intersection of Fairview
Avenue
Greeley Avenue West From Tuttle Street to Rockwell
Street
104. Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
105. Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
§ 300-58 UTILITIES § 300-58
290:503
Name of Street Side Location
Hart Street South From East Avenue east for 160
feet
High Street East From Crosby Street north for
60 feet
High Street East From 10 feet north of Robinson
Alley to 10 feet south of
Robinson Alley
High Street West From Wood Street to Ravine
Street
Hill Street West From Hillside Place north for
15 feet
Hill Street West From Spruce Street south for
20 feet
Hillside Place Both Entire length
Horton Street [Added
2-14-2005]
Both Entire length
Howard Street [Added
9-25-2000]
Both An additional 15 feet in an
easterly direction from the
intersection of East Avenue
Industrial Road Both From Cedar Street to East
Avenue
Irving Place North Entire length
John Street West From Lisi Lane to River Street
Kansas Avenue South Entire length
Kansas Avenue Extension Both Entire length
Leach Avenue --
Leach Avenue North Entire length
Leach Avenue North From East Main Street west for
530 feet
Lincoln Street East Entire length
Main Street North From 40 feet west of the
arterial to 50 feet east of Adsit
Place
Main Street North From Adsit Place west for 50
feet
Main Street North From Main Street Centerline
Station 28+10 left to Bank
Street Station 11+10 left106
106. Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
§ 300-58 HORNELL CODE § 300-58
290:504
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street North From the Thacher Street
Bridge east for 145 feet
Main Street North From the Thacher Street
Bridge east for 185 feet
Main Street South From 25 feet west of Olive
Place to 25 feet east of Olive
Place
Main Street South From 52 feet west of Allen
Street to 11 feet west of Olive
Place
Main Street South From Allen Street west for 50
feet
Main Street South From Allen Street west for 95
feet
Main Street South From Broadway east for 136
feet
Main Street South From Centerline Station 27+45
right to Centerline Station
33+15 right107
Main Street South From West Street to Park
Street
Maple Street [Added
11-20-2017]
South From Collier Street west, past
the first driveway, for a
distance of 90 feet
Maple Street South From Seneca Street east for 68
feet
Maxwell Avenue [Added
11-17-2003]
East Entire length, from the
intersection of Crosby Street to
the dead end
Mays Avenue [Added
2-24-2009]
North Entire length
McClean Avenue East Entire length
McDougall Avenue West From the south end of the
Knights of Columbus property
to the McDougall Avenue
Parking Lot
Mill Street [Repealed
12-18-2017]
107. Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
§ 300-58 UTILITIES § 300-58
290:505
Name of Street Side Location
Mill Street South From Maple City Drive to
Charles Street
Monroe Avenue West From East VanScoter Street
south for 40 feet
Monroe Avenue West From East VanScoter Street to
its terminus
Myrtle Avenue West From Canisteo Avenue north
for 30 feet
North Main Street North In front of No. 59
O'Connor Avenue North From Canisteo Street east for
30 feet
Olive Place [Amended
7-22-2013]
Both Entire length
Orchard Street [Added
2-4-2013]
-- Near driveway at 10 Orchard
Street
Orchard Street [Added
2-4-2013]
-- West end of Orchard Street
Orchard Street South In front of No. 14
Pine Street North From the arterial highway to
Canisteo Street
Pine Street North In front of Davidson's
Warehouse
Pine Street South From Maple City Drive to
Ontario Street
Preston Avenue North Entire length
Ransom Street North Entire length
Ransom Street Extension
[Added 10-14-2002]
Both For a distance of 45 feet north
from the northerly curbline of
Ransom Street
Ransom Street/ Washington
Street connection
East From 188 feet east of Hornell
Street east for 46 feet
Ransom Street/ Washington
Street connection
South and
east
From 517 feet east of Thacher
Street east and north for 96
feet
Ravine Street South From 10 feet east of Robinson
Alley to 10 feet west of
Robinson Alley
River Street North From the western edge of the
River Street Bridge north for
80 feet
River Street North Within 20 feet of Jane Street
§ 300-58 HORNELL CODE § 300-58
290:506
Name of Street Side Location
River Street North Within 20 feet of John Street
River Street North Within 20 feet of Oak Street
Rose Avenue Extension Both Entire length
Scott Street North From Maple City Drive east for
242 feet
Sherwood Avenue [Added
4-8-2002]
Both Entire length
South Division Street
[Added 9-24-2012]
East Entire length
South Street North Entire length
Spencer Avenue [Added
8-23-2004]
North From the westerly curbline of
Canisteo Street west to a
distance of 55 feet
Spruce Street Both From Seymour Street east for
15 feet
Terry Street South From East Avenue west for 300
feet
Thacher Street [Added
1-24-2000]
East From Steuben Street 60 feet
north
The Circle Both Entire length
Tobes Hill Road Both From Sunset Road north for 35
feet
Tobes Hill Road East From Florence Street Station
11+15 left to Tobes Hill Road
Station 10+30 right108
Transit Drive [Added
2-14-2005]
Both Entire length
Unnamed access road Both From Allen Street to the county
courthouse
Unnamed access road
running between the parking
lots at the south end of the
mall
North Entire length
Unnamed alley Both From High Street to Ravine
Street
Unnamed connector road Both From Elm Street to the city's
No. 2 Parking Lot
108. Editor's Note: As shown on the plans for NYSDOT Project No. 6751.83, East Main Street
Bridge Replacement.
§ 300-58 UTILITIES § 300-58
290:507
Name of Street Side Location
Unnamed roadway adjoining
the business property on the
east side of the Broadway
Mall
Both Entire length
Vanity Lane Both From Seneca Street to Fulton
Street
Washington Street North From Seneca Street to West
Genesee Street
Washington Street North From Thacher Street west for
108 feet
Washington Street South From West Genesee Street east
for 60 feet
Wells Street North From Catherine Street west for
60 feet
West Genesee Street Both From the footbridge to
Washington Street
West Genesee Street East From 450 feet north of State
Street to 27 feet south of Adsit
Street
West Genesee Street West From 40 feet south of Adsit
Street south for 275 feet
West Genesee Street West From 47 feet from the
Canacadea Creek flood wall to
34 feet south of State Street
West VanScoter Street South From the St. James Mercy
Hospital parking lot exit to
Canisteo Street
§ 300-59. Schedule XIII: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-18, no person shall stop a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Adsit Place East From Main Street north for 48
feet
Adsit Place West From Main Street north for 53
feet
Adsit Street North From the arterial east for 123
feet
Adsit Street North From the arterial west for 82
feet
§ 300-58 HORNELL CODE § 300-59
290:508
Name of Street Side Location
Adsit Street South From West Genesee Street east
for 49 feet
Adsit Street South From the arterial to West
Genesee Street
Adsit Street South From the arterial west for 79
feet
Allen Street East From Main Street south for 80
feet
Allen Street West From Main Street south for 48
feet
Armory Place North From West Genesee Street east
for 52 feet
Armory Place South From West Genesee Street east
for 52 feet
Bennett Parkway East Entire length
Main Street North From 40 feet west of the
arterial to Seneca Street
Main Street North From 49 feet west of Bostwick
Place to 50 feet east of
Bostwick Place
Main Street North From 52 feet west of Adsit
Place to 50 feet east of Adsit
Place
Main Street South From 52 feet west of Allen
Street west for 400 feet
Main Street South From the arterial east for 145
feet
Main Street South From the arterial east for 320
feet
Preston Avenue North From West Genesee Street east
for 61 feet
Seneca Street Both From Main Street north for 70
feet
Seneca Street East From 10 feet north of Mays
Avenue to 60 feet north of
Horton Street
Seneca Street East From 215 feet south of
Genesee Street to 95 feet north
of Genesee Street
§ 300-59 UTILITIES § 300-59
290:509
Name of Street Side Location
Seneca Street East From 70 feet south of Bennett
Street to 115 feet north of
Fulton Street
Seneca Street West From 100 feet south of Adsit
Street to 105 feet north of
Adsit Street
Seneca Street West From 65 feet south of State
Street to 90 feet north of State
Street
Seneca Street West From 90 feet south of Genesee
Street to 100 feet north of
Genesee Street
Seneca Street West From West Genesee Street
north for 55 feet
Seneca Street West From West Genesee Street
south for 47 feet
State Street Both From the arterial to West
Genesee Street
State Street North From West Genesee Street east
for 51 feet
State Street North From the arterial west for 58
feet
State Street South From West Genesee Street east
for 54 feet
State Street South From the arterial west for 56
feet
Washington Street North From West Genesee Street east
for 61 feet
Washington Street South From West Genesee Street east
for 54 feet
West Genesee Street East From Adsit Street south for 27
feet
West Genesee Street East From Preston Avenue north for
34 feet
West Genesee Street East From State Street north for 38
feet
West Genesee Street East From State Street south for 51
feet
West Genesee Street North From Seneca Street west for
47 feet
§ 300-59 HORNELL CODE § 300-59
290:510
Name of Street Side Location
West Genesee Street North From the arterial east for 166
feet
West Genesee Street South From the arterial to Seneca
Street
West Genesee Street West From 47 feet north of the
Canacadea Creek flood wall
south to where the curb meets
the flood wall
West Genesee Street West From Adsit Street south for 40
feet
§ 300-60. Schedule XIV: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-19, no person shall stand a
vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
O'Connor Avenue North From 374 feet east of Canisteo
Street east for 50 feet
Seneca Street East From 115 feet north of Fulton
Street to 10 feet north of Mays
Avenue
Seneca Street East From 60 feet north of Horton
Street north to the city line
Seneca Street East From 70 feet north of Main
Street to 215 feet south of
Genesee Street
Seneca Street East From 90 feet north of State
Street to 100 feet south of
Adsit Street
Seneca Street East From 95 feet north of Genesee
Street to 70 feet south of
Bennett Street
Seneca Street West From 100 feet north of
Genesee Street to 65 feet south
of State Street
Seneca Street West From 105 feet north of Adsit
Street north to the city line
Seneca Street West From 70 feet north of Main
Street to 90 feet south of
Genesee Street
West Genesee Street North From 47 feet west of Seneca
Street to 166 feet east of the
arterial
§ 300-59 UTILITIES § 300-61
290:511
§ 300-61. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-20, no person shall park a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
All city streets All 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m./All109
Entire length
Adsit Street
[Added
5-29-2007]
Both 6:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Maple City Drive to
Hornell Street
Blaine Street North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m./All
Entire length
Main Street From
West Street east
for 125 feet
South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
Main Street South 2:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
From West Street to Park
Street
Pearl Street
[Added
3-17-2014]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Genesee Street at
the center line of Pearl
Street north for 250 +/-
feet
Pearl Street
[Added
3-17-2014]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Genesee Street at
the center line of Pearl
Street south for 250 +/-
feet
§ 300-62. Schedule XVI: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-21, no person shall stop a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Canisteo Street
[Added
2-28-2006]
East 4:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
From Southside Tavern
parking lot entrance to
on-ramp for Route 36
109. Editor's Note: This parking restriction is in effect 365 days per year unless otherwise
directed by the Board of Public Safety and Public Works or its designee.
§ 300-61 HORNELL CODE § 300-63
290:512
§ 300-63. Schedule XVII: No Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-22, no person shall stand a
vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 300-64. Schedule XVIII: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-23, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Broadway Mall
[Added
12-28-1992]
-- 2 hrs./All Entire mall
Buffalo Street Northeast 2 hrs./All From Cass Street to
Taylor Street
Buffalo Street/
Loder Street
East 15 mins./All From Cass Street to Erie
Avenue
Canisteo Street East 15 mins./All From 269 feet south of
East VanScoter Street
south for 280 feet
Canisteo Street
[Added
10-15-2018]
East 15 mins./All In front of 320 Canisteo
Street
Canisteo Street West 15 mins./All In front of No. 396
Church Street
[Added
10-14-1998]
West 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./ All
From 150 feet north of
the curbline of Genesee
Street to a point 195 feet
northerly thereof
City Parking Lot
No. 1
-- 2 hrs./All 25 stalls contiguous to
the arcade walkway
City Parking Lot
No. 3
West 15 mins./ 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
City Parking Lot
No. 4 [Added
12-17-2012]
North 2 hrs./All Church Street entrance
Conklin Street North 2 hrs./All From 15 feet east of East
Avenue east for 100 feet
Conklin Street South 2 hrs./All From 15 feet east of East
Avenue east to No. 7
§ 300-63 UTILITIES § 300-64
290:513
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
East Avenue East 2 hrs./All From 15 feet north of
Conklin Street north for
53 feet
East Avenue East 2 hrs./All From 15 feet south of
Conklin Street south for
32 feet
East Avenue
[Repealed
10-27-2008]
East Main Street East 15 mins./All In front of Margaret's
Grocery Store
Genesee Street Both 15 mins./ 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./ Monday
through
Saturday
In front of the Hornell
Post Office
Hakes Avenue East 15 mins./All
p.m./Monday
through Friday
In front of No. 7 On the
west side of the Center
Street Parking Lot
Main Street
[Amended
6-14-1999]
Both 2 hrs./All From Seneca Street to
Center Street (diagonal
parking)
Main Street North 2 hrs./All From West Bank Street
west for 40 feet
Main Street South 30 mins./All From the East Main
Street Bridge to
Riverside Place
Main Street South 30 mins./ 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./ All
From the west end of the
Landon-Beaver Funeral
Home west for 40 feet
Main Street
[Added
10-15-2018]
South 2 hrs./All In front of 23 Main
Street
Main Street
Municipal Parking
Lot
-- 2 hrs./All The first 5 stalls in each
of the 4 parking lanes
adjacent and north of the
unnamed paved alley
Municipal Parking
Lot No. 1 [Added
12-27-2005]
-- 2 hrs./All Two stalls directly
behind Rink Partridge
Insurance Agency at
southern end of lot
§ 300-64 HORNELL CODE § 300-64
290:514
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
River Street North 15 mins./All From 10 feet east of John
Street to in front of
Moretti's Store
River Street North 1 hr./ 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./ Monday
through
Saturday
From the east end of No.
92 west for 61 feet
River Street North 15 mins./All In front of No. 86
Terry Street North 2 hrs./All 6:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
In front of No. 172
Thacher Street West 15 mins./All From Steuben Street
north for 98 feet
Unnamed access
road
South 2 hrs./All 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From Elm Street to the
Canisteo Street Parking
Lot
Washington Street North 15 mins./All From Thacher Street
west for 108 feet
§ 300-65. Schedule XIX: Handicapped Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-24, the following described
locations are hereby designated as reserved for the use of the handicapped:
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway South 1 space at the northwest corner of
the Hornell City Building
Elm Street South 1 space at the side entrance to St.
Ann's Church
Erie Avenue West 1 space south of the restricted area
at St. Ann's Church
City Parking Lot No. 1 -- 2 spaces at the most southerly end
of the lot and bordering Routes 36
and 21
City Parking Lot No. 2 -- 2 spaces at the most northerly end
of the lot and facing the west wall of
Brooks Drugstore
City Parking Lot No. 2 -- 2 spaces at the most southerly end
of the lot, facing the west and
adjacent to the grassy rest area at
the rear of J.C. Penney, Co.
§ 300-64 UTILITIES § 300-65
290:515
Name of Street Side Location
City Parking Lot No. 3 -- 2 spaces at the most northerly end
of the double bay behind Tom
Kinney Clothing
City Parking Lot No. 3 -- 2 spaces at the most southerly end
of the second double bay north of
the Elm Street Medical Center
City Parking Lot No. 4 -- 1 space on each of the north and
south sides of the Church Street
entrance to the lot
City Parking Lot No. 4 -- 2 spaces directly behind McHenry's
Jewelry Store
City Parking Lot No. 4 -- 2 spaces on the northwest curbline
and behind the Burdett Building
Main Street North 1 space at No. 134
Main Street North 1 space at No. 170
Main Street North 1 space in front of the First
Presbyterian Church
Main Street North 1 space in front of the walkway
between Public Loan and DiDio's TV
Store
Main Street South 1 space immediately adjacent to the
west side of Broadway Mall
Main Street South 1 space in front of No. 161
Main Street South 1 space in front of Tuttle and
Rockwell Store entrance
§ 300-66. Schedule XX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-25, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 300-67. Schedule XXI: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
§ 300-65 HORNELL CODE § 300-67
290:516
Name of Street Side Location
Church Street East At the west side of Panosians
Store
Church Street West The first parking stall adjacent
to Pave Alley
Erie Avenue [Amended
6-27-2005]
East From 20 feet north of Loder
Street north to the driveway at
No. 86
Genesee Street [Added
10-14-1998]
North From a point 110 feet from the
west curbline of Church Street
to a point 160 feet westerly
thereof
Loder Street [Added
6-27-2005]
North In first parallel stall immediately
to west of Brickman Lane
Madison Avenue West From 25 feet north of Steuben
Street north for 60 feet
§ 300-68. Schedule XXII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-27, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 300-69. Schedule XXIII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-28, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 300-70. Schedule XXIV: Metered Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 300-29, the following described
locations are hereby designated as parking meter zones:
Name of Street or Lot Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 300-67 UTILITIES § 300-70
290:517
Chapter 306
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 142.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 228.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 262.
Openings and excavations of streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 267, Art. III.
§ 306-1. Authority.
The City Of Hornell Board of Public Works shall make, publish and enforce
all needful by-laws, rules and regulations in relation to their own
government and for the protection and operation of the Water Department,
water system, and all the property and appurtenances thereof and in
relation to the management thereof and the supply of water thereby,
whether to individuals or corporations, and may alter and modify the same
from time to time, and may fix a penalty herein provided for the violation
of any of said rules and regulations. The Board of Public Works may aid
enforcement by resolution, local law, rule or regulation. The said City of
Hornell may prosecute in its own name for all violations of said local laws,
rules, regulations and resolutions. The by-laws, rules and regulations, and
all amendments shall be filed in the City Clerk's Office before they shall
take legal effect. These rules and regulations are adopted and specifications
adopted hereunder shall be considered as part of the contract between
the City of Hornell and every person, owner, customer or entity who takes
water supplied by the City. Such person using this service shall be bound by
this contract, including those using water on a renewable contract basis, in
which case the contract may stipulate any conditions which are exceptions
to these laws, regulations and specifications.
§ 306-2. Definitions.
As used in these regulations, the words and phrases listed below shall be
deemed to have the following meaning:
APPLICANT — Any person making a request in writing for any water supply,
main extension or other Water-Department-related service to be rendered
or furnished by the City of Hornell.
A.W.W.A. — The American Water Works Association.
BOARD OR BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS — The City of Hornell Board of
Public Works.
BUILDER, CONTRACTOR or REAL ESTATE DEVELOPER — Any person
owning or having an interest in a plot or tract of land who applies for a
§ 300-70 HORNELL CODE § 306-2
290:518
supply of water to such premises which are intended to be sold, conveyed
or leased by said person to an owner or occupant.
CITY — The City of Hornell.
CONSUMER or CUSTOMER — The person legally or equitably responsible
for payment of the water bill, charges or other facilities and services or
owner of premises or property furnished water service by the Department.
CROSS CONNECTION — Any unprotected connection between any part
of a water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes
and any source or system containing water or any substance that is not
or cannot be approved as equally safe, wholesome and potable for human
consumption.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Hornell Water Department, division of the
Department of Public Works of the City of Hornell.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works.
OWNER — The person who has legal or equitable title to the premises.
OWNER'S SERVICE PIPE — The pipe or tubing leading from the curb
stop and curb box across the customer's or other person's property to the
building, structure or premises.
PERSON — An individual, firm, association, lessee or corporation, either
public or private.
PREMISES or PROPERTY — Shall mean but is not restricted to the
following:
A property or location whether or not occupied by a structure, and shall
include the entire front footage thereof abutting on a street whereat the
service of water is requested or furnished for any part thereof;
A.
A building under one roof owned or leased by one customer, and
occupied as one residence or one place of business;
B.
A combination of buildings owned or leased by one customer, in one
common enclosure, occupied by one family, or one corporation or firm,
as a residence or place of business;
C.
Each unit of a multiple house (multifamily residence) or building
separated by a solid vertical or horizontal partition wall, occupied by
one family, or one firm, as a residence, or place of business;
D.
A building owned or leased by one customer having a number of
apartments, offices, or lofts which are rented to tenants, and using in
common one hall and one or more means of entrance;
E.
A building two or more stories high under one roof, owned or leased
by one customer having an individual entrance for the ground floor
occupants and one for the occupants of the upper floors;
F.
§ 306-2 UTILITIES § 306-2
290:519
PRIVATE STREET — Any street, avenue, road or way that is not for any
highway purpose under the jurisdiction of the legislative body of a village,
town, city, county or the State of New York.
PUBLIC STREET — Any street, avenue, road or way that is for any highway
purpose under the jurisdiction of the legislative body of any village, town,
city, county or State of New York.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The tap or connection to the main, corporation
stop, curb box, curb stop, and sufficient tubing or pipe to connect the
corporation stop to the curb box.
SPECIFICATIONS — The written requirements adopted by the Board and
published for general reference concerning requirements for work and
materials related to the water system.
CITY — The City of Hornell.
WATER SYSTEM, WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM or PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
— The entire system of pipes, valves, buildings, reservoirs, plants, wells,
and other facilities owned by the City and used for the supply, treatment,
storage and transmission of water.
§ 306-3. Service area.
The City will supply water to the City of Hornell and may supply the same
to the Village of North Hornell and portions of the Town of Hornellsville and
other potential users based upon a network of municipal water systems. The
Board reserves the right to refuse or limit service to any consumer located
outside the City if the supply of water for the City or its inhabitants becomes
insufficient because of such outside service. The service area is defined as
Village of North Hornell and the Town of Hornellsville Water District #1 and
#3 and as amended or altered from time to time.
§ 306-4. Application for service.
Apartments owned by one individual or firm and located in one common
enclosure;
G.
A trailer court (mobile home court) owned by one individual or firm and
located in one common enclosure.
H.
A combination of buildings owned by one customer, in one common
enclosure, none of the individual buildings of which is adapted to
separate ownership, i.e., elderly housing project;
I.
J. A public building;
K. A single plot used as a park or recreational area.
All applications for the use of water must be made in writing on forms
provided by the Department signed by the owner of the premises to
be supplied or a duly authorized representative. On approval by the
Board/Department, the application shall constitute a contract between
A.
§ 306-2 HORNELL CODE § 306-4
290:520
the City and the applicant obligating the applicant to pay the City
its established rates and charges and to comply with its rules and
regulations (as amended), which contract may be terminated by the
City without recourse of the applicant, its successors or assigns.
No agreement will be entered into by the City with any applicant for
service until all charges due from the applicant for water services at
any premises now or heretofore owned or occupied by him which are in
arrears shall have been paid.
B.
Application will be accepted subject to there being an existing main
owned by or under the management and operation of the City and or
a municipal system in a street, right-of-way or easement abutting the
premises to be served. Acceptance shall in no way obligate the City
to extend its mains to service the premises excepting as hereinafter
provided.
C.
A separate application must be made for each premises as defined in
§ 306-2. Sub metering may be permitted subject to the approval of the
City; unless so approved, sub metering is prohibited.
D.
Application of builders, contractors, real estate developers and others
for temporary water service may be accepted and temporary water
service may be supplied, providing it does not interfere with use of
water for other customers. The quantity of water taken for such
purposes shall be determined either by meter or by estimate, and shall
be paid for in accordance with the rate schedule applicable to metered
general purposes and any premium levied by the City. Customers
requiring temporary water service shall reimburse the City for all
its expense in connection with providing necessary temporary service
connections. A deposit specified by the Superintendent may be
required.
E.
Applicants for service need not be the owners of the premises to be
served, provided that the premises can be metered and notification
shall be given to the property owner or the agent of the owner whose
consent has been secured.
F.
The application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent. Applications for the extension of public mains may be
initiated by the Board or by a petition by abutting property owners,
as well as owners of the property to be served by the extension.
Applications for the extension of public mains may be denied by the
Board for failure to fully comply with the laws of the City or the rules,
regulations and specifications adopted under those laws, or if approval
of the application is not in the best interest of the City. The Board
reserves the right to refuse all petitions for extensions of mains where
the estimated water rents will not warrant the cost of installation or for
other bonafide reasons.
G.
§ 306-4 UTILITIES § 306-4
290:521
§ 306-5. Installation of services.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the service connection shall be borne by the customer. The customer
shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any and all loss,
liability, damage, injury or expense directly or indirectly resulting from
or arising out of the work done under or in connection the approved
application and/or installation.
H.
Approval of applications shall be valid for a period of no more than one
year, unless otherwise approved by the Board in writing.
I.
Service connection: water service. Upon written application for service
by an owner, or authorized agent, of any property abutting on any
public or private street and upon payment of the applicable charge
prescribed in § 306-10, the City may install, operate, maintain, and
when necessary, replace, the service pipe connection between the main
and the curb box shut off on both public and private streets. When
necessary, easements acceptable to the Board must be furnished at
the applicant's expense. All service lines, from the water main to and
including the curb well and curb stop installed by the Department shall
remain the property of the City. The City reserves the right to deny an
applicant's request. Further, the City reserves the right to require the
applicant to retain the services of an licensed plumber, approved by
the City, for such services and to require that those portions of water
mains and appurtenances which lie in the rights-of-way of public and
private streets be constructed in accordance with plans, specifications
and materials approved by the City and that ownership of same be
dedicated to the City free and clear of liens and encumbrances
following satisfactory installation, together with any necessary
easements for future maintenance, repair and service extensions.
A.
Service connection: public fire protection service. Upon written
application for fire protection service (supply of water for same) by
a legally constituted authority (e.g., Village or Town, etc.) properly
qualified and authorized by law to contract and pay for fire protection
service, approved by the Board, the City may furnish, place and install
hydrants and hydrant connections necessary to provide water for fire
protection in the area in which same is requested, or cause the same
and will be reimbursed by such authority by payment of the applicable
annual charge prescribed in § 306-10 together with any other cost or
expense incurred by the City in so doing. All hydrants and hydrant
connections so installed shall remain the property of the City and
all maintenance, replacement and service will be supplied by the
Department, as per contract.
The Board reserves the right to terminate the maintenance, repair
and supply of water to a service connection for any reason
whatsoever and in particular for leaks in such connection or
inadequate supply or quantity of water. The City makes no
guarantee as to pressure of the water in said pipe of the main
(1)
B.
§ 306-4 HORNELL CODE § 306-5
290:522
supplying the same, and shall not, under any circumstances, be
held liable for loss or damage from a deficiency or failure in the
supply of water for any cause except gross negligence.
Service connection: private fire protection service.
Upon written application for fire protection service by an owner or
occupant of any property abutting on any public or private street
approved by the Board and upon payment of the applicable charge
as prescribed in § 306-10, the City may install, operate, supply
water, maintain and when necessary replace, all at the owner's
expense, the service pipe and connection between the main and the
curb shut off on both public and private streets.
(1)
If a hydrant is installed on a private fire protection service line,
such hydrant will be located on the owner or occupant's property
and installed by him at his expense. However, the Board reserves
the right to approve the type of hydrant and the manner of
installation before service is provided.
(2)
The customer shall install in his service line a detector check valve
and meter. The Board reserves the right to approve type of meter
and manner of installation before service is provided and reserves
the right to require the customer to equip the service line with
backflow prevention devices as may be required by the New York
State Sanitary Code, New York State Health Department, or the
Board.
(3)
The connection is to be used for fire protection or periodic testing
or flushing or the system only, and is to have no connection
whatsoever with any taps that may be used for any other purposes.
Using or permitting the use of water from this connection for
purposes other than extinguishing fires constitutes a misdemeanor.
Violators may be subject to fine, discontinuance of service, and/or
criminal prosecution.
(4)
Any authorized representative of the City shall have free access
to the premises of the applicant at any reasonable time for the
purpose of inspecting said connection and service.
(5)
The City makes no guarantee as to pressure of the water in said
pipe of the main supplying the same, and shall not, under any
circumstances, be held liable for loss or damage from a deficiency
or failure in the supply of water for any cause except gross
negligence.
(6)
The City may specify the date(s) and time(s) of such inspection,
testing and flushing of the service.
(7)
C.
Maintenance and replacement. The City may maintain and, when
necessary, replace, all at the City's expense, any service pipe
D.
§ 306-5 UTILITIES § 306-5
290:523
connection from the main to the curb shut off on all public and private
streets.
Service pipe and service connections shall not be trespassed upon
nor interfered with in any respect. The curb stop may not be used
by customers for turning on or off the water supply without written
permission of the Superintendent.
(1)
The Board reserves the right to terminate the maintenance, repair
and supply of water to a service connection for any reason
whatsoever and in particular for leaks in such connection or
inadequate supply or quantity of water.
(2)
Service on applicant's property. At his own expense, the applicant shall
install the service pipe from the curb box shut off to the premises
and a valve, to be located preferably just inside the building wall,
permitting control of the water supply by the customer. This property
shall be maintained by and when necessary replaced at the expense
of the customer. For this installation and maintenance, the customer
shall employ a competent plumber licensed with the City. All work shall
be performed in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent and in
accordance with specifications in § 306-5F. Authorized representatives
of the Board will approve service connections on the applicant's
property and the connection to the curb shut off before water is turned
on. The customer shall refrain from backfilling the trenches until this
inspection has been performed and the installation approved.
E.
Service pipe specifications.
All service pipes shall have a minimum cover of 4 1/2 feet and
shall be aligned perpendicularly to the center line off the street. A
distance of at least four feet between the water service pipe and
parallel utility's will be maintained. All connections of service pipes
to a main with ground cover of less than five feet shall be so made
on the side of the main so that service pipes in no case have less
covering than the main. Modification to these rules will be made
by the Superintendent in special locations and unusual building
orientations. Water and sewer service lines shall not be installed in
a common trench unless the applicant makes written request for
same and the Department approves such request; in such event,
the sewer line shall be laid deeper than the water service and there
shall be a distance of at least 18 inches between such lines.
(1)
Service pipes installed or replaced after January 1, 2010, shall
not be less than 3/4 inch inside diameter in size, and a one-inch
minimum diameter size shall be used for buildings connected to
water mains with less than 40 p.s.i. static pressure. U.S.
Government Specification Type K soft-tempered copper tubing
shall be used on all installations with pipe sizes two inches and
less in diameter. The next size pipe allowed after two inches is four
inches; all services four inches and larger shall be ductile iron pipe
(2)
F.
§ 306-5 HORNELL CODE § 306-5
290:524
of quality equal to American Water Works Association standard
specifications and of weight suitable for service under a pressure
of 150 p.s.i. Either push-on, mechanical or bell and spigot joints
may be used with the cast iron pipe with frost connections. The
Superintendent reserves the right in all cases to stipulate the size
and type of service connection to be used.
Winter provisions. The City shall not be required to install service lines
or connections between November 14 and March 15, except by special
arrangement, in which case the customer shall pay for the excess over
normal costs.
G.
Easements. Applicants for service shall deliver and record without cost
to the City permanent easements or rights-of-way when necessary for
the installation and maintenance of the service lines and connections.
The City shall not be obligated to commence any construction or to
turn the water on to a service unless and until applicants have obtained
for it satisfactory easements or rights-of-way or have agreed to pay
such costs as may be incurred if at their request the City obtains such
easements or rights-of-way, whenever these are required from parties
who are not applicants for service.
H.
Delays. The Superintendent shall not be compelled to proceed with the
installation of service lines and service connections under this section,
when circumstances beyond control of the Department prohibit such
construction. Said circumstances include but shall not be limited to
delays in delivery of materials, weather conditions, strikes, act of God,
etc.
I.
Miscellaneous.
All installations of service between the main and the curb box,
including the curb box, will be made by City personnel or their
agents and shall remain the property of the City. The City will
maintain the service, in case of leakage, at its own expense unless
damage is caused by the carelessness or negligence of the property
owner or occupant. In such case or if replacement is requested for
other reasons by the customer, the customer will be responsible for
any charges for repairs and/or replacement. The Superintendent
reserves the right to require the customer to cause such
installation or be responsible for the cost of same if it so
determines.
(1)
The customer to be serviced by a service connection shall be
responsible for the installation and maintenance of service pipes
and fixtures between the curb box and the meter. The size, depth,
alignment, materials of construction and methods to be used in
placing the pipe, joining, testing and backfilling excavations shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or
other applicable rules and regulations of and to the specifications
of the AWWA. The customer shall be responsible for the protection
(2)
J.
§ 306-5 UTILITIES § 306-5
290:525
of the service pipes and meter from freezing. Before the service is
covered, it must be inspected and approved by the Superintendent
or his agents. Before the meter is installed and the water service
activated, all parts of the service that are the responsibility of the
customer shall be again subject to inspection and approval by the
Superintendent or his agents in conformity with these rules and
regulations. At either inspection, the customer will be notified as
to any necessary repairs to be made before metered service will be
granted.
In buildings where there is no cellar, the pipes shall be carried to
the center of the building or to an unexposed part previous to being
carried upward.
(3)
In all cases where the service pipes pass through areas or traps
open to the weather, the opening shall be closely covered and
the windows and doors closed to the outside air during the cold
weather. In all exposed situations, the service pipes and fixtures
shall be properly wrapped with felt or other nonconducting
substances and surrounded by a box packed also with a
nonconducting substance, if necessary, to protect said service from
freezing. Said protection shall be at the expense of the owner, and
in case he neglects to protect his service as aforesaid, the City may
cut off the water therefrom. It shall be the duty of the plumber to
protect from frost all work done by him. He will not be released
from the responsibility by having the owner of the premises or
other do the work for him.
(4)
If a water meter or a pipe near such meter freezes, no hot water
shall be put on the meter.
(5)
No abatement from any water bill will be made in cases where
the charge results from the failure on the part of the owner or
consumer to promptly repair any broken, frozen or defective
fixtures or service.
(6)
The Department may meter private fire lines where there is
demonstrated justification such as unauthorized use of the service and/
or where unusual circumstances prevail in the customer's premises.
K.
Backflow prevention program.
Plans and specifications.
All applications for water service will be reviewed by the
Department for a determination as to the need for a backflow
prevention device using the New York State Health
Department Cross Connection Control Manual. All backflow
prevention devices required by the department are the
responsibility of the customer and must be designed by a
registered professional engineer (P.E.) of the State of New York
or an architect licensed by New York State. Exception: If the
(a)
(1)
L.
§ 306-5 HORNELL CODE § 306-5
290:526
water customer is a municipality, and the total cost of the
installation does not exceed $5,000, a non-P.E. employee of the
municipality may design the installation.
Approved backflow devices. Only three devices are applicable
to the containment concept of cross-connection control. These
devices are the DCV (double check valve), the RPZ (reduced
pressure zone) and air gap separation.
(b)
The New York State Department of Health maintains a list
of backflow prevention devices, which have been approved
for use in New York State. All backflow prevention devices,
which are required, shall be of a model and size approved
by the New York State Department of Health for each type
of assembly. Currently approved devices are posted at:
http://www.health.state.ny.us/environmental/water/drinking/
cross/cross.htm
(c)
Submission and approval of plans.
The customer is responsible for submitting all plans and
specifications for a backflow prevention device per the
following procedure:
Applicant must complete the application for approval of
backflow prevention device (Form Gen 236) and submit
it with detailed plans and specifications as well as an
engineering report to the Department for approval. All
forms, plans and reports must be submitted in
quadruplicate.
[1]
The Department will forward the application and all
documents to the State Heath Department, Bureau of
Public Water Supply for final approval. Upon final approval
by the state, a certificate of approval (Form Gen 237) will
be returned to the Department, and the customer.
[2]
(a)
Note: If plans are disapproved at any step, they will be
returned to the customer for modification and resubmitted to
the Department.
(b)
Engineering reports submitted with plans must meet NYS
criteria as posted at: http://www.health.state.ny.us/
environmental/water/drinking/cross/cross.htm
(c)
(2)
Installation and initial testing.
An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line as well as any bypass line to a customer's
property at or near the property line or immediately inside the
facility being served as determined by the Department. In all
cases, the backflow prevention device will be installed before
(a)
(3)
§ 306-5 UTILITIES § 306-5
290:527
the first branch line leading off the service and will be fully
accessible for maintenance and testing.
In the case of premises that have more than one service line,
all service lines to the premises will be equipped with the
appropriate backflow prevention devices dependent on the
degree of hazard which has been assigned to the facility.
(b)
All backflow prevention devices must be installed so that they
are not subject to flooding or freezing. In no case will the
installation of a backflow prevention device include
unprotected bypass piping.
(c)
After installation of an approved backflow prevention device,
the customer is responsible for certifying that the installation
was done in accordance with the approved plans. The initial
device test results must also be documented and certified by
an approved backflow device tester. Certification of installation
and initial test results shall be submitted to the Department
and the New York State Health Department within 30 days of
installation. (NYSDOH Form 1013 has been designed for both
the designers' certification of installation and the certified test
results).
(d)
Testing.
The customer is responsible for the certified testing of all
backflow prevention devices at least once each year. In those
situations where the Department or the New York State Health
Department deems the hazard to be great enough, certified
tests may be required at more frequent intervals. All backflow
prevention devices shall also be tested upon initial installation
and after each repair.
(a)
Only individuals that are New-York-State-certified backflow
device testers will conduct the testing of backflow prevention
devices. All certified backflow device testers must register with
the City and provide current proof of insurance.
(b)
Results of all certified testing will be documented on Form
Gen 215 and forwarded to the Department within 30 days of
the test. The customer shall keep all testing and maintenance
records for each backflow prevention device a minimum of 10
years.
(c)
(4)
Maintenance.
The customer is responsible for conducting general
maintenance, repair and replacement of all backflow
prevention along with ensuring protection against freezing,
flooding and continued accessibility. Piping checks shall also
be conducted frequently to ensure that all backflow prevention
(a)
(5)
§ 306-5 HORNELL CODE § 306-5
290:528
§ 306-6. Installation of meters.
devices have not been bypassed or otherwise rendered
ineffective.
The customer is responsible for the disassembly and rebuilding
of all DCV and RPZ backflow prevention devices every five
years and a copy of Form Gen 215 documenting the work
performed shall be provided to the Department.
(b)
Facility access inspections. In conjunction with an application for
water service or request for inspection of an existing service the
customer shall allow the Department or its authorized
representative access to its facilities for the purpose of inspections
and assessment of the degree of hazard. Failure to provide access
within 30 days of receiving written notice from the Department will
be cause for the denial of water service or the discontinuance of
water service to the facility.
(6)
Installation of backflow prevention devices.
Subsequent to the facility inspection, the Department will
make a determination as to the degree of risk that the facility
poses for cross connection contamination of the public water
system. Based upon the assigned risk, the Department will
send written notice to the customer advising that an approved
backflow prevention device be installed.
(a)
If the required backflow prevention device is two inches in size
or smaller, the water customer will be required to install an
approved device within 90 days of notification.
(b)
If the required backflow prevention device is over two inches
in size, the customer will be required to install an approved
device within 180 days of notification.
(c)
Failure to install an approved backflow prevention device
within the compliance deadlines will be cause for the
discontinuance of water service to the facility.
(d)
Failure to comply with the requirements for testing backflow
prevention devices will be cause for discontinuance of water
service to a facility.
(e)
(7)
An individual (separate) meter with shut off shall be required for each
premises and for each separate service connection to a premises. Public
buildings, churches and institutions shall be metered.
A.
The meter will be owned by, maintained, removed and furnished at the
City/Department's expense and connected at the customer's expense
for sizes one inch or less; however, all sizes over one inch must be
purchased and owned by the customer and shall meet Department
B.
§ 306-5 UTILITIES § 306-6
290:529
requirements and standards. The Superintendent reserves the right in
all cases to supervise and regulate the installation, and to stipulate the
size, type and make of the meter to be used on any connection.
Whenever possible, a meter two inches in size and under shall be set in
the basement or utility room. In buildings with no cellars and where the
meter is required to be placed in a utility room located other than at
the front of the building, the service line shall have 4 1/2 feet of cover.
Further, the City shall have no responsibility whatsoever for piping or
lines underneath a structure. The meter shall be located at a convenient
point approved by the Superintendent so as to protect the meter and
to measure the entire supply of water through the connection. When
a meter cannot be set in the basement or utility room, it will be
set near or inside the property line or in a place designated by the
Superintendent, and all expenses incurred by the City in connection
with its proper housing, if any, shall be reimbursed to the City. All
meters shall be placed in locations readily accessible to meter readers
and shall be installed with remote reader at a location approved by the
Department.
C.
The Department may require meters larger than two inches in size to
be set near and inside the property or in a place designated by the
Superintendent, and all expenses incurred by the City in connection
with proper housing, including bypass for testing, if required, shall be
reimbursed to the City. All meters larger than two inches shall have a
bypass for testing.
D.
All meters sized one inch or less and all meter connections shall at all
times remain the sole property of the City and shall not be interfered
with in any respect. All such meters will be maintained by and at the
expense of the City as far as ordinary wear and tear are concerned,
but the customer will be held responsible for damages due to freezing,
hot water, customer negligence, or other external causes. In case of
damage, the City will repair such meter, if necessary, replacing it
with another meter and the costs shall be paid by the customer. Any
meter larger than two inches will be periodically tested or inspected
for accuracy and repaired at the customer's expense when the City
deems it necessary. Any meter larger than two inches will be supplied,
installed, maintained, repaired and replaced at the owner's expense
and under the City's supervision and direction. If meters need attention,
the Department must be notified at once. Plumbers are not allowed to
remove meters for repairs or any other purpose.
E.
The City reserves the right to remove and/or test any meter at any time
and to substitute or to cause another meter to be substituted in its
place. In case of a disputed account involving the accuracy of the meter,
such meter will be tested by the Department upon the request of the
customer. If the meter is found to register correctly (i.e., accurately or
to the prejudice of the City) the customer shall pay the fee as provided
in § 306-10 for same. In the event that the meter so tested is found
to have an error in registration to the prejudice of the customer in
F.
§ 306-6 HORNELL CODE § 306-6
290:530
§ 306-7. Payment for services.
excess of 4% at any rate of flow within the normal test-flow limits, no
testing charge will be made and prior water bills, not to exceed one
year, will be adjusted to correct such over-registration in accordance
with recommendations of the Board.
Where a meter would otherwise be located more than 75 feet from
the curb box, the City reserves the right to require a meter pit. Meter
pit size and location shall conform to the specifications of the
Superintendent. Further, all outside meters shall be maintained in an
area which is accessible to the City personnel, structurally sound and a
dry place. The pit and cover shall be owned, installed and maintained
by the customer.
G.
The City reserves the right to place remote reading registers on any
service as in integral part of the meter installation or to require same.
H.
Employees of the City shall have access to meters, as well as all aspects
of the water service, at all reasonable hours for the purpose of reading,
testing, inspection or service repairs.
I.
No person other than a Department employee or its agent shall break
seals, tamper with or disconnect meters. If any person takes such
action without authorization from the Department, the person and
owner shall be liable for any damage which may result therefrom and
shall be billed on the basis of water used in a similar period.
J.
The customer is responsible for maintaining plumbing on either side of
the meter in good condition and valves on both sides of the meter per
standards so that the meter may be removed or replaced conveniently
and without impairing such plumbing. If a leak should develop
subsequent to meter removal or replacement due to poor condition of
the piping, the customer shall be responsible for any necessary repairs.
K.
The customer is requested to notify the Department promptly of any
defect in or damage to the meter or its connections.
L.
The inside pipe must be thoroughly strapped so that no weight shall
bear on the water meter.
M.
Service pipes must be thoroughly flushed of white lead and foreign
substances before installation of a water meter.
N.
All bills are payable in accordance with the terms of the applicable
service classification. If a new service is installed at any time during the
billing period, the minimum charge and the amount of water allowed
thereunder will be prorated according to the number of days remaining
to complete the billing period after the service has been made available.
A.
§ 306-6 UTILITIES § 306-7
290:531
Meters will be read quarterly and customers will be billed quarterly
at the Board's option as required in § 306-10, or such other periods or
frequency as the Board may determine.
B.
The quantity of water recorded by the meter, subject to the applicable
multiplication factor, shall be considered the amount of water passing
through the meter, which amount shall be conclusive as between both
customer and the City except where the meter has been found to be
registering incorrectly, or has ceased to register.
A billing which is not disputed within 90 days of its rendering is
conclusive as between both customer and the City. Bills which are
incorrect due to meter or billing errors will be adjusted as follows:
When a meter in service is tested and found to have overregistered
more than 4%, the City will adjust the customer's
bill for the excess amount paid determined as follows:
If the time at which the error first developed can be
definitely determined, the amount of overcharge shall be
based thereon.
[1]
If the time at which the error first developed cannot be
definitely determined, it shall be assumed that the overregistration
existed for a period equal to 1/2 of the time
since the meter was last tested, or one year, whichever
period is lesser. If more than one customer received
service through the meter during the period for which
the refund is due, a refund will be paid to the present
customer only for the time during which such present
customer received service through the meter. The refund
will be accomplished by means of a credit to the
customer's account, or otherwise at the Department's
discretion.
[2]
If a meter in service is found not to register, the
Department may render an estimated bill. The Department
will estimate the charge for water use by averaging the
amount registered for a similar period preceding or
subsequent to the period of nonregistration, or for
corresponding periods in previous years adjusting for any
changes in the customer's use.
[3]
When a customer has been overcharged as a result of
incorrect reading of the meter, incorrect calculation of the
bill, incorrect connection of the meter, or other similar
reasons, the amount of the overcharge shall be refunded
or credited to the customer. Conversely, when a customer
has been undercharged for such reasons, the amount of
the undercharge will be billed to the customer.
[4]
(a)
(1)
C.
§ 306-7 HORNELL CODE § 306-7
290:532
All bills are due and payable when rendered and as per § 306-10.
Failure of a customer to receive the bill or notice does not relieve
the customer from the obligation of payment or consequences of
nonpayment. All water charges by the City shall be a lien upon the real
property on which, or in connection with which, such water is used and
may be added to the real property tax bill. If such charges are not paid
within 30 days from the date due, the water supply may be shut off until
such charges are paid. The water supply shut off procedure shall be as
prescribed in the City billing and delinquent procedure in § 306-10. The
owner shall be responsible for water charges and any other charges
relating to water service held against the premises unless paid by the
customer.
D.
Any customer may discontinue water service by giving the City written
notice not less than three days prior to the discontinuance, and all
liability for service rendered after the discontinuance of service, as
herein provided for, shall cease. This procedure is to be followed in
cases of changes of occupancy and other appropriate circumstances.
No adjustment of bills between owners or tenants will be made or
rebates given for unoccupied premises unless prior written notice is
received by the City.
E.
Inability to obtain a meter reading. In cases where a meter reading
cannot be obtained, an estimated bill will be rendered to the customer.
Subsequent bills will reflect actual consumption plus any adjustment to
the bill made necessary through the use of an estimate. In the event
that a reading cannot be obtained for a period of six months, the City
reserves the right to suspend the water service until such time as
accurate billing is made possible through an actual reading of the meter
and all service charges for suspension and reinstatement of the water
service have been paid.
F.
Inability to obtain a final reading. If a customer has requested a final
reading of his meter or a final reading of the meter plus a
discontinuance of service and the City is unable to gain entry to the
property for such purpose, an additional service charge (i.e., call-out)
may be made. This charge will be affected on notification to the
property owner who is obligated to make the premises available to the
City for final reading. If the premises are not made available, for each
additional service call made necessary through the inability of the City
to gain entry to the property a service charge (i.e., call-out) as provided
on the annexed Schedule A110 may be added to the customer's bill.
G.
H. Each premises owned by an owner shall be billed separately.
Owners are requested to report promptly to the Department any
change in mailing address or ownership in order to insure proper
rendering of bills.
I.
110. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an appendix to this chapter.
§ 306-7 UTILITIES § 306-7
290:533
§ 306-8. Extension of mains.
Water supplied to a building, all or any part of which is rented, shall
normally be charged to the owner or his agent. However in all cases,
the owner shall be held liable for the paying of bills for water supplied
or services to such premises and shall be held liable for all violation of
rules.
J.
Meters for industrial customers and other large consumers may be read
monthly and billed at the Department's option.
K.
Water for construction purposes will be metered if practical and will be
sold at regular quarterly rates.
L.
Miscellaneous sales, such as water for construction purposes, may be
billed as the service is rendered.
M.
Main extension agreements. Upon application for water service in areas
not served by a City-owned water main, the Board may elect to extend
its mains or install necessary mains in accordance with the Board's then
main extension policy and within the permissive service area limits as
approved by the New York State Department of Health.
A.
Main extension policy. The Board may extend or permit the extension
of its mains to provide water service that shall meet or exceed the
requirements of the New York State Sanitary Code. All water main
extension construction practices shall meet or exceed the requirements
of the New York State Sanitary Code. The Board may extend or allow
the extension of its water mains within the City's service area no more
than 100 feet to serve a customer without a main extension agreement
as set forth in § 306-8C and D below.
B.
Main extension agreement: developers. Real estate developers shall be
required to bear the full costs for all main extensions installed to supply
water to their developments. No extension will be less than eight inches
in size. If larger size mains are required, the Board may elect to bear
all costs in excess of the cost of installing an eight-inch main.
C.
Main extension agreement: individual owners. Individual property
owners will be required to sign a main extension agreement in which
they shall agree to pay to the City in advance 100% of the cost or,
alternatively, annually for 20 years 12% of the cost of main extensions
installed to supply water to their buildings. No extensions will be less
than eight inches in size. If a larger size main is required, the Board
may elect to bear all costs in excess of those for an eight-inch main.
As more connections are made to the new extension prior to the full
repayment of its cost as noted above, the annual minimum charge may
be redistributed proportionately among all users. This charge shall be
in addition to the charge or cost of the water supplied through the
extension.
D.
§ 306-7 HORNELL CODE § 306-8
290:534
§ 306-9. General rules.
Easements. Applicants for main extension shall deliver without cost
to the City permanent easements or rights-of-way when necessary for
the installations and maintenance of the extensions or subsequent
additions thereto. The City shall not be obligated to commence any
construction until applicants either have obtained for it satisfactory
easements or rights-of-way or have agreed to pay such costs as may be
incurred if at their request the City obtains such easements or rights-ofway,
whenever these are required, from parties who are not applicants
for service.
E.
Size and type. The Board reserves the right to determine and specify
the diameter, type, etc., of pipe, meters, and appurtenances required to
provide the service requested.
F.
Title. Title to all main extensions shall be vested in the City and the
City shall have the right to further extend any main installed by it or
transferred to it pursuant to the terms of the main extension agreement
in and to other streets and premises without repayment or refund to
any applicant. If such extension has been installed by others, same shall
be conveyed to the City free and clear of liens and encumbrances before
being put into service.
G.
Delay. The Department shall not be compelled to proceed with the
installation of mains under this section when circumstances beyond
the control of the Department prohibit such construction. Such
circumstances include but shall not be limited to delays in delivery of
materials, weather conditions, strikes, acts of God, etc.
H.
Maintenance and replacement. The City, at its own expense, will
maintain and, when necessary, replace the City-owned mains used
to supply water to its customers, and if adequate service requires
the reconstruction or replacement of such mains, said mains will be
reconstructed or replaced by the City at its expense.
I.
Where a developer has extended a main along the frontage of others,
the entire cost shall be borne by the developer. It is the practice of
the City to engage in discussions with developers and others regarding
issues related to main extensions and system development. Such
discussions may relate to main sizing, pumps, metering, reimbursement
for a proportional share of costs for any tie-ins to the main by abutters,
etc.
J.
The City undertakes to use reasonable care and diligence to provide
a constant supply of water at a reasonable pressure to customers, but
reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off water in its
mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions, or for other
purposes, and it is expressly agreed that the City shall not be liable for
a deficiency or failure in the supply of water, its quality or portability,
or the pressure thereof for any cause whatsoever, or for any damage
A.
§ 306-8 UTILITIES § 306-9
290:535
caused thereby, or for the bursting or breaking of any main, service
pipe, meter or any attachment to the City's property or to a customer's
property. The City shall, when possible, issue prior notice of a water
service shut down to the water service area to be effected by the
interruption in service. Such notice is a courtesy and not a requirement.
In the interest of public health, the City will not knowingly permit
its mains or services to be connected with any service pipe or piping
which is connected with any source of water supply not approved by the
Department of Health of the State of New York without the installation
of a suitable backflow prevention device or devices approved by the
New York State Department of Health. The City will also not knowingly
permit its mains or service pipes to be connected in any way to any
piping, tank, vat or other apparatus which contains liquids, chemicals,
or water of questionable quality without the installation of a suitable
backflow prevention device or devices approved by the New York State
Department of Health.
B.
The City, through the Superintendent of Public Works, reserves the
right, in periods of drought or emergency of when deemed essential
to the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, to restrict,
curtail or prohibit the use of water for secondary, nonessential
purposes, such as sprinkling (of lawns, gardens, etc.), car washing or
filling swimming pools, and shall have the right to fix or limit the hours
and periods when water may be used for such purposes. The same shall
be without liability on the part of the City.
C.
Water service may be discontinued by the City for any one of the
following reasons:
For use of water other than as represented in the customer's
application, or through branch connections on the street side of the
meter or place reserved for meter.
(1)
For willful waste of water by improper or imperfect pipes or by any
other means.
(2)
For molesting or tampering with any service pipe, seal, meter, or
any other appliance owned by the City or for conduct which could
or has resulted in the erroneous or improper metering of water
consumption.
(3)
For nonpayment of bills for water or services rendered by the
City and/or Department, in accordance with the City's billing and
delinquent procedure for the Department prescribed in § 306-10.
(4)
For cross-connecting pipes carrying water supply by the Board
with any other source of supply or with any apparatus which may
endanger the quality of the City water supply.
(5)
For refusal of reasonable access to the property for the purpose
of reading, repairing, testing, installing, inspecting, or removing
(6)
D.
§ 306-9 HORNELL CODE § 306-9
290:536
meters, water piping, plumbing and other fixtures and
discontinuing water service during normal working hours (8:00
a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday).
For failure to repair leaking service lines between the curb shut-off
and meter within five working days after receiving written notice
from the Department.
(7)
For violation of the regulations of the City or Department as filed
at the office of City clerk. When two or more premises are now
supplied with water through one service pipe, under control of one
curb stop, if any of the parties so supplied shall violate any of
the above rules, the City reserves the right to apply its shut off
regulations to the joint service line, except the City shall attempt
to avoid taking such action until the innocent customer, who is
not in violation of the City's or department rules has been given
reasonable opportunity to attach the service pipe leading to his
premises to a separately controlled service connection.
(8)
When water services to any premises has been turned off upon the
order of the customer, or for any of the above reasons, and service
at any premises is again desired by the same customer, including
seasonal customers, a charge as provided in § 306-10 shall be made
to the customer for the restoration of service. If, however, it becomes
necessary to remove the City's equipment/materials from the
customer's premises or shut off or disconnect the service pipe at the
City's main, the charge to the customer for restoration of service will
be 125% of the actual cost incurred by the Department incidental to
the disconnection and reconnection of the service pipe or restoration of
service.
E.
Upon receipt of an application for a new service or for the
reinstatement of an existing service, the City will assume that the
piping and fixtures which the service will supply are in proper order
to receive same, and the City will not be liable in any event for any
accident, breaks, or leakage arising in any connection with the supply
of water and/or failure to supply same.
F.
No person shall injure or interfere with any pipe, main, valve, meter,
reservoir or other equipment or buildings belonging to the City's water
system, tamper with meters, operate or use the City's gate valves or
curb stops, divert water from main, use water without permission, or
cut into any water pipe or main.
G.
No person, other than City personnel, shall take or release water
from any public or private fire hydrant for any use other than for
firefighting purposes, or other authorized use. Except as otherwise
provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to open, use,
operate or tamper with a fire hydrant or a valve in the water supply
system.
H.
§ 306-9 UTILITIES § 306-9
290:537
Any person wishing to purchase water supplied by a means other
than through an existing metered water service (for example, filling
swimming pool, construction needs, landscaping purposes, etc.), shall
contact the Superintendent and shall make application for such
authorization on a form to be provided by the City. Such form shall
constitute the applicant's request for the purchase of water in bulk. The
applicant shall inform the City as to the quantity of water to be supplied
in whole units of 1,000 gallons. Upon approval of the application and
payment of the necessary fees, an appointment will be made for supply
of the water on a regular work day of the Department between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. The applicant shall be given a receipt
for payment which will be displayed to department personnel at the
garage at the time of supply. Such water shall be supplied through the
City garage hydrant only.
I.
These regulations will be subject to and incorporate by reference all
current provisions pertaining to drinking water supply which are part of
the New York State Sanitary Code, and the local plumbing regulations
of the City in the area served.
J.
Safety. All excavations for service connections or mains shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of construction, etc., shall be restored
in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent.
K.
Maintenance. Failure on the part of the customer to immediately notify
the City of any defective or broken part of the service for which the
customer is responsible, or to immediately repair or replace any
defective part of the service which is the customer's responsibility, may
result in the suspension of water service until repairs or replacements
have been made.
L.
Liability.
The City and its employees or officials shall not be held liable for
any damage that may occur as a result of the maintenance, repair
or replacing of any part of the City's owned system or the City's
failure to do so.
(1)
The City shall not be held liable or responsible for any losses or
damage resulting from fire or water which may occur due to the
installation of a private fire protection service connection or any
leakage or flow of water therefrom.
(2)
The Department assumes no responsibility for clogging of interior
plumbing which may occur during or after repairs to services,
mains or meters.
(3)
M.
Painting of hydrants. No one except the Department or other authorized
personnel shall paint hydrants or in any way change the color of any
N.
§ 306-9 HORNELL CODE § 306-9
290:538
part of a hydrant without the express consent and approval of the
Board.
The City will undertake to provide an adequate supply of potable water
at adequate pressure throughout its system but cannot assume
responsibility or liability, direct, indirect, or consequential, for any
damage from failure to do so. Whenever possible, work necessitating
the interruption of service will be scheduled to provide the least
inconvenience to the customer.
O.
To safeguard against possible damage due to interruption of service,
customers are advised to regulate their installations connected with the
water system supply so that damage will not occur if water is shut off
or pressure fluctuates without notice. An automatic check valve may be
installed on the service at the building entrance. Hot water tanks may
be provided with vacuum and pressure relief valves which customers
should keep in good operating condition at all times. Lever type valves
are recommended.
P.
In areas where pressure is low, the Department may, at its discretion,
require that the customer install and operate a booster pump and tank
of a combined capacity approved by the Department. In such cases,
the customer will enter into a written agreement with the Department
in which he holds the Department harmless from possible damage and
inconvenience resulting from low pressure. In areas where pressure
is high, the Department may, at its discretion, require that customers
install and maintain pressure-reducing valves.
Q.
Customers are responsible for keeping their connections and fixtures in
good order and protected from freezing. Failure to do so may result in
interruption of service and costly repairs for which the Department is
not liable.
R.
Any change in location of meters or services requested by the customer
shall, if approved by the Department, be at the customer's expense.
S.
In the event that a customer shall use water at rates of flow which
cause noticeable pressure variations in the system, the Department
may require that such customer control his flow rates or install
equipment to minimize such variations at the customers' expense.
T.
Customers shall notify the Department when premises are to be
vacated so that water may be turned off, meters read and/or removed,
and the account transferred. If the premises are to be permanently
abandoned, the owner shall notify the Department immediately so that
the service connection can be closed. Closure will be made at
Department expense.
U.
All underground lawn sprinkling systems shall be equipped with check
valves and vacuum breakers to prevent back siphonage into the water
system. Plans for such a system shall be approved by the Department
V.
§ 306-9 UTILITIES § 306-9
290:539
§ 306-10. Classifications, rates, charges and delinquency.
before installation is made and the Department's final on-site inspection
and approval is required before backfilling.
Maintenance of the service pipes from the main to the customer's
premises is the responsibility of the Department. The customer, at his
own expense, shall maintain the service connection from the curb box
to the interior of the building or other facility-provided water service.
The customer shall maintain the service connection in good repair in
accordance with the reasonable requirements of the Department.
W.
Where there is a leak in any service connection, and the owner of the
property cannot be readily found, or shall refuse to make immediate
repairs, the Department shall have the right to make the necessary
repairs and the cost thereof shall be charged to the customer.
X.
No new or repaired water supply systems, or any structure there, shall
be placed in use before such system or structure has been effectively
cleaned and disinfected in a manner prescribed and approved by the
New York State Sanitary Code.
Y.
When dealing with members of the public, employees of the
Department shall carry a badge, ID card, or other insignia identifying
such individual as a Department employee.
Z.
Services rendered after the Department's normal hours or on weekends
or holidays are subject to special charges.
AA.
Service connection: water service. As noted heretofore in §§ 306-5
and 306-6, the City will in general be responsible for the installation,
operation, maintenance and repair of the service pipe connection
between the main and the curb box shut off, as well as the furnishing
of a meter when the service pipe is one inch or less and oversight of
installation of such meter when the service pipe is one inch or less. The
applicant shall pay a connection fee as provided on Schedule A.111The
applicant, at his sole cost and expense, shall be responsible for the
installation and maintenance of the service pipe from the curb box shut
off to the premises and a valve to be installed before the meter. Such
installation shall be in accordance with these rules and regulations.
A.
Service connection: public fire protection. Political subdivisions, other
than the City of Hornell, shall pay the City an annual charge for each
hydrant installation authorized by the political subdivision. The annual
payment amount for each hydrant installation in the political
subdivision shall be mutually acceptable to the Board and the legally
constituted authority properly qualified and authorized by law to
contract and pay for fire protection service in the political subdivision.
B.
111. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 306-9 HORNELL CODE § 306-10
290:540
Service connection: private fire protection service. The applicant, for
private water protection service, shall be responsible for the
construction, repair and replacement of the fire protection service
line from the main to the building including the cost thereof. Such
installation shall be constructed, repaired and replaced in accordance
with applicable federal, state and local laws, code, rules and
regulations including these rules and regulations.
C.
Service on applicant's property. It is the policy of the City that its
personnel and equipment shall, whenever possible, refrain from
entering upon the property of others for installation, repair,
maintenance, inspection, etc. However, in the event that City personnel
and/or equipment do enter upon the property of others for such
purposes, the applicant and/or other benefited parties shall be billed for
the labor (including benefits) plus material charges, equipment rental
charges, and overhead charges associated with the work performed.
Such charges shall be based upon the actual cost of the labor, materials,
equipment, etc., to the City. The City reserves the right to require
payment, in whole or part, of the actual or estimated charges for such
services.
D.
Payment for services, including water rates. (See annexed Schedule "A"
for water rates.112)
The water usage charge to be applied to two-family dwellings
and multifamily dwellings (apartments and other such facilities
which are independent units containing cooking facilities or sinks
or bathrooms, etc., or has access to) in which the water consumed
by each dwelling unit is not individually metered will be calculated
by taking the water consumed, as established by the master meter
servicing the units, and allocating the consumption proportionately
to each of the units served by said master meter. Thus for purposes
of establishing the charge for water consumption, it is conclusively
determined that each unit within the structure will have consumed
the same amount of water. Then the established schedule of water
rates will be applied to each dwelling unit's proportionate
consumption to determine the charge to be assessed or levied
to such master meter; said charge being cumulative of all such
dwelling units served by the meter. The minimum quarterly water
charge will be assessed to each dwelling unit in those instances
where the proportionate consumption, as determined above, is less
than such established minimum usage for individual services based
upon the above-noted water rates. This method of allocation and
billing shall apply within and outside of the City.
(1)
A laboratory fee of 125% of the actual cost incurred by the City will
be charged to all customers having interconnections and private
chlorination systems, necessitating sampling and inspection by the
Department.
(2)
E.
112. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 306-10 UTILITIES § 306-10
290:541
Bills for water used or consumed will be rendered quarterly. Fire
protection bills will be rendered quarterly. A fifteen-percent penalty
will be charged on all bills not paid within the period specified
for payment without penalty. Fire protection bills will be rendered
based upon the above noted schedule as opposed to the quantity of
water consumed.
(3)
All bills are sent in the owner's or the customer's name. In
purchasing property, it shall be the responsibility of the purchaser
to determine whether or not there are outstanding bills.
Outstanding water bills or charges shall be paid prior to property
transfer or the opening of a new account and supply of water to
a new owner. Failure of the owner or customer to receive bills
does not relieve him of responsibility for payment. Owners must
keep the meter easily accessible for reading, inspection and repair
at all times. Regardless of the manner and place of billing, the
owner shall be primarily liable for all bills and charges levied by the
City; such billings and charges shall constitute a lien against the
premises served. Collection of the same may be enforced by levy
and inclusion with the real property taxes on said premises.
(4)
The City reserves the right at all times to shut off water temporarily
without notice, for repairs, extensions or other work necessary
in connection with the system, maintenance and repair and for
nonpayment of bills. Where service is shut off for nonpayment,
a charge as prescribed herein will be made to cover costs of
disconnecting and reconnecting service.
(5)
The Board reserves the right to waive or discount the rates and
charges for services and materials provided to governments.
(6)
In the event that a service to a customer or owner is disconnected
or terminated, whether at his request or for nonpayment of charges
and billings, the customer or owner shall be subject to a
disconnection or termination charge as provided on the annexed
Schedule A.113
(7)
In the event the City provides installation, repair, replacement
or maintenance labor, services and or materials which are
necessitated due to installation of a service or other service at the
request of an applicant or others, or due to a service line, meter,
box or other water system component being damaged, defaced or
altered by the act or neglect of a customer, owner, invitee, guest,
etc. (or someone in their control or within their responsibility), or
for any other reason, the City shall bill such applicant, customer,
owner or other for the costs of same as provided on the annexed
Schedule A.114 The City may require advance payment in whole or
(8)
113. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
114. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 306-10 HORNELL CODE § 306-10
290:542
part and shall require payment in full before the service is installed,
restored or reconnected, including water charges.
The Board may revise the above rate structures from time to time
without notice to the owners or customers.
(9)
Upon the installation of a water meter by the Department of Public
Works on any premises heretofore on a flat rate or any other rate,
the meter rate shall immediately take effect, and credit shall be
given pro rata for any advance payment which has been made and
credited upon the future meter charges or refunded.
(10)
Labor and material charges.
The minimum call-out charge shall be as provided in the annexed
Schedule A.115 In the event of an emergency call-out (other than
the department's normal working hours and days; see § 306-9), the
call-out charge shall be as provided on Schedule A.
(1)
The charge for all water meter installations and connections with
or without remote readers, service tee installations, stop and drain
installations, tap installations, and repair services to meters
including replacement of meter bottoms shall include the costs of
labor, materials and equipment associated, used or expended in
performance of the service and shall be charged to the applicant/
owner as provided on Schedule A.
(2)
If the job/service/repair requires the use of materials, labor and/or
equipment of parties other than the Department's, the customer or
owner shall be assessed the actual cost of same plus an additional
charge of 10% thereof.
(3)
The customer or owner shall deposit with the City Chamberiain
a sum equal to 1/2 the estimated cost of the service repair of
installation prior to the actual performance of same, excepting in
the case of emergencies.
(4)
F.
Delinquency procedures.
A water bill (for water service or labor and materials, etc.) is
delinquent if not paid on or before the allowable due date posted
on each bill. The Board reserves the right to place uncollected
water charges of such customers on the Village/Towns tax rolls,
and the Board reserves its rights to discontinue water service for
nonpayment by those customer or owner of the premises receiving
water service.
(1)
The City Chamberiain shall cause the preparation of a delinquent
water customer list promptly following the last day for payment
of charges without penalty. Generally, the last day for payment
(2)
G.
115. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 306-10 UTILITIES § 306-10
290:543
§ 306-11. Grievances; amendment; penalties for offenses.
without penalty would be the last day of the months of March, June,
September, and December of each year. Such list shall contain
the account number, the party billed, the service, address, and
the amount due and shall reflect all amounts which are not paid
in full for water service or other charges for the previous two
billing cycles, if any. Simultaneous with the preparation of such
list, there shall be added to each delinquent account a charge
as provided on the annexed Schedule A.116 The imposition of this
penalty is based upon the additional burden being placed upon
City staff and financial resources due solely to efforts to collect
upon such delinquent accounts. Water bills are mailed every three
months (four times a year). Delinquent accounts that are listed for
nonpayment of water services three or more times within the past
12 months will incur a specific penalty as provided in Schedule A.
Within five business days following the preparation of such list, the
Chamberlain shall cause notice to be given to the party billed of
such delinquency by regular mail. Such notice shall provide that in
the event that all arrearages and penalties are not paid in full by
noon of the 30th day following the day of mailing of such notice,
water service at the premises noted shall be terminated on such
date and at such time or as soon thereafter as the Department
manpower permits.
(3)
In the event of multiple residents or tenants who do not have a
meter in his or her name, the above-noted notice shall be posted
on the door of each residential unit or house. Reasonable efforts
shall be made by City personnel to locate tenants in rental units or
multiple dwellings for the purpose of delivery of such notice or the
information contained in the notice regarding pending termination
of water service for nonpayment.
(4)
In the event that the Chamberlain fails to receive payment in full
regarding the delinquent accounts prior to the scheduled shut off
date, the Chamberlain shall inform the Superintendent who shall
act upon the list to approve termination of service (shut off) for
nonpayment. Upon such determination, the Superintendent shall
promptly instruct appropriate Department personnel to terminate
the service at the service address noted.
(5)
The delinquent amount plus the delinquent account charges and
the reconnection charge (Schedule A) must be paid in full prior to
water service being reconnected.
(6)
Grievances. Any grievance out of the administration of these rules
shall be resolved by a hearing held before the Superintendent or his
designee at such time and place and under such rules of evidence and
A.
116. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 306-10 HORNELL CODE § 306-11
290:544
§ 306-12. Prohibitions.
procedure as he shall determine. The Superintendent or designee shall
render an opinion or decision verbally unless the grieving party makes
a written demand for a written decision.
Appeals. The grieving party may, within 10 days of receipt of the
decision, file a written appeal to the Board. The grieving party may
make the appeal himself or by his attorney. Said appeal shall be filed
with the City Clerk. The Board shall set down a hearing of said
grievance.
B.
Stay. Pending the determination of the grievance and/or appeal as set
forth in Subsections A and B, the City will continue service; provided,
however, this stay shall only be effective during the determination of a
grievance and appeal of a shut off pursuant to § 306-10 F through I if
the grievance was requested prior to the proposed shut off.
C.
Amendment. The Board reserves the right to amend or change these
rules and regulations from time to time without notice and without a
hearing thereon.
D.
Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate any of
the provisions of these rules shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed
to have committed a violation as prescribed in § 55.10 of the Penal
Law. Any action or proceeding in the name of the City of Hornell
may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or retrain by injunction the violation of any provision
of these rules. Such remedy shall be addition to any other penalties
prescribed by law.
E.
Waste of water. No customer shall willfully waste water either through
leakage due to imperfect service pipes or fixtures or in any other
manner.
A.
Use of water. No customer supplied with water by the City will be
allowed to supply water to any other customer or to sell water whether
through a separate meter or not. No multiple customer services shall be
permitted on the same property excepting if each customer is provided
with a separate meter.
B.
Curb box. No person shall cover, obstruct or otherwise disturb a curb
box so that it is not easily accessible to the Department, its personnel
or agents.
C.
Turning on of water. No person but the Superintendent or his designee
shall turn on or turn off the water to any premises.
D.
Obstruction of hydrants. No person shall place any obstruction that
would prevent free access to any fire hydrant.
E.
§ 306-11 UTILITIES § 306-12
290:545
Chapter 315
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 148.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 267.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 275.
Storage of vehicles and parts — See Ch. 296.
Cross-connections. No person shall install or permit to be installed any
cross-connection, whether permanent or temporary. Protection against
such cross-connections shall be as required by state law or regulation
and by any such regulations approved by the Board. In addition to
any other penalties, service to any customer violating this prohibition
may be discontinued by the City and not restored until the violation is
corrected.
F.
Unauthorized access. No person without permission of the
Superintendent shall enter upon the properties of the City used for
supply, treatment or storage of water or discharge into or otherwise
contaminate the water or deface or damage these facilities or the City
water system or its components parts.
G.
§ 306-12 HORNELL CODE § 306-12
290:546
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 315-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hornell,
New York."
§ 315-1.1. General purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the development
and redevelopment of land in the City of Hornell and to carry out locally
established goals and objectives in accordance with the city's
Comprehensive Plan and other development plans supported by the
Common Council. In sum, this chapter is designed to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the City of Hornell consistent with the
unique character of the city and its diverse neighborhoods.
§ 315-1.2. General procedures.
No building or land use shall be constructed, changed or altered without
compliance with this chapter. Application of this chapter is generally
initiated by an individual or organization seeking to develop or redevelop a
building or land use upon request with the City Code Enforcement Officer.
With receipt of that application, the Building Department advises the
applicant on any approvals necessary from the Code Enforcement Officer,
Common Council, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals. The Planning
Board or the Planning and Development Committee of the Common Council
may also require an advisory review prior to issuance of certain permits.
§ 315-2. Word usage and definitions.
Word usage.
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The word "person" includes a corporation as well an individual.
(4) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(5) The term "shall" is always mandatory.
The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building,
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
(6)
A.
Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words
herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A separate and complete dwelling unit
that is contained within or attached to the structure of a single-family
B.
§ 315-1 UTILITIES § 315-2
290:547
dwelling unit or is in an accessory building on the same lot as a
conforming single-family dwelling unit.
ACCESSORY SIGN — Any sign unrelated to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the
premises where such sign is located.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure within which a conforming
accessory use is conducted.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such
principal use or building.
ADJOINING — Where used in reference to land, lots, districts, uses,
buildings or other structures on the land, shall mean only those which
are contiguous and in contact at some point or line and shall not include
those separated by a street.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT —
ADULT BOOK AND/OR VIDEO STORE — An establishment having
as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs,
films, videos, slides or other visual representations, which are
characterized by the exposure or emphasis of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas or instruments, devices
or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities which are for sale, rental or viewing on
or off the premises.
(1)
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private
establishment which regularly presents topless and/or bottomless
dancers, strippers, waiters or waitresses, male or female
impersonators, lingerie models or exotic dancers, or other similar
entertainment or films, motion pictures, videos, slides or other
photographic material, or which utilizes employees that, as part
of their employment, regularly expose patrons to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(2)
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly
features live performances characterized by the exposure of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(3)
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Any motion-picture
theater where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of
the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(4)
§ 315-2 HORNELL CODE § 315-2
290:548
A-FRAME SIGN — A portable, top- or side-hinged advertising
device.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
ALLEY — A narrow service way providing a secondary public means of
access to abutting properties.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height,
or the moving from one location or position to another.
AMUSEMENT CENTER — A place where three or more coin- or tokenoperated
machines, devices or games are provided for public
amusement as the primary use; includes but is not limited to video
arcades, billiard or pool halls.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are given medical
or surgical treatment, including veterinary clinic and offices. Use as
a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall only be
incidental to such hospital use.
ANTENNA — Any system of poles, panels, rods, discs or similar devices
used for the transmission or reception of radio or electromagnetic
frequency signals, light, sound or other communication signals.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building arranged, intended or designed to
be occupied by three or more families with common external entrance
but living independently of each other.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed
place of business where massages are administered for pay,
including but not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths or steam
baths. This definition shall not be construed to include a hospital,
nursing home or medical clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon,
chiropractor, osteopath, duly licensed physical therapist or duly
licensed massage therapist or barbershop or beauty salon, athletic
club, health club, school, spa or similar establishment where
massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an
incidental accessory service.
(5)
ADULT MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
in a state of nudity or who displays specified anatomical areas
is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay
money or any form of consideration.
(6)
PEEP SHOW — A theater which presents materials distinguished
or characterized by primary emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
sexual anatomical areas, in the form of live shows, films or
videotapes, viewed from an individual enclosure, for which a fee is
charged.
(7)
§ 315-2 UTILITIES § 315-2
290:549
APPLICANT — The person, persons, partnership, corporation,
association or other entity named as applicant or petitioner in an
application for a building or other permit, zone change, variance,
finding of compatibility or other approval or authorization required
by these regulations. At the time of an application, an applicant must
own the real property identified in the application or hold an executed
written contract, option or other document giving the applicant the
right to purchase or otherwise secure ownership or long-term lease or
other control of the property prior to any use or construction.
ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENTS — The individual and collective parts
of a building that give it an architectural style, whether interior or
exterior, and whether renovation, addition or new construction. These
elements include but are not limited to doors, windows, trim, exterior
siding, porches, building materials, color, size, relative scale, bulk,
dimensions, number of stories, roofline, parking, signage and fences.
ARCHITECTURAL STYLE — The general impression given to a
building, whether interior or exterior, and whether renovation, addition
or new construction, based on the individual collection of architectural
elements.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane
at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps. All
dimensions shall be measured between the exterior faces of the walls.
AREA, NET SITE — The total area within the property lines, excluding
external streets.
AREA OF A SIGN — The surface devoted to the conveying of the
message exclusive of the structure to support it properly, trim and
framing device, unlettered fascia, and any appurtenances required in
construction. In the case of open sign structures not having a solid
surface or a sign not otherwise inscribed in a definitive area, the area
of the sign shall be taken as the area required circumscribing all
letters and devices exclusive of supports.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L.
No. 1-2005]
ART GALLERY — A place where paintings, sculptures or other works of
art are exhibited or sold.
AWNING SIGN — Any awning or overhang protruding from the front
and/or side and/or rear of a building made either of cloth, wood, plastic,
metal or other like substance, to which any insignia, logo, graphic,
diagram, design, Name or other information may be or is either
attached to or incorporated therein.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
BANK or FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A place where money is
deposited, kept, lent or exchanged.
BANNER SIGN — Any cloth, plastic, wood, metal, paper, glass or other
like substance which is suspended or hung in a nonpermanent manner
§ 315-2 HORNELL CODE § 315-2
290:550
either on the interior window or exterior surface of a building.[Added
8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
BAR or NIGHT CLUB — A business establishment licensed by the State
of New York to serve alcoholic beverages which serves such beverages
for consumption on the premises and may include the serving of food
and other beverages along with entertainment as accessory uses.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 of its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A "basement"
shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement if
the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the
adjoining ground is more than five feet or if it is used for business or
dwelling purposes.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A home occupation within a single-family
dwelling wherein rooms are rented and a single daily meal is served to
overnight guests for commercial purposes.
BILLBOARD — All structures of any size whatever and of whatever
material the same may be constructed, which are either independently
supported or placed on the ground or which are attached flat against
the exterior wall of any building or structure, or are placed upright on
the roof of any building or structure, or are placed upright on the roof
of any building and which are erected, maintained or used for the outof-
door display of printed or painted posters, signs, pictures or other
pictorial or reading matter. This definition shall not be held to include
reading matter. This definition shall not be held to include any structure
used to display official notices issued by any court or public officer, or
posted by any public officer in the performance of a public or official
duty, or any sign attached to or suspended from any building which
announces the name of the proprietor and general type of business, or
the firm name and general type of business of any store or business
establishment which is located within or conducting business from the
building whereon the sign is attached, or any real estate sign with an
area of not more than 50 square feet advertising for sale or for rent
the property upon which it stands or to which it is attached. Billboards
are not allowed in the City of Hornell.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
BUILDING — Any structure other than a boundary wall or fence.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A supplemental building, the use of which
is incidental to that of a main or principal building and located on the
same lot therewith.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building
nearest the front of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered
porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.
§ 315-2 UTILITIES § 315-2
290:551
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical height from the finished grade at
the front of the building. In the case of a flat roof, the highest point of
the roof surface or the parapet, whichever is greater. In the case of a
mansard roof, the deck roofline. In the case of a gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the mean heights between the eaves and ridge, exclusive of any
accessory roof construction such as a chimney, tower, steeple, antenna,
mechanical penthouse or elevator shaft.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BULK FUEL DEPOT — Buildings or structures used for the storage or
distribution of fuels and oils but not including retail sales.
BUS STATION — A place for the housing or parking of commercial
buses and the loading and unloading of passengers.
CAR WASH — A place where mechanical equipment is used to wash
motor vehicles.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of
its clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A
"cellar" shall not be considered in determining the permissible number
of stories.
CEMETERY — A place used for the interment of the dead.
CENTER LINE — The equal distance from the inside of the existing
sidewalks on both sides of the street; in areas where there are no
sidewalks, the center line of the travel way of the roadway.
CHURCH or PLACE OF WORSHIP — A place used for regular public
worship by members or representatives of a bona fide religious sect or
organization as recognized by state law.
CLUB — An organization catering exclusively to members and their
guests, including premises and buildings for recreational or athletic
purposes, which are not conducted primarily for gain, provided that
there are not conducted any vending stands, merchandising or
commercial activities except as required generally for the membership
and purposes of such club.
COMMERCIAL — Any use involving the sale or rental or distribution
of goods, services or commodities, either retail or wholesale, or the
provision of recreational facilities or activities for fee. The term shall
not include uses of the above nature which are separately defined in
this code.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — A place designed for the conduct of
sports, leisure-time activities and other customary recreational
activities, including playgrounds, bowling, swimming pools and skating
rinks; may include as accessory uses retail sales and repair of
equipment directly related to the activities provided on site as well as
food and beverage service for recreation users.
§ 315-2 HORNELL CODE § 315-2
290:552
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any nonpassenger motor vehicle which
displays any advertising.
COMMUNICATION INTERFERENCE — Any form of communication
reception hindrance caused by outside device operation such as (but
not limited to) ham and CB radios.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — Materials, written and/or graphic,
including but not limited to maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports
and other descriptive material, that identify the goals, objectives,
principles, guidelines, policies, standards, devices and instruments for
the immediate and long-range protection, enhancement, growth and
development of a municipality.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A place where retail sale of groceries and
other daily household necessities, including fuel for motor vehicles, is
made primarily to the surrounding area.
CORNER LOT — A lot that exists on two streets. For future construction
purposes, a corner lot shall provide for front yard depth on both streets.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the
building area.
CULTURAL FACILITIES — Any place designed or used primarily for the
presentation to the general public of live theater, dance performances,
musical concerts, cinema, lectures, exhibits or various art forms or
exhibits of cultural, academic or scientific material specifically not
including adult entertainment as defined elsewhere in this code.
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade of the curb in front of
the midpoint of the lot.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A use where professional child day-care services
are offered for seven or more children, depending on age, for more
than three hours a day but less than 24 hours a day, that is operated
as a principal or accessory use by an individual, organization or agency
licensed by the New York State Department of Social Services or
through other applicable state regulations.
DAY-CARE HOME — A dwelling unit use licensed by the New York
State Department of Social Services or through other applicable state
regulations wherein child day-care services are provided for up to 10
children of all ages, including not more than four children under two
years of age or up to 12 children where all such children are over two
years of age. Such day-care homes shall include family day-care homes
and group-family day-care homes.
DECORATIVE POLE SIGN — Any sign attached or suspended from a
decorative or wrought iron yardarm attached to a single pole.[Added
8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
DRIVE-IN — A principal or accessory business use that includes a
service, window, booth or other arrangement on the exterior of a
structure designed primarily for drive-through or carry-out service.
§ 315-2 UTILITIES § 315-2
290:553
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as the living
quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING SIGN — A nameplate to convey an address and/or resident
of the dwelling.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling or a portion thereof providing complete
living facilities for one family.
EDUCATIONAL — A place of instruction, including public and private
schools, colleges and universities offering courses authorized by
applicable state regulations; may include playgrounds and accessory
use residences for staff or students.
ERECT — To build, construct, alter, repair, display, relocate, attach,
hand-place, suspend, affix or maintain any sign, and shall also include
the painting of exterior wall signs.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
FAMILY — A single individual occupying a dwelling unit, or two or
more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a common
household.
FASCIA SIGN — Any sign placed flush against the building.[Added
8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
FENCE — Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected or maintained to enclose or screen
areas of land or to divide a piece of land into distinct portions.
FILLING STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used or designed to be used for the supply of gasoline or oil or
other fuel for the propulsion of motor vehicles, and which may include
facilities used or designed to be used for the polishing, greasing,
washing, spraying, dry cleaning or otherwise cleaning or servicing of
such motor vehicles.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of the building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached manufactured or stickbuilt
building containing one dwelling unit only.
(1)
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families independently of each other.
(2)
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling or group of dwellings on
one plot containing separate living units for three or more families
but which may have joint services or facilities or both.
(3)
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or a portion thereof
containing three or more dwelling units.
(4)
DWELLING, GROUP — A group of two or more one-family, twofamily
or multiple dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and
having any yard in common.
(5)
§ 315-2 HORNELL CODE § 315-2
290:554
of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two
buildings. In particular, the floor area of a building or building shall
include:
FREESTANDING GROUND — Any sign suspended between two posts
and not attached to a building or structure.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L.
No. 1-2005]
FREESTANDING POLE SIGN — Any sign attached to a single pole and
not attached to a building or structure. [Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
FUNERAL HOME — A place designed for the purpose of furnishing
funeral supplies and services to the public, including facilities intended
for the preparation of the dead human body for interment or cremation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed space for the storage of one or
more motor vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service
is conducted for profit therein nor space therein for more than one car
is leased to a nonresident of the premises.
GOVERNMENT USE — Any place used by a public agency or public
authority for a bona fide governmental function.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of the street
as officially determined by the city.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and
roads brought to grades as shown on official plan or design relating
thereto.
GREENHOUSE — A place for growing flowers, plants, shrubs, trees and
similar vegetation, including retail and wholesale sales.
HEIGHT — The height of a structure from the mean average of grade
within a particular block and not to include filled grade areas.
(1) Basement space.
(2) Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
Floor space for mechanical equipment, with structural headroom of
seven feet six inches or more.
(3)
(4) Penthouses.
Attic space (whether or not a floor has actually been laid) providing
structural headroom of seven feet six inches or more.
(5)
(6) Interior balconies and mezzanines.
(7) Enclosed porches.
Accessory uses, not including space for accessory off-street
parking.
(8)
§ 315-2 UTILITIES § 315-2
290:555
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation for gain or support conducted
entirely within a dwelling unit by members of the family residing in
such dwelling unit, provided that:
HOSPITAL — Any institution or place established for the maintenance,
observation, medical and dental care and supervision and skilled
nursing care of persons afflicted with or suffering from sickness,
disease or injury or for the convalescent or chronically ill persons.
Unless otherwise specified, includes sanitariums, sanatoriums,
preventoriums, clinics, rest homes, nursing homes and convalescent
homes.
HOTEL — A building containing rooms intended or designed to be used
or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are
occupied for sleeping purchases by guests and where only a general
kitchen and dining room are provided within the building or in an
accessory building; includes motels, inns and auto courts.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A nonilluminated sign which may be
attached to an exterior wall of a building adjacent to public entrances.
Such sign shall be limited in text to the name of the resident firm
or corporation and shall not exceed two square foot in area.[Added
8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas, or
other artificial light, including reflective or phosphorescent light. Neon
gas signs intended for either interior of exterior use shall be installed
by a certified neon installer with the exclusion of self-contained neon
signs (i.e., bar, open) which have a surface area less than two square
foot.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
INDUSTRIAL — The use of land or buildings for the manufacturing,
processing, fabricating or assembly of raw materials or goods,
warehousing or bulk storage of goods and related accessory uses. This
term does not include uses of the above nature which are separately
defined in this code.
There is no external display or advertising other than a sign
erected in accordance with the applicable sign regulations.
(1)
(2) There is no external storage of goods or materials.
Such home occupation is secondary to the main residential use and
does not change the residential character of the dwelling unit nor
create or become a nuisance, in particular with regard to noise,
traffic, parking, odor, smoke, vibration, dust, heat or glare.
(3)
Not more than 25% of the total floor area is used for the home
occupation use.
(4)
There are no persons employed except in the case of a dentist,
physician, chiropractor, veterinarian or other licensed professional,
in which case the staff shall be limited to one employee.
(5)
§ 315-2 HORNELL CODE § 315-2
290:556
KENNEL — A structure used for the keeping, breeding, boarding or
training of more than three dogs or other domestic animals that are
more than six months old.
LAUNDROMAT — A place where coin-operated laundry machines are
made available to the public for the purpose of cleaning; may include a
repair or service shop as an accessory use.
LINE, STREET — The dividing line between the street and the lot.
LOT — A piece, parcel, tract or plot of land in one ownership, which
may include one or more lots of record occupied or to be occupied
by one principal building and accessory buildings or utilized by one
principal building and accessory building or utilized for one principal
use or uses accessory thereto, and including such open spaces as
required by this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A single-family dwelling unit according to
the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
(24 CFR 3280) HUD Code; may include a modular home, which is
a single-family dwelling, which consists of two or more sections
transported to a site or a series of panels or room sections transported
on a truck and erected or joined together on site. Modular homes may
or may not have an integrated chassis.
MEDICAL CLINIC — A place where medical care is provided to persons
on an outpatient basis only, without overnight accommodations, by one
or more members of the medical profession, dentists, chiropractors,
osteopaths, therapists or other licensed professionals.
MOBILE HOME — A single-family dwelling that is wholly, or a
substantial part is, fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for
installation or assembly at the building site, designed to be a permanent
residence, and built prior to the enactment of the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act on June
15, 1976.
MOBILE HOME COURT — A parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of two or more single-wide mobile homes.
This use is only permitted at the site known as the "Big Elms Trailer
Park" on tax parcel 151,10-01-041.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES — A place authorized by applicable state
regulations where new or used motor vehicles, including recreational
vehicles, are displayed and maintained for commercial sale.
NAMEPLATE — Any one-sided sign not to exceed two square feet on
the face of a building.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
NONCONFORMING USES — A building, structure or use of land,
existing at the time of enactment of this chapter, which does not
conform to the regulations of the district, or zone, in which it is
situated.
§ 315-2 UTILITIES § 315-2
290:557
NURSING HOME — A place where a corporation or charitable
institution supplies for hire lodging with or without meals and, in
addition provides nursing, medical or similar care and treatment, if
required, and includes a rest home, convalescent home, living-care
facility or similar establishments authorized by state regulations.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot
with a building.
PARKING GARAGE — Any garage, other than a private garage,
available to the public, operated for gain and which is used for the
storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or
equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of
one motor vehicle, with dimensions not less than nine feet and 18
feet exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and
giving access thereto, and having direct access to a street or alley.
PERMANENT WINDOW SIGN — Any sign which is painted or fixed to
the front windows of any business or establishment.[Added 8-22-2005
by L.L. No. 1-2005]
PLAZA MARKER — Either a freestanding ground or freestanding pole
sign declaring the organizations and/or businesses contained within the
plaza or development.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign at least four square feet in size
used to advertise a person or event relating to political activity.[Added
8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
POLITICAL POSTER — A one- or two-sided sign not to exceed four
square feet used to advertise a person or event relating to political
activity made of cloth, plastic, wood, or other like substance which
is suspended or supported in a nonpermanent manner for window,
exterior building surface or lawn use.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
PROFESSIONAL NAMEPLATE — Any nameplate to convey a person
of profession and/or the profession.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — A place where one or more skilled,
trained or licensed professionals offer advice, assistance or training to
the public and where a retail store may only be accessory.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign which projects from the exterior of
any building commencing at the second story of such building and
extending in an upward and outward fashion.[Added 8-22-2005 by
L.L. No. 1-2005]
REPAIR AND SERVICE SHOP — A place for servicing, repairing,
cleaning, installing or leasing equipment and goods, including but not
limited to radio, television, household, tool or appliance service and
§ 315-2 HORNELL CODE § 315-2
290:558
repair, computer service and repair, locksmiths, shoe repair, tailoring
and dry cleaners, and including retail sales as an accessory use.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A place used for scientific research,
investigation, testing or experimentation but not for manufacturing or
sale of products except as an accessory use to the laboratory.
RESTAURANT — A place where food and beverages are prepared and
sold to the public for consumption at tables or counters either inside
or outside of a building. Take-out service or drive-in service may be
provided.
RETAIL STORE — A place where goods, wares, merchandise,
substances, articles or things are offered or kept for sale directly to the
public.
SEASONAL — A time period not to exceed 180 days.[Added 8-22-2005
by L.L. No. 1-2005]
SERVICE STATION — A place used for the servicing and repairing of
motor vehicles and for the sale of fuel, oils and accessories for motor
vehicles.
SIGN — Any display of lettering, numbering, logos, designs, colors,
lights or illumination visible to the public from outside of a building or
from a public right-of-way, which either conveys a message to the public
or intends to advertise, direct, invite, announce or draw attention to,
directly or indirectly, a use conducted or events, goods, products,
services or facilities available.
SIGN PACKAGE — A specific grouping of permitted signage for a
specified site or area.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
SITE PLAN — A rendering, drawing or sketch prepared to
specifications and containing necessary elements, as set forth in this
code, which shows the arrangement, layout and design of the proposed
use of a single parcel of land.
SPECIAL USE — A use which is permitted within the applicable zoning
district subject to the requirements of site plan approval and any other
conditions designed to ensure that the use will not adversely affect the
neighborhood within which it is proposed.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; and
(1)
Human male genital in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal: or
§ 315-2 UTILITIES § 315-2
290:559
STORAGE GARAGE — A building used for the indoor storage or
maintenance of equipment, including motor vehicles.
STORAGE YARD — A space used for the storage or maintenance of
equipment, goods or supplies.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — A public or private way which affords the principal means of
access to abutting properties, including the sidewalks.
STREET LINE — In the absence of a legally established street line by
means of a certified, filed, licensed surveyor's map, the inside of the
existing sidewalk.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
location on the ground.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure, including accessory
buildings such as equipment sheds, on which transmitting and/or
receiving antenna(s) are located. Such antennas are a system of
electrical conductors that transmit or receive radio frequency waves.
Such waves shall include but not be limited to radio navigation, radio,
television, wireless and microwave communications. The frequency of
these waves generally range from 10 hertz to 300,000 megahertz.
TEMPORARY — A time period not to exceed 30 days. A temporary sign
may be renewed for an additional thirty-day period at the discretion of
the City.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
THEATER — A place used for the commercial showing of films or
presentation of live entertainment, specifically not including adult
entertainment as defined in this code.
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are
provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such
units in which each has its own front and rear access to the outside, no
unit is placed over another, and each unit is separated from another by
one or more vertical, common, fire-resistant walls.
TRAILER — A vehicle that is intended to be transported over the streets
and highways and is designed to transport goods or material. A trailer
has no means of self-propulsion.
TRAVEL TRAILER CAMP — A tract of land where two or more travel
trailers are parked or which is used or held out for the purpose of
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or breasts.
(3)
§ 315-2 HORNELL CODE § 315-2
290:560
§ 315-3. Application of regulations.
Except as hereinafter provided:
supplying to the public a parking space for two or more trailers. At the
effective date of this code there is no land designated for this use.
TRUCKING TERMINAL — A place for the storage or transfer of goods,
wares or merchandise by truck transport.
USE — The specific purpose for which land, a structure or a building
is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied
or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be
deemed to include any nonconforming use.
VALUE OF SIGN — The cost of the sign when it was originally
constructed.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
YARD — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with a
building or structure.
YARD SALE — A nonmerchant sale in any district operated by the
resident of the property.[Added 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building
or part thereof shall be erected, moved or structurally altered unless in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which
it is located.
A.
No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height,
to occupy a greater percentage of lot area or to have narrower or
smaller rear yards, front yards and side yards than are specified herein
for the district in which such building is located.
B.
No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purposes of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for
another building.
C.
Principal uses. New principal uses listed in any zoning district shall
require approval from Code Enforcement Officer as well as site plan
approval from the Planning and Development Committee of the
Common Council as defined in the Code. Anyone may seek an advisory
review from the Planning and Development Committee of the Common
Council or from the Planning Board prior to approval.
D.
Prohibited uses. Uses that are not listed as either principal, special
or accessory uses in a specific zoning district are prohibited in that
district.
E.
§ 315-2 UTILITIES § 315-3
290:561

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts and Map
§ 315-4. Establishment of districts.
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community, the City of Hornell is hereby divided into the
following types of districts:
§ 315-5. Zoning Map.
Said districts are bounded and defined as shown on a map entitled "Zoning
Map, City of Hornell, New York," which, with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter.117
A. Residence districts as follows: R-1, R-2 and R-3.
B. Business districts as follows: B-1 and B-2.
C. Industrial districts as follows: I-1 and 1-2.
117. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the city offices.
§ 315-4 UTILITIES § 315-5
290:563

ARTICLE III
Residential District Regulations
§ 315-6. Designation of residential districts; permitted uses.
Residential areas shall be designated as R-1, R-2 and R-3.
§ 315-7. Number and location of buildings permitted on lot.
There will not be more than one one-family or one two-family dwelling
permitted on a zoning lot. There may be more than one multifamily building
on a zoning lot. In addition, there may be one or more accessory buildings
on the same zoning lot with a main building if such accessory buildings
are constructed subsequent to the main building in accordance with the
regulations for such buildings set forth in this chapter. No one-family or twofamily
dwelling shall be located to the rear of any building on the same lot or
on another lot that does not have the required frontage on a street. A group
of multifamily buildings may be arranged in groups and not all directly front
on a street.
R-1 District uses shall be as follows:
Principal buildings and uses: one-family dwelling; private garden;
and government use. All one-family dwellings in any district must
meet the standards in § 315-14.
(1)
Accessory buildings and uses: recreational uses and private pools;
fences and walls; and parking areas for automobiles accessory to
one-family dwellings, and home occupations.
(2)
A.
R-2 District uses shall be as follows:
Principal buildings and uses: same as permitted in the R-1 District;
bed-and-breakfast; church; cultural facilities; library; day-care
home or center; and education use.
(1)
Accessory buildings and uses: the same as permitted in R-1
Districts; the renting of rooms; signs consistent with other sections
of this code; and storage garages.
(2)
B.
R-3 District uses shall be as follows:
Principal building and uses: the same as permitted in R-2 Districts;
two-family dwellings; multifamily dwellings, including townhouse
and apartment; hospital; and parking garage or lot.
(1)
Accessory building and uses: the same as permitted in R-2
Districts; storage garages; and parking areas for automobiles
accessory to multifamily dwellings.
(2)
C.
§ 315-6 UTILITIES § 315-8
290:565
§ 315-8. Accessory garages and parking facilities.
Private storage garages and open off-street parking areas shall be permitted
on a zoning lot in a residential district if accessory to the permitted
dwellings on the zoning lot, in accordance with the standards and
regulations for such uses set forth in this chapter. Commercial vehicles may
not be stored or parked in the front yard. Vehicles requiring a Class B or C
license from New York State may not be regularly stored or parked unless
visually screened from all public streets and from adjoining residential
buildings.
§ 315-9. Renting of rooms.
The renting from a resident family of not more than one room to not more
than one person shall be permitted in any residential district.
§ 315-10. Removal of soil.
Soil, sand or gravel shall not be stripped or removed in any residential
district except excess soil, sand or gravel resulting from excavations or
grading operations in connection with the contraction or alteration of a
building for which a permit has been issued.
§ 315-11. Protection of drainagecourses.
No building or structure shall be erected, altered or moved within any
area herein described as a drainagecourse. For the purpose of this chapter,
a "drainagecourse" shall include any area such as a ditch, drainageway,
channel, stream or creek and any area designed or intended for drainage
purposes as shown on a recorded subdivision. No filling of land or
excavation of land shall be permitted within a drainagecourse or on any
lands within 100 feet of the center line of such drainagecourse except upon
issuance of a certification by the City Engineer that such filling will not
obstruct the flow of water or otherwise reduce the water-carrying capacity
or impair the design and character of such drainagecourse.
§ 315-12. Temporary buildings and enclosures.
Temporary structures may be permitted in any residential district if such
structures are deemed necessary for construction operations of the
dwellings of the area for which a building permit has been issued, provided
that:
Such temporary structures shall be limited to offices, yards and
buildings for the storage of lumber, equipment and other building
material or workshops for prefabricating building components.
A.
The operations and activities carried on within such structures shall not
adversely affect the use of nearby dwellings by reason of noise, smoke,
dust, odor, fumes, vibration, communication interference, electrical
B.
§ 315-8 HORNELL CODE § 315-12
290:566
§ 315-13. Area, yard and height regulations.
Land and buildings in residential districts shall be used and buildings
shall be erected, altered and moved only in accordance with the following
schedule and regulations.118
disturbance or glare to a greater extent than normal in a residential
district that is being developed.
All such temporary structures shall be removed within 30 days after the
completion of work on the premises for which a permit has been issued
or if construction is not persued diligently.
C.
Lot area. The area of a zoning lot shall be not less than the area in
square feet required for each dwelling unit as set forth in Schedule IX,
multiplied by the number of dwelling units in the building.
A.
Lot width. The width of a zoning lot shall be not less than the width
required for the type of dwelling in the district in which the lot is
located as set forth in Schedule I119 and shall be measured at the
building line. Each one-family and two-family zoning lot shall abut upon
a street for the required lot width, except on curved streets where the
width at the front lot line may be less, provided that the lot width at the
building line meets the required lot width of the particular district.
B.
Front yards. The front yard depth or setback of a zoning lot shall be not
less than the depth set forth in Schedule I120 for the type of dwelling or
other building permitted in the district in which it is located. Where a
building line has not been established and where 50% or more of the
aggregate street frontage between two successive streets is occupied
by buildings of the type and uses permitted in the district before the
effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto, the minimum
front yard depth for new buildings shall be the average depth of front
yards of existing buildings located within 100 feet on either side of a
given lot; provided, however, that the depth of the front yard resulting
therefrom shall be not less than 1/2 the dimension specified in Schedule
I.
C.
Side yards. Two yards shall be provided for every one-family dwelling
on a zoning lot. Widths of side yards shall be not less than the
respective dimensions set forth in Schedule I.121 In no case will the
distance between one-family dwellings be less than 20 feet in any R-1
Residential District or 12 feet between detached one-family and/or two-
D.
118. Editor's Note: See Schedule I, Residential Districts Table of Area, Yard and Height
Regulations, at the end of this chapter.
119. Editor's Note: See Schedule I, Residential Districts Table of Area, Yard and Height
Regulations, at the end of this chapter.
120. Editor's Note: See Schedule I, Residential Districts Table of Area, Yard and Height
Regulations, at the end of this chapter.
121. Editor's Note: See Schedule I, Residential Districts Table of Area, Yard and Height
Regulations, at the end of this chapter.
§ 315-12 UTILITIES § 315-13
290:567
family dwellings in any R-2 Residential District. Where a side yard is
narrower than required for the district in which the building and lot
are located and was owned separately from all other tracts of land on
the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto and is still
so owned, the building may be maintained or altered but shall not be
enlarged in width unless both side yards comply with the regulations
for such yards set forth in this chapter.
Rear yards. The rear depth of a zoning lot for main buildings shall be
not less than the depth set forth in Schedule I122 for the district in which
it is located or not less than 25% of the depth of the lot, whichever is
greater.
E.
Corner lots. The front yard depth of a corner lot shall be not less than
the required front yard depth from the front lot line, and the width of
the side yard on the side street shall be not less than the depth of the
front yard required for the adjoining lot which abuts said side streets
unless shown otherwise on the Zoning Map.
F.
Required lot area to be maintained. A parcel of land may be subdivided
into two or more parcels, provided that all lots resulting from such
division conform to all lot area and width regulations of the district
in which they are located. A lot of record which conformed to the
provisions of this chapter and which was owned separately from
adjoining lots on the effective date of this chapter or any amendments
thereto shall not be reduced in any manner which would make it
nonconforming.
G.
Lots of record of insufficient area. A lot of record which does not comply
with the lot area or width regulations of the district in which it is
located on the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto
which made it nonconforming may be used as follows:
If occupied by a building, such building may be maintained,
repaired or altered; provided, however, that the building may not
be enlarged in floor area unless the regulations for front, side and
rear yards set forth in this chapter are complied with.
(1)
If vacant, the lot may be used, provided that no adjoining vacant
lot or parcel of land was owned by the same owner on the effective
date of this chapter or any amendments thereto, other vacant
land cannot be equitably acquired adjoining the lot and all other
regulations of this chapter, except the lot area and width
regulation, shall be complied with.
(2)
H.
Required yards to be maintained. The required yards surrounding an
existing building shall not be separated in ownership from that portion
of the lot upon which the building is located, and no part shall be
considered as providing a required yard for any other existing building
I.
122. Editor's Note: See Schedule I, Residential Districts Table of Area, Yard and Height
Regulations, at the end of this chapter.
§ 315-13 HORNELL CODE § 315-13
290:568
§ 315-14. Additional standards for one-family dwellings and
multifamily dwellings.
on the same or on an adjacent lot. A yard shall not be reduced to
less than the required dimensions and shall not be further reduced in
any manner. Every required yard shall be open and unobstructed from
the ground upward except for the following provisions for accessory
buildings and projections into yards:
Any accessory use permitted in a residential district may occupy
a part of the main building, occupy a separate accessory building
or constitute an accessory land use. Any accessory building, other
than private garages and fences, shall maintain a minimum six-foot
setback from all lot lines. An accessory building shall be set back
from the side street line not less than required for the adjacent
principal building of the abutting lot.
(1)
A projection is that part or feature of a building that extends or
projects outside of the enclosing walls. It is intended that certain
building features may project into required yards, but they shall be
regulated so as not to substantially interfere with the reception of
sun, light, air and the use of adjacent lots, as follows:
A belt course, balcony, cornice, gutter or chimney may project
into a front and side yard for a distance of six feet, provided
that no part is less than three feet from any side lot line.
(a)
An open platform, landing, steps, terrace or other feature not
extending above the first-floor level of a building may extend
six feet into a front yard and three feet into a side yard.
(b)
An entrance hood or an open but roofed porch may project
six feet into a front yard and three feet into a side yard. An
enclosed entry or porch shall not project into any required yard
area.
(c)
(2)
One-family dwellings. All new one-family dwellings in any district must
meet the following:
(1) Must have at least a 5/12 roof pitch.
Must be set on a permanent foundation. Full basements shall be of
blocks or poured walls, slab shall be with three full blocks exposed,
and all crawlspaces must be enclosed with a structural design
compatible to the dwelling.
(2)
Electrical hookups must be attached to the house with proper
utility company approval.
(3)
The main entrance shall face the street common with the
neighborhood character.
(4)
A.
§ 315-13 UTILITIES § 315-14
290:569
Any single-story dwelling must have a minimum front width of 25
feet.
(5)
(6) Any two-story dwelling must have a minimum front width of 20 feet.
The net area of living space must be a minimum of 1,000 square
feet.
(7)
Multifamily dwellings. In order to encourage greater flexibility in
design and more attractive arrangement of buildings and greater
utilization of open spaces, yard regulations for multifamily dwellings
are hereby established for single developments and yard regulations
for locating several buildings within a group development. The yard
of multifamily buildings shall be related to the space between the
buildings as well as the yards. Buildings shall be arranged so as to
assure privacy between adjacent buildings and intersecting wings of
buildings from street and off-street parking and recreation areas in
accordance with the following regulations:
Definitions. The terms used in this section are defined as follows:
END OR SECONDARY WALL — Any exterior wall of a multifamily
building other than a main wall and containing secondary windows
required for ventilation and not intended to provide a direct view.
GROUP DEVELOPMENT — A development of more than one
multifamily building on a parcel planned as a unit and coordinated
with the surrounding neighborhood.
MAIN WALL — Any exterior wall of a multifamily building
containing the principal windows of a living, dining and/or sleeping
room or rooms.
OVERLAPPING WALLS — That portion of the exterior walls which
is directly opposing when two buildings, parallel or within 30° of
being parallel, face each other across an open yard or court.
SINGLE DEVELOPMENT — A development of one multifamily
building on one lot coordinated with the surrounding neighborhood
and fronting on a street.
(1)
Front yards. The front yard depth or setback for multifamily
buildings in single developments or group developments shall be
not less than 20 feet, measured from the street line, unless shown
otherwise on the Zoning Map
(2)
Distance between facing and overlapping building. In a group
development of multifamily buildings, this distance shall vary in
direct relation to the length and height of buildings. Such minimum
distance shall be determined by the formula:
(3)
B.
§ 315-14 HORNELL CODE § 315-14
290:570
Minimum
distance
= LA + LB + HA + HB
F
The elements of this formula are shown on Figure 1 of this
chapter123 and are defined as follows:
MINIMUM DISTANCE — The required minimum horizontal
distance between any wall of building A and the nearest wall of
building B or the vertical prolongation of either.
(a)
LA — The total length of building A, which, for the purpose of
the formula, is defined as the maximum length of the portion
or portions of any wall or walls of building A from which lines
drawn perpendicular to the face of such wall or walls will
intersect any wall of building B.
(b)
LB — The total length of building B, which, for the purposes of
the formula, is defined as the maximum length of the portion
or portions of any wall or walls of building B from which lines
drawn perpendicular to the face of such wall or walls will
intersect any wall of building A.
(c)
(d) HA — The height of building A.
(e) HB — The height of building B.
F — A divisor of four; provided, however, that the minimum
distance between any main wall of any other building shall not
be less than 20 feet.
(f)
Distance in angular arrangements.
Minimum distances are determined by the formula:
2LB + HA + HB + K
F
(a)
The elements of this formula are defined in Subsection B(3)
above and Figure 1 of this chapter.124 "K" in the formula varies
as the sine of 2n, where "n" is the angle from building B to
building A or extensions thereof.
(b)
(4)
123. Editor's Note: Figure 1, Illustrations of Yard Regulations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
124. Editor's Note: Figure 1, Illustrations of Yard Regulations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 315-14 UTILITIES § 315-14
290:571
Value of "n"
(degrees)
Value of "K"
(feet)
30 to 34 10
35 to 39 20
40 to 50 25
51 to 55 20
56 to 60 10
Distances between walls of court arrangement. Minimum distances
shall be determined by applying the formulas defined in Subsection
B(3) and (4) above and Figure 1 of this chapter125 to each set of
facing walls. In arrangements of parallel walls with offset sections,
the distance between the corresponding parallel walls shall be
determined by said formulas.
(5)
Distance between nonoverlapping walls. Where the walls of two
buildings do not directly face each other or do not overlap so that
lines drawn perpendicular from the face of any wall of any one
building will not intersect the face of any wall of another building,
the minimum horizontal distance between such buildings shall be
not less than 1/2 of the combined height of the two buildings.
Such minimum distance shall be determined by the formula:
HA + HB
2
(a)
The elements of this formula are defined in Subsection B(3)
above and Figure 1 of this chapter.126
(b)
(6)
Distance between building and boundary lines. This distance
between a single development or group development and any side
or rear lot line of the parcel of a development area shall vary
in direct relation to the length and height of the building. Such
minimum distance shall be as determined by the formula:
2(LL) +HA
4
The elements of this formula are shown on Figure 1 of this
chapter127 and defined as follows:
(7)
125. Editor's Note: Figure 1, Illustrations of Yard Regulations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
126. Editor's Note: Figure 1, Illustrations of Yard Regulations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
127. Editor's Note: Figure 1, Illustrations of Yard Regulations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 315-14 HORNELL CODE § 315-14
290:572
MINIMUM DISTANCE — The minimum required horizontal
distance between any wall of a building and the nearest side or
rear lot line or boundaries of the parcel or development area.
(a)
LL — The maximum length of the side or rear lot which can
be intersected by lines drawn perpendicular from the face or
faces of any wall or walls of the building.
(b)
HA — The height of building A. Where any multifamily
development abuts an R-1 and R-2 Residential District, the
minimum distance between any side or rear lot line and any
main building shall be not less than the height of the main
building.
(c)
Townhouse dimensions. A single townhouse dwelling unit shall be
not less than 12 feet in width, and any main or longitudinal wall
of a sequence of townhouse dwelling units shall not exceed 80 feet
in length without a ninety-degree offset of at least 10 feet; and the
aggregate length of any such wall, including its offsets, shall not
exceed 170 feet in length.
(8)
Use and design of yards. Required yards shall be landscaped and
may be used for pedestrian walks and passive recreation areas,
driveways or playgrounds. The distances between buildings shall
be increased by the dimensions of such intermediary facilities.
(9)
§ 315-14 UTILITIES § 315-14
290:573

ARTICLE IV
Business District Regulations
§ 315-15. Purpose.
Business districts and their regulations are established herein in order to
achieve, among others, the following purposes:
§ 315-16. Exception to applicability.
The ten-foot front yard building restriction shall not apply in the business
area on the arterial route (Maple City Drive), Broadway and Main Street on
both sides of the street from Center Street to West Street.
§ 315-17. Designation of business districts; permitted uses.
To provide, in appropriate and convenient locations, zoning districts
of sufficient size for the exchange of goods and services and other
business activities.
A.
To provide B-1 Local Business Districts that do not attract a large
volume of traffic to serve the needs for convenience goods and services
in the immediate neighborhood.
B.
To provide B-2 General Business Districts which do require larger
land areas, which may be open in evenings and which generate large
volumes of traffic serving the needs for both shopping and convenience
goods and services of the entire community and region.
C.
To protect adjacent residential neighborhoods by regulating the types
and spacing of business uses, particularly at common boundaries,
which would create hazards, noise, odors and the other objectionable
influences.
D.
To promote the most desirable land use and traffic patterns in
accordance with the goals and the objectives of this chapter.
E.
B-1 Local Business District. Building and land in B-1 Local Business
Districts shall be used and buildings shall be created, altered and
moved only for the uses set forth as permitted in the following
regulations:
Principal buildings and uses. Principal buildings and uses shall be
as follows:
Residential uses permitted and as regulated in the nearest
adjacent residential district to the lot or parcel under
consideration, amusement center, art gallery, bank/financial
institution, bed-and-breakfast, car wash, church, medical
clinic, commercial uses including commercial recreation,
cultural facilities, drive-in uses, funeral homes, service station,
convenience store, government use, hotel, motel, inn, motor
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 315-15 UTILITIES § 315-17
290:575
court, library, day-care home or center, nursing home, office,
parking garage or lot, education, professional service, repair
shop, restaurant, retail store and laundromat.
If allowed, residential and professional service uses are
preferably located above the first story of any multistory
building and may be located in the first story of a multistory
building only upon demonstration that no site or building
within the district has suitable and available space for such
use.
(b)
Permitted accessory uses.
Any accessory use, such as sales in open yards and the storage
of goods or processing operations, which is clearly incidental
to conducting a retail business, office or service establishment
which is a permitted main use in a B-1 Local Business District
shall be permitted, provided that such use has no injurious
effect on adjoining zoning lots.
(a)
Off-street parking and loading facilities and signs shall be
provided in accordance with the off-street parking and loading
and sign regulation of this chapter.
(b)
Signs and fences consistent with the supplemental regulations
of this code.
(c)
(2)
B-2 General Business District. Buildings and land in B-2 General
Business Districts shall be erected, altered and moved only for the uses
set forth as permitted in the following regulations:
Principal main buildings and uses. Principal uses shall be as
follows: buildings and uses permitted as regulated in any B-1 Local
Business District, animal hospital, bar/nightclub not including adult
entertainment, bus station, club, greenhouses, motor vehicle sales,
storage garage, theater, warehousing and wholesale centers.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Any accessory use, such as sales in open yards and the storage
of goods or processing operations, which is clearly incidental
to conducting a retail business, office or service establishment
which is a permitted main use in a B-2 General Business
District shall be permitted, provided that such accessory use
has no injurious effect on the adjoining zoning lots.
(a)
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the off-street parking and loading regulations
of this chapter.
(b)
Signs and fences consistent with the supplemental regulations
of this code.
(c)
(2)
B.
§ 315-17 HORNELL CODE § 315-18
290:576
§ 315-18. Area yard and height regulations.
Buildings and land in business districts shall be used, and buildings shall be
erected, altered and moved only in accordance with the following schedule
and regulations.128
Front yards. The front yard depth or setback for buildings and uses
shall not be less than as set forth in Schedule II of this chapter.129
Whenever off-street parking areas are proposed in front yards, a front
yard depth greater than as showing in Schedule II may be required. If
off-street parking or sales in open yards are located in front yards, a
concrete curb or precast barrier shall be erected along the off-street
parking or sales area no closer than five feet to the public right-of-way.
The area between said curb or barrier and the right-of-way line shall
be landscaped and maintained attractively. If permitted under a special
permit as provided for in this chapter, gasoline pumps may be erected
in front of the established building line, but not less than 10 feet from
any public right-of-way line.
A.
Side yards. Whenever a business building is located adjacent to another
business building having one or more party walls and a common roof
with one or more similar buildings but individually owned, there shall
either be no side yards provided or the buildings shall be separated not
less than six feet from the nearest business building.
B.
Screening and landscaping. Wherever a building is located on a zoning
lot which adjoins a residential district, side and rear yards not less
than as set forth in Schedule II of this chapter130 shall be provided
and maintained. A wall or fence located not less than five feet from
the business district boundary line may be required to shield adjacent
residential areas from parking lot illumination, headlights, fumes, heat,
blowing papers and dust and to reduce the visual encroachment of
business buildings, uses, signs and activity. The area between said wall
or fence and the zoning lot line shall be treated with plantings to form
a permanent landscaped area.
C.
Land coverage. The land area occupied by main and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 40% of the total area of a zoning lot in any
business district; provided, however, that in a B-2 General Business
District, such percentage of land coverage may be increased if the
Board finds that the required number of accessory off-street parking
spaces set forth in the parking regulations of this chapter are available
on an adjacent parcel within a walking distance of 200 feet of the
zoning lot being developed. Whenever required accessory off-street
parking facilities are proposed to be located on a parcel other than
D.
128. Editor's Note: See Schedule II, Business Districts Yard Requirements, at the end of this
chapter.
129. Editor's Note: See Schedule II, Business Districts Yard Requirements, at the end of this
chapter.
130. Editor's Note: See Schedule II, Business Districts Yard Requirements, at the end of this
chapter.
§ 315-18 UTILITIES § 315-18
290:577
§ 315-19. Off-street parking and loading.
Off-street parking and loading facilities in any business district shall be
provided in accordance with the off-street parking and loading regulations
set forth in this chapter, as follows:
the zoning lot being developed, the Board shall require a copy of the
agreements covering such an arrangement.
Height regulations. The height of any main or accessory building in a
B-1 Local Business District shall not exceed 35 feet. The height of any
main or accessory building in a B-2 General Business District shall not
exceed 50 feet.
E.
Off-street parking. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, surfaced
off-street automobile parking spaces shall be provided on the same
zoning lot on which any of the following uses are established. Such
parking spaces shall be with vehicular access to a street. For the
purposes of computing off-street parking area required, a ratio of 162
square feet per parking space shall be used. The number of parking
spaces required may be altered by the Common Council on a case-bycase
basis if evidence from a qualified professional demonstrates an
adequate alternative for parking provision. The number of off-street
parking spaces required shall be as follows:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Automobile or machinery sales
and service garages, repair shops
1 for each 600 square feet of floor
area
Banks, financial institutions,
professional services, and offices/
other business uses not mentioned
1 for each 400 square feet of floor
area
Bowling alleys 7 for each alley
Churches and educational uses 1 for each 5 seats in an
auditorium or 1 for each 12
classroom seats, whichever is
greater
Commercial recreation,
auditoriums, theaters and
assembly halls other than
education
1 for each 100 square feet of floor
area used or 1 for each 4 seats,
whichever is greater
Dwellings 2 for each family or dwelling unit
Funeral homes and mortuaries 4 for each parlor or each 50
square feet of floor area
Hospitals 1 for every 3 employees, plus 1 for
every bed
A.
§ 315-18 HORNELL CODE § 315-19
290:578
Use Parking Spaces Required
Hotels, motels, inn, motor courts
and lodging houses
1 for each bedroom, plus
additional spaces for accessory
uses and assembly or meeting
space consistent with off-street
parking requirements for similar
principal uses
Industrial uses and research
laboratories
1 for every employee during
largest shift, plus 1 per every
company vehicle left on premises
Libraries, museums, galleries and
cultural uses
1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Medical or dental clinics 1 for each 200 square feet of floor
area
Motels or motor hotels 1 for each living or sleeping unit
Restaurants, bars and nightclubs 1 for each 200 square feet of floor
area or 1 for every 4 seats of
occupancy
Retail store, laundromat 1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Sanitariums, convalescent homes
and children's homes
1 for each 2 beds
Wholesale establishments and
warehouses
1 for each 3 employees on the
maximum shift or for each 3,000
square feet of floor area,
whichever is greater
Dimensions for off-street parking. Every parking space provided shall
be at least nine feet wide and 18 feet long, and every space shall have
direct and usable driveway access to a street or alley with minimum
maneuver area between spaces as follows:
Parallel parking: five feet end to end with twelve-foot aisle width
for one-directional flow and twenty-four-foot aisle width for twodirectional
flow.
(1)
Thirty-degree parking: thirteen-foot aisle width for one-directional
flow and twenty-four-foot aisle width for two-directional flow.
(2)
Forty-five-degree parking: sixteen-foot aisle width for onedirectional
flow and twenty-four-foot aisle width for two-directional
flow.
(3)
Sixty-degree parking: twenty-one-foot aisle width for onedirectional
flow and twenty-four-foot aisle width for two-directional
flow.
(4)
B.
§ 315-19 UTILITIES § 315-19
290:579
Perpendicular parking: twenty-four-foot aisle width for onedirectional
or two-directional flow.
(5)
Development and maintenance of parking areas. Every parcel of land
hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including
commercial parking lots, shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
Screening and landscaping. Off-street parking area for more than
five vehicles shall be effectively screened on each side which
adjoins premises situated in a residential district be a masonry
wall or solid fence of acceptable design. The wall or fence shall be
between four and six feet in height and shall be maintained in good
condition. Landscaping provided in lieu of such wall or fence shall
consist of a strip of land less than five feet in width planted with an
evergreen hedge or a dense planting of evergreen shrubs not less
than four feet in height.
(1)
Surfacing. Any off-street parking area for more than five vehicles
shall be graded for proper drainage and surfaced with a durable
hard surface, such concrete or asphaltic concrete.
(2)
C.
Off-street loading. In any district, in connection with every building
or part thereof erected and having a gross floor area of 5,000 square
feet or more which is to be occupied by manufacturing or storage, or
a warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store or market,
hotel, hospital, mortuary or laundry dry-cleaning or other use similarly
requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or
merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same
zoning lot as the main building at least one off-street loading space, plus
one additional such loading space for each 10,000 square feet or major
fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of 10,000 square
feet. Each loading space shall comply to the following requirements:
Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width and 25
feet in length.
(1)
Subject to the limitations of this chapter, a loading space may be
located in a required side or rear yard. However, no loading space
shall be located in any part of any front yard.
(2)
No loading space shall be closer than 30 feet to any residential
district, unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or
enclosed on all sides by a solid wall or fence between four and six
feet in height.
(3)
D.
§ 315-19 HORNELL CODE § 315-19
290:580
ARTICLE V
Industrial District Regulations
§ 315-20. Purpose.
Industrial districts and their regulations are established herein to achieve,
among others, the following purposes:
§ 315-21. Designation of Industrial Districts; permitted uses.
Industrial districts shall be designated as I-1 and I-2.
To provide, in appropriate and convenient locations, zoning districts
of sufficient size for carrying on research, for providing commercial
services, for manufacturing and for distributing goods to promote
employment and strengthen the economy.
A.
To provide I-1 Light Industrial Districts in appropriate and convenient
areas for office uses, laboratories, limited production, distribution
operations and general services.
B.
To provide I-2 Heavy Industrial District for those products and
processes which normally require a large amount of motor vehicle
trucking for the transportation of raw materials and finished products
but in which dust, smoke, fumes, glare, odors or other objectionable
influences can be controlled.
C.
To improve the general environment by prohibiting dwellings,
institutions and public facilities in industrial districts and, by so doing,
making land more readily accessible for industry.
D.
To protect adjacent residential districts by restricting the types of
industrial uses in the surrounding areas to only those not creating
objectionable influences beyond their district boundaries and by
separating and insulating them from the most intense industrial
activities.
E.
To protect industrial and related development against congestion
insofar as is possible and appropriate in each area by limiting the bulk
of buildings in relation to the land and by providing off-street parking
and loading facilities.
F.
To promote the most desirable land use and traffic patterns in
accordance with the goals and objectives of this chapter.
G.
I-1 Light Industrial District. Buildings and land in I-1 Light Industrial
Districts shall be used and buildings shall be erected, altered and
moved only for the uses set forth as permitted in the following
regulations and which meet all performances standards set forth in this
Code.
Principal buildings and uses. Principal uses shall be as follows:
industrial use, hospital, animal hospital, bar/nightclub, bus station,
(1)
A.
§ 315-20 UTILITIES § 315-21
290:581
§ 315-22. Area, yard and height regulations.
Land and buildings in industrial districts shall be used and buildings shall
be erected, altered and moved only in accordance with the following
schedule and regulations.131
car wash, service station, government use, greenhouses, kennel,
office, repair shop, research laboratory, storage garage or yard,
trucking terminal, adult entertainment and tattooing, both of which
shall be subject to the supplemental requirements of this Code,
warehousing and warehouse centers. [Amended 4-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 3-2013]
Permitted accessory uses.
Any accessory use, such as the storage of materials and
products and processes, which is clearly incidental to the
permitted main use in an I-1 Light Industrial District shall
be permitted, provided that such use has no injurious effect
on adjoining zoning lots and off-street parking and loading
facilities are provided in accordance with the off-street parking
and loading regulations of this chapter.
(a)
Signs and fences consistent with the supplemental regulations
of this code.
(b)
(2)
I-2 Heavy Industrial District. Building and land in I-2 Heavy Industrial
Districts shall be used and buildings shall be erected, altered and
moved only for the uses set forth as permitted in the following
regulations and which meet all performances standards set forth in this
code.
Principal buildings and uses. Principal buildings and uses shall be
as follows: industrial uses, bulk fuel depot, government use, repair
shop, research laboratory, storage yard, towers, trucking terminal
and adult entertainment.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Any accessory use, such as the storage of materials and
products and processes, which is clearly incidental to the
permitted main use in an I-2 Heavy Industrial District shall
be permitted, provided that such use has no injurious effect
on adjoining zoning lots and off-street parking and loading
facilities are provided in accordance with the off-street parking
of this chapter.
(a)
Signs and fences consistent with the supplemental regulations
of this Code.
(b)
(2)
B.
131. Editor's Note: See Schedule III, Industrial Districts Yard Regulations, at the end of this
chapter.
§ 315-21 HORNELL CODE § 315-22
290:582
§ 315-23. Parking and loading.
Off-street parking and loading facilities in any industrial district shall be
provided in accordance with the off-street parking and loading regulations
for business uses set forth in this chapter, except that all industrial uses
shall provide at least one off-street parking space per employee during
the largest shift as well as one off-street parking space for every company
vehicle normally left on the premises.
Front yards. The front yard depth for buildings and uses shall not be
less than as set forth in Schedule III of this chapter.132 Whenever offstreet
parking areas are proposed in front yards, a front yard depth
greater than as shown in Schedule III may be required. If off-street
parking is located in a front yard, a concrete curb or precast barrier
shall be erected along the off-street parking area no closer than five
feet to the public right-of-way line, and it shall be landscaped and
maintained attractively. No storage of material or equipment shall be
permitted in front yards.
A.
Screening and landscaping. Whenever a building is located on a zoning
lot which adjoins a residential district, side and rear yards not less than
as set forth in Schedule III of this chapter133 shall be provided and
maintained and a wall or fence not less than five feet from the industrial
district boundary line may be required to shield adjacent residential
areas from parking lot illumination, headlight, fumes, heat, light and
dust and to reduce the visual encroachment of industrial buildings,
uses, signs and activity. The area between said wall or fence and the
zoning lot line shall be treated with plantings to form a permanent
landscaping area.
B.
Land coverage. The land area occupied by main and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 40% of the total area of a zoning lot in an I-1
Light Industrial District and 50% of the total area of a zoning lot in an
I-2 Heavy Industrial District.
C.
Height regulations. Main and accessory buildings in any industrial
district may be erected to a height not exceeding the width of the
side or rear yard adjoining any residential district, but in no case to
a height exceeding 50 feet. Chimneys, spires, cupolas, domes, towers,
flagpoles, water tanks, radio or television antennas, monuments and
other mechanical appurtenances located upon or constituting an
integral part of a main building shall not exceed a height of 100 feet
above the finished grade.
D.
132. Editor's Note: See Schedule III, Industrial Districts Yard Regulations, at the end of this
chapter.
133. Editor's Note: See Schedule III, Industrial Districts Yard Regulations, at the end of this
chapter.
§ 315-22 UTILITIES § 315-24
290:583
§ 315-24. Performance standards.
Any use established in any industrial district after the effective date of
this chapter or any amendment thereto shall comply with the following
performance standards as a precedent to occupancy and use. Any use
already established in such districts shall not be altered, added to or
otherwise modified so as to conflict with or further conflict with the
performance standards as a precedence to further occupancy and use.
Statements may be required by the Board from the owner that such uses
comply or will comply with the performance standards. In cases of doubt,
the city may select and arrange for an independent study by a professional
engineer qualified in the particular field in question, and the costs for such
study shall be paid by the owner.
Enclosure. All permitted main and accessory uses and operations,
except off-street parking and loading, shall be performed wholly within
the limits of the zoning lot not required for front, side or rear yards. All
raw materials, finished products, mobile and other equipment shall be
stored within the same limits.
A.
Fire and explosive hazards. The storage, handling and use of flammable
or explosive materials shall be permitted only in structures having
noncombustible exterior walls, and all operations in connection
therewith shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices
against hazards of fire and explosion, as well as with adequate firefighting
and suppression equipment and devices standard to the
operation involved.
B.
Dust and smoke. The emission of smoke, soot, fly ash, fumes, dust and
other types of air pollution borne by the wind shall be controlled so that
the rate of emission and quantity deposited in any other district shall
not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or
welfare.
C.
Odorous matter. The emission of odorous matter in such quantities as
to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond the zoning lot occupied
by the use shall not be permitted.
D.
Toxic or noxious matter. The emission of toxic, noxious or corrosive
fumes or gases which would be demonstrably injurious to property,
vegetation, animals or human health at or beyond the zoning lot
occupied by the use shall not be permitted.
E.
Noise. The sound-pressure level of any operation on a lot, other than
the operation of auto-calls, bells, motor vehicles, sirens or whistles,
shall not exceed the average intensity of the street traffic noise at the
nearest residential district, and no sound shall be objectionable due to
intermittence, beat, frequency or shrillness.
F.
Vibration. Vibrations which would be perceptible without the aid of
instruments shall not be permitted beyond the zoning lot occupied by
the use.
G.
§ 315-24 HORNELL CODE § 315-24
290:584
Radioactive or electrical disturbances. Radioactive or electrical
disturbances which would adversely affect any form of life or
equipment at or beyond the zoning lot occupied by the use shall not be
created.
H.
Waste materials. Liquid wastes shall not be discharged into an open
drainagecourse, stream or other open body of water or a sewer unless
treated or controlled so that the amount of solid substances, oils,
grease, acids, alkalines and other chemicals shall not exceed the
amount permitted by other codes of this state, county or city.
I.
§ 315-24 UTILITIES § 315-24
290:585

ARTICLE VI
Supplemental Regulations
§ 315-25. Neighborhood Overlay District.
Introduction. The Neighborhood Overlay District is defined as shown
on a map entitled "Zoning Map, City of Hornell, New York" which, with
all explanatory matter, has been made a part of this code. An overlay
district is a zoning district that overlaps one or more underlying zoning
districts within which additional or supplemental requirements exist.
A.
Purpose. The City of Hornell recognizes that the Neighborhood Overlay
District includes properties, which together contribute to the historic
and attractive character of particular neighborhoods in the city and
to the overall health, safety and welfare of the community. Efforts
to protect and enhance these properties can foster civic pride, can
maintain the attractiveness of neighborhoods and can help ensure
harmonious and orderly growth and development.
B.
Building Inspector review.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of
any new principal use, or for the conversion of an existing use to
a new principal use, or prior to issuance of any site plan permit,
as well as prior to the demolition of any principal use structure
proposed as a part of any of the aforementioned activities, the
Building Inspector, with the advice of the Planning Board, shall
determine if the proposed activity is compatible within the
Neighborhood Overlay District. This review shall be based on the
following principles:
The general design and character of the proposal in harmony
with neighboring properties in the district.
(a)
The scale of the proposal in relation to the site and
neighborhood properties.
(b)
The similarity of building materials in their color and texture
to those found in the district.
(c)
Visual compatibility of the proposal to surrounding properties,
including height, setbacks, roof shape, window and door
arrangements, and building orientation to the street.
(d)
(1)
Upon this review the Building Inspector, with the advice of the
Planning Board, may deny such demolition or may place reasonable
conditions on the issuance of applicable site plan approval or
building permits.
(2)
C.
Appeals. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be made by any
person aggrieved by the compatibility review defined in the previous
D.
§ 315-25 UTILITIES § 315-25
290:587
§ 315-26. Fences.
section. That Board shall follow the established procedures and criteria
for appeals established in this code.
Permitted accessory use. Fences shall be allowed as a permitted
accessory use in all districts subject to the requirements of this section.
A.
General provisions. No fence, wall or similar structure shall be erected
or modified unless a building permit for such construction is issued.
Any fence or similar structure, including shrubs or plantings, which in
the opinion of the Building Inspector unduly cuts off light or air, may
provide an obstruction to the provision of fire protection or emergency
services or may provide other dangerous conditions is prohibited.
Fences constructed as part of an approved site plan for nonresidential
uses or for temporary security during construction may vary from the
other standards of this section subject to a building permit.
B.
Prohibited fences. The following fences and fence materials are
considered a potential nuisance and are specifically prohibited:
Barbed wire, except with approval of the Planning and
Development Committee of the Common Council in situations
where safety is an issue. Barbed wire should be above a six-foot
grade.
(1)
(2) Razor wire.
(3) Poultry or chicken wire.
(4) Temporary fences, including snow fences.
(5) Electrically charged fences.
(6) Chain-link fences with open top loops.
(7) Construction security fences erected for more than one year.
C.
Maximum height. Any fence or similar structure must not exceed six
feet in height, except at the front yard where four feet is the maximum
height. For the purposes of this section, corner lots at the intersection
of two streets shall be considered to have two front yards, one at each
street.
D.
Location and setback. All fences and similar structures must be erected
within the property line and shall not encroach on any neighboring
property or public right-of-way or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
E.
Fences on corner lots. Fences on corner lots may not obstruct views
from intersecting rights-of-way.
F.
Other requirements. The finished side of a fence must face out toward
the road or neighboring property; all entrances and gates must open
G.
§ 315-25 HORNELL CODE § 315-26
290:588
§ 315-27. Signs. [Amended 8-22-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
in. Any fence located along the front yard or along a public right-of-way
shall have:
The supporting or least decorative side of any fence furthest away
from such yard or right-of-way if fencing supports or posts are more
prominent on one side of the fence than another or one side of the
fence is more decorative than another.
(1)
At least one opening or gate at least three feet wide for any totally
enclosed area.
(2)
This section is adopted to regulate the use of signs in order to promote
signs which are:
(1) Harmonious in character with other similar displays.
(2) Orderly, readable and safe.
(3) Nondistracting to motorists.
A.
The City likewise recognizes that signage has a substantial effect on
the historical character, appearance, use and value of buildings. It is,
therefore, the intent of this section to promote and protect property
values, create a more attractive business climate, enhance the physical
appearance of the area, encourage the most appropriate use of the land
and structures and provide a more enjoyable and pleasing appearance
to our community.
B.
Signs may be erected and maintained in the City of Hornell only when
in compliance with the following:
Intent. The City of Hornell finds that signs are a necessary means
of communication that can benefit and detract from the city's
community and neighborhood character and should conform with
the following provisions.
(1)
Exceptions. The following types of signs are allowable without
any city approval, except that any such sign shall not exceed the
maximum dimensional, height or area requirements of this section
relevant to the applicable zoning district.
Temporary on-premises signs. Any property owner is permitted
to erect a single, temporary, nonilluminated sign on said
property advertising the sale or lease of merchandise or a
special event. Such sign shall be removed within three days
after the sale, lease, or event.
(a)
Location, street address and public safety signs. Any property
owner is permitted to erect one non-illuminated sign
identifying the property name or residents of the property and
the official street address. Other signs offering information
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 315-26 UTILITIES § 315-27
290:589
necessary of public safety including by example, customary
posted or no-trespassing signs, private drive, parking or exit/
entrance signs along with other signs required pursuant to any
governmental function, law or regulation, are also exempt.
Other. When not associated with a commercial activity, all
historical or memorial markers as well as flags, insignia or
emblems of any government or religious organization and any
religious holiday decorations are also exempt.
(c)
Landmark signs. Any older sign of artistic or historic merit or
of uniqueness to the city, each of which must be recognized by
the Common Council or the City Historian, is entirely exempt
from this section, including all dimensional, height and area
requirements.
(d)
Nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign lawfully existing
at the effective date of this section may continue, with the
exception of signs exceeding three times the allowable sign
area. All signs must conform to this section within seven years
of the effective date of this section.
(e)
Professional nameplates that shall not exceed two square feet
in area on either of two sides.
(f)
Dwelling signs denoting the name and address of the
occupants of the premises, which signs shall not exceed two
square feet on either of two sides.
(g)
Signs denoting the architect, engineer, or contractor placed
on the premise where construction, repair, or renovation is in
progress, which signs shall not exceed six square feet on either
of two sides. This sign must be removed from the premises
within seven days after such construction, repair, or renovation
is completed.
(h)
Signs advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the premises
upon which the sign is located, which shall not exceed six
square feet in area, provided such sign is erected or displayed
not less than five feet inside the property line. This sign must
be removed from the premises within seven days after the
property is sold or leased. Not more than one sign shall be
permitted for each street contiguous to the said premises but
in no case shall there be more than two signs on the premises.
(i)
Signs or banners customarily used to advertise garage sale,
lawn sale, porch sale, barn sale, household sale or sales of
similar nature are permitted provided that such signs shall not
exceed four square feet in area on either of two sides, and shall
advertise only the nature of the sale and the premises where
such sale is located: provided, no more than four signs shall be
allowed for each such sale conducted on the premises. Signs
(j)
§ 315-27 HORNELL CODE § 315-27
290:590
are to be removed within 48 hours of the completion of any
such sale. Signs are not permitted to be placed upon utility
poles and any such placed signs shall be immediately removed.
Political signs. Political signs cannot be posted prior to 90 days
before the corresponding election, and all political signs must
be removed within two weeks after the relevant election.
(k)
Measurement of sign area. Sign measurement shall be based upon
the entire area of the sign, with a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the sign surface. For a sign painted
on or applied to a building, the area shall be considered to include
the smallest rectangle or other shape which encompasses all
lettering, numbering, designs, logos or lights together with any
background of a different color from the finished material of the
building. The area of supporting framework such as brackets or
posts shall not be included in the area of the sign, but will be
included in the size of the total structure. When a sign has two or
more faces or is composed of multiple signs each with a face, the
sum of the areas of all the faces shall be included in determining
the area, except where two faces are placed back to back and are
at no point more than two feet from each other. In this latter case,
the sign area shall be taken as the area of either face, and if the
faces are unequal, the larger shall determine the area.
(3)
Measurement of height. The height of any sign shall be measured
from the highest point of the structure to the surface of the ground
prior to construction of the sign or to the surface of the nearest
public road, whichever is lower.
(4)
Off-premises signs. Signs displaying information on uses, events,
goods, products, services or facilities offered at locations other
than on the tax lot where the sign is located are prohibited, with
the exception of general directory or directional signs which may
be approved subject to a special use permit. General directory or
directional signs shall be no larger in area than 24 square feet
and shall include only the name(s) of the establishment and basic
directional information in lettering no higher than five inches.
(5)
Home occupation signs. One non-illuminated sign per home
occupation no larger in area than two square feet indicating the
name, address, phone number or principal number or principal
purpose of the home occupation is permitted. Such sign should be
affixed flat to the building.
(6)
For-sale and for-rent signs. No more than two nonilluminated signs
advertising the sale or rental of a property may be erected and
maintained on said property by the owner or broker or any person
with legal interest in the sale or rental of such property, provided
that:
(7)
§ 315-27 UTILITIES § 315-27
290:591
The size of any such sign shall be no more than six square feet;
and
(a)
Up to two additional, non-illuminated signs may be erected or
maintained if said property abuts more than one public rightof-
way.
(b)
General provisions for all signs. All signs shall conform with the
following performance standards.
Construction and maintenance. Any sign must be constructed
of durable materials, maintained in good condition and not
allowed to become dilapidated.
(a)
Obstruction of public right-of-way. Signs attached to a
structure shall not project more than three feet from the
structure. No sign shall extend over a public right-of-way or
public sidewalk, and no sign shall obstruct views from any
public right-of-way to any other public right-of-way.
(b)
Illumination. Sign illumination shall only be with steady,
stationary, shielded light sources directed onto the sign
without causing glare onto adjoining properties or onto any
public right-of-way. Flashing signs or signs with moving lights
such as scroll signs are prohibited. No sign shall be illuminated
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. unless the
premises are open for general business during such hours.
(c)
Building permits shall be required for all signs except those
described in Subsection C(2) of this section. Any building
permit shall conform to the requirements of this section.
(d)
Removal of signs upon vacation of premises. Every person
maintaining a sign shall upon removal from the premises
where the sign is maintained forthwith remove such sign.
(e)
All sign colors should be kept limited within the character and
standards of the area it is placed within.
(f)
Signs shall not project beyond the building line more than
12 inches over the sidewalk when erected full or against said
building. When hung at right angles to a building, or on top of
a building parallel with the roof thereof, signs shall not extend
into or over any street or sidewalk more than six feet from the
building line to which the same is attached, or in any event,
more than 24 inches from the inside of the curb, except that
on an authorized marquee, the illustrated sign may extend the
entire length.
(g)
No sign or supports or hangings shall be erected so as to cover
doors or windows of any building, nor otherwise to prevent
free ingress and egress to or from any window, door or fire
(h)
(8)
§ 315-27 HORNELL CODE § 315-27
290:592
escape of any building, nor shall any sign be attached to any
part of a fire escape or upon or to any stand pipe, and when
a sign is hung near a fire escape it shall be arranged so as
to swing away from such fire escape. No sign shall be erected
in such position as to completely blanket another sign already
placed on either side.
All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced and
shall be kept in perfect structural condition and clean and well
painted at all times. Every sign, its framework, braces, anchors
and other supports, shall be constructed of such material and
in such workmanlike manner as shall make them safe and be
satisfactory to the Department of Public Safety.
(i)
All wiring, fittings and materials used in the construction,
connection and operation of electric signs must be in
accordance with the requirements of the current National
Electrical Code (NEC) and must pass an inspection conducted
by an electrical inspector recognized by the City upon
installation.
(j)
Sign provisions for residential districts.
(1) Off-premise signs are prohibited.
(2) All signs should be aligned parallel with the street and sidewalk.
All permitted nonresidential uses that are not home occupations
may construct, relocate, alter or repair a sign to meet the following
standards:
If a sign is building mounted or building hung, it must meet the
standards required in § 315-27F regarding home occupation
signs with the exception of size. A residential business that
is not a home occupation may have a building-mounted or
building-hung sign not to exceed six square feet.
(a)
If a sign is freestanding, it may not exceed 16 square feet
in size. The total sign structure including borders,
ornamentation, and supports should not exceed five feet in
height, and may not exceed six feet in width.
(b)
Freestanding signs may not be illuminated in any way, with the
exception of exterior lighting from the top of the sign.
(c)
Marquee signs, sandwich boards, canopy signs, window signs,
roof-mounted signs, scrolling signs, awning signs, or any other
signs other than the types mentioned above are not permitted.
(d)
(3)
D.
Sign provisions for business and industrial districts.
(1) Size and placement.
E.
§ 315-27 UTILITIES § 315-27
290:593
All signs in B-1, B-2, I-1 or I-2 Districts must meet the following
standards:
No signage shall exceed 5% of any given side, and no
building may have total signage that exceeds 10% of the
total building frontage for all sides. This provision includes
all types of signs, not just building-mounted.
[1]
The lower edge of a sign, except a sign attached flat
against a building, shall not be less than 10 feet above the
sidewalk or ground level in front of the building to which
such sign is attached.
[2]
At no time shall any sign cover or block any window or
door that is required as either an exit or for purpose of
light and/or ventilation.
[3]
Identification signs may be attached to an exterior wall of
a building adjacent to public entrances. Such signs shall
be non-illuminated and are limited in text to the name
of the resident firm or corporation, each such firm or
corporation being allowed one such sign. Each sign shall
not exceed two square feet in area.
[4]
Awning signs shall be permitted provided that the awning
structure, if preexisting, meets the New York State
Building code criteria for safety and that any insignia,
logo, graphic, diagram, design, name or information of
any type falls within the total maximum allowable square
footage for fascia signage as allowed by this chapter. For
new awnings where no such structure was preexisting a
building permit shall be required for the awning structure
and such structure will adhere to all New York State
Building Codes in effect at the time; this is in addition
to the required sign permit. Any insignia, logo, diagram,
design, name or information of any type placed upon or
incorporated into the awning shall be subtracted from and/
or counted toward the total square footage allowed for
fascia signage.
[5]
Directional signs are permitted provided that the
individual signs do not exceed two square feet in area. Text
is limited to "Office," "Entrance," "Exit," and "Parking."
All such signs shall be provided with indirect illumination
only.
[6]
Permanent window signage is permitted provided that the
individual signs do not extend closer than 12 inches to
the sides, the top, and 12 inches from the bottom of the
window. All window signage shall be subtracted from the
allowable square footage for fascia signage unless part of
a specified sign package.
[7]
(a)
§ 315-27 HORNELL CODE § 315-27
290:594
Banner signs shall be permitted provided that the signs
are attached either to the inside of the window area or
flush to the exterior of the building. All banner signs shall
be subtracted from the allowable square footage for fascia
signage unless part of a specified sign package.
[8]
One A-frame sign shall be permitted provided that said
sign shall not exceed a maximum of 48 inches in height
and a maximum of 30 inches in width. Text is limited to
identification of business, designation of business hours,
special sales, daily items of interest and notices of
information. The A-frame sign shall be positioned so as to
minimize impedance of pedestrian travel, be placed upon
the sidewalk only during the hours of business operation,
be maintained in good order and be aesthetically
appealing. Peel-and-stick lettering or other forms of
lettering, which can be easily vandalized, are not
permitted. The entire message must be contained within
the main structure of the sign.
[9]
Temporary advertising banners placed across streets are
allowed pending approvals from the NYSDOT, the City of
Hornell Public Safety Board and the Code Enforcement
Officer. All such banner applications shall also have
attached written permission from the property owner
whose building such banners are to be suspended from.
[10]
Number.
Fascia signage, which may include permanent window signage,
one fascia sign attached to the exterior wall of the building,
and awning signage in a combined amount up to but not to
exceed 100 square feet is permitted for the front or face of the
building.
(a)
One fascia sign is permitted on the rear and/or side exterior
wall of a building, provided that such side faces a street or
public way and that the square footage for any such signs does
not exceed 65 square feet.
(b)
Two directional or identification signs are permitted per
establishment, provided the maximum square footage of two
square feet per sign is not exceeded.
(c)
Banner signs, not included in a sign package, are permitted
provided that such signs do not exceed the total allowable
fascia square footage of 100 square feet.
(d)
One projecting sign not to exceed a total of 60 square feet,
attached to a building, and which advertises only the name of
the business, trade name, or trademark, or activity conducted
on the premises where the sign is located.
(e)
(2)
§ 315-27 UTILITIES § 315-27
290:595
Text on permitted signs. The text on each sign is subject to approval
by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and is limited to:
Name or assumed name of the owner and or business located
on the property on which it is located.
(a)
(b) Principal business or businesses conducted on the property.
(c) Brief indication of product or services available.
(3)
Illumination. Only indirect lighting shall be used to illuminate a
permitted sign. No flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights
shall constitute a part of or be used to illuminate a permitted sign.
No light shall be placed in such a manner that it is a hazard to
the traveling public, or shall cause any objectionable glare, either
direct or reflected.
(4)
Sign setbacks.
All freestanding signs must be placed at least 10 feet from
the street right-of-way or as required by the New York State
Department of Transportation.
(a)
No freestanding sign, either ground or pole, shall be erected
or maintained nearer the building facade than three feet, or
nearer the sidewalk surface than eight feet, and must be
placed so as not to obstruct pedestrian passage on the
sidewalk, or impair the line of sight of vehicular traffic. Such
signs may not exceed 60 square feet in area on either of two
sides.
(b)
(5)
Administration and enforcement of article. The Code Enforcement
Office shall be charged with enforcement of this article and with its
administration under the direction of the Board of Public Safety. The
Board of Public Safety is authorized in the name of the city to enjoin
impending or existing violations of this article, and is likewise
empowered to resort to legal process to enforce mandatory compliance
with its provisions.
F.
Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter,
locate, reconstruct or maintain, or cause to be erected, altered,
relocated, reconstructed or maintained within the corporate limits of
the city, any sign or signs without having first obtained a permit
therefor from the Code Enforcement Officer and without complying
with the provisions of this article.
G.
Permit application.
Contents. Any person desiring to procure a permit provided for in
this article shall file with the Code Enforcement Office a written
application upon blank forms prepared and furnished by the city.
The written consent of the owner and or lessee of the property
upon which such sign or signs is/are to be erected and maintained
(1)
H.
§ 315-27 HORNELL CODE § 315-27
290:596
§ 315-28. Adult entertainment uses. [Amended 4-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 3-2013]
shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Office with such
application. Such application shall contain an accurate description
of the location or proposed location and character of each sign it is
desired to erect, alter, relocate, reconstruct or maintain, the name
and address of the applicant, and of the person by whom such sign
is to be erected, altered, relocated, reconstructed or maintained,
and such other information as the city may require to locate the
sign and to show a compliance with the provisions of this article.
Plan design. The city may, in the case of non-illuminated signs, and
shall in the case of an illuminated sign, require that the application
be accompanied by a plan or design of the sign or proposed sign,
showing its weight, dimensions, electrical or gas equipment, details
of its attachments and hangings and its position relative to the
building and such other information as the Board of Public Safety
may require. All signs requiring the use of electricity shall be
inspected by an electrical inspector recognized by the City.
(2)
Issuance of sign permits.
Construction permit; fee. The sign permit will be issued at such
time the Code Enforcement Officer finds the proposed sign
specifications are in compliance with this chapter of the City of
Hornell. Fees will be assessed according to the city fee schedule134
and will be collected prior to issuance of sign permit.
(1)
Inspection. The Code Enforcement Officer will issue a certificate of
compliance after final inspection of installed sign is determined to
be in compliance.
(2)
I.
Revocation of permit; notice thereof. The Code Enforcement Officer
may at any time for a violation of this article revoke any construction
or final permit. Notice of such revocation and the reason or reasons
herefore shall be served by the city upon the order of the Department of
Public Safety upon the person named in the application by mailing the
same to the address given in the application and by filing a copy thereof
immediately in the office of the City Clerk.
J.
Findings and legislative intent.
It is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their
very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics
under certain circumstances, which produce a deleterious effect
upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary
to ensure that adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or
downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. The City of Hornell
(1)
A.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 142, Fees.
§ 315-27 UTILITIES § 315-28
290:597
finds it in the public interest to enact these regulations. The
purpose of these regulations is to prevent or lessen the secondary
effects of adult entertainment uses, and not to inhibit freedom of
speech.
The unrestrained proliferation and inappropriate location of such
businesses is inconsistent with existing development and future
plans for the city in that they often result in influences on the
community, which increase the crime rate and undermine the
economic and social welfare of the community. The deleterious
effects of these businesses change the economic and social
character of the existing community and adversely affect existing
businesses and community and family life.
(2)
As defined in Article II of this chapter, adult entertainment uses shall
be permitted only in Industrial Zoning Districts subject to the following
restrictions:
Adult entertainment uses are prohibited within:
Five hundred feet of any zoning district that is zoned to allow
residential use.
(a)
Five hundred feet of any single-family, two-family, or multiplefamily
dwelling, including structures devoted to both
residential and commercial or business purposes.
(b)
(c) Five hundred feet of any public or private school.
Five hundred feet of any church or other religious facility or
institution.
(d)
Five hundred feet of any public park, public bike path,
playground or playing field, cemetery or civic or recreational
facility.
(e)
(1)
No adult entertainment use shall be allowed within 500 feet of
another existing adult entertainment use.
(2)
No more than one adult entertainment use shall be located on any
lot.
(3)
The distances provided hereinabove shall be measured by following
a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the
nearest point of the property parcel upon which the adult
entertainment use is to be located to the nearest point of the parcel
of property or the land use district boundary line from which the
adult entertainment use is to be separated.
(4)
B.
Other restrictions.
No adult entertainment use shall be conducted in any manner
that allows the observation of any material depicting, describing
(1)
C.
§ 315-28 HORNELL CODE § 315-28
290:598
§ 315-29. Telecommunications towers.
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas from any public way or from any property not containing an
adult entertainment use. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show, window or other opening.
There shall be no outdoor sign, display or advertising of any kind
other than one identification sign limited to only the name of the
establishment.
(2)
Adult entertainment uses shall obtain site plan approval in
accordance with this code.
(3)
Adult entertainment uses shall meet all other regulations of the
city, including but not limited to district lot and bulk regulations,
parking regulations and signage.
(4)
It shall be unlawful to operate an adult entertainment use between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.
(5)
Purpose and intent.
The purpose of these supplemental regulations is to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the town,
to provide standards for the safe provision of telecommunications
consistent with applicable federal and state regulations, and to
protect the natural features and aesthetic character of the city.
(1)
These regulations are not intended to prohibit or have the effect
of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, nor shall
they be used to unreasonably discriminate among providers of
functionally equivalent services consistent with current federal
regulations.
(2)
A.
Application of special use regulations.
No transmission tower shall hereafter be used, erected, moved,
reconstructed, changed or altered except after approval of site
plan approval and in conformity with these regulations. No existing
structure shall be modified to serve as a transmission tower unless
in conformity with these regulations.
(1)
(2) These regulations shall apply to all property within the city.
Exceptions to these regulations are limited to:
(a) New uses which are accessory to residential uses.
Lawful or approved uses existing prior to the effective date of
these regulations.
(b)
(3)
B.
§ 315-28 UTILITIES § 315-29
290:599
Where these regulations conflict with other laws and regulations
of the city, the more restrictive shall apply, except for tower height
restrictions, which are governed by these special use standards.
(4)
Standards.
Site plan. An applicant shall be required to submit a site plan as
described in the administration section of this code. The site plan
shall show all existing and proposed structures and improvements,
including roads, and shall include grading plans for new facilities
and roads. The site plan shall also include documentation on the
proposed intent and capacity of use as well as a justification for the
height of any tower or antennas and justification for any land or
vegetation clearing required.
(1)
Additionally, the city shall require that the site plan include a
completed visual environmental assessment form (visual EAF) and
a landscaping plan addressing other standards listed within this
section with particular attention to visibility from key viewpoints
within and outside of the municipality as identified in the visual
EAF. The city may require submittal of a more detailed visual
analysis based on the results of the visual EAF.
(2)
Shared use. At all times, shared use of existing towers shall be
preferred to the construction of new towers. Additionally, where
such shared use is unavailable, location of antennas on preexisting
structures shall be considered. An applicant shall be required to
present an adequate report inventorying existing towers within
reasonable distance of the proposed site and outlining
opportunities for shared use of existing facilities and use of other
preexisting structures as an alternative to a new construction.
An applicant intending to share use of an existing tower shall
be required to document intent from an existing tower owner
to share use. The applicant shall pay all reasonable fees and
costs of adapting an existing tower or structure to a new
shared use. Those costs include but are not limited to
structural reinforcement, preventing transmission or receiver
interference, additional site screening and other changes,
including real property acquisition or lease required to
accommodate shared use.
(a)
In the case of new towers, the applicant shall be required
to submit a report demonstrating good-faith efforts to secure
shared use from existing towers as well as documenting
capacity for future shared use of the proposed tower. Written
requests and responses for shared use shall be provided.
(b)
(3)
Setbacks. Towers and antennas shall comply with all existing
setbacks within the affected zone. Additional setbacks may be
required to contain on site substantially all icefall or debris from
tower failure and/or to preserve privacy of adjoining residential
(4)
C.
§ 315-29 HORNELL CODE § 315-29
290:600
and public property. Setbacks shall apply to all tower parts,
including guy wire anchors, and to any accessory facilities.
Visibility. All towers and accessory facilities shall be sited to have
the least practical adverse visual effect on the environment. Towers
shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human safety as
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Towers shall
be a galvanized finish or painted gray above the surrounding tree
line and painted gray, green, black or similar colors designed to
blend into the natural surroundings below the surrounding tree
line unless other standards are required by the FAA. In all cases,
structures offering slender silhouettes (i.e., monopoles or guyed
tower) shall be preferable to freestanding structures except where
such freestanding structures offer capacity for future shared use.
Towers should be designed and sited so as to avoid, whenever
possible, application of FAA lighting and painting requirements.
Accessory facilities shall maximize use of building materials, colors
and textures designed to blend with the natural surroundings.
(5)
Existing vegetation. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved
to the maximum extent possible, and no cutting of trees exceeding
four inches in diameter (measured at a height of four feet off the
ground) shall take place prior to approval of the special permit
use. Clear cutting of all trees in a single contiguous area exceeding
20,000 square feet shall be prohibited.
(6)
Screening. Deciduous or evergreen tree plantings may be required
to screen portions of the tower from nearby residential property
as well as from public sites known to include important views
or vistas. Where the site abuts residential or public property,
including streets, the following vegetative screening shall be
required. For all towers, at least one row of native evergreen
shrubs or trees capable of forming a continuous hedge at least 10
feet in height within two years of planting shall be provided to
effectively screen the tower base and accessory facilities. In the
case of poor soil conditions, planting may be required on soil berms
to assure plant survival. Plant height in these cases shall include
the height of any berm.
(7)
Access and parking. A road and parking will be provided to assure
adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing
roads, public or private, shall be made. Road construction shall be
consistent with standards for private roads and shall at all times
minimize ground disturbance and vegetation cutting to within the
toe of fill, the top of cuts, or no more than 10 feet beyond the
edge of any pavement. Road grades shall closely follow natural
contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil
erosion potential. Public road standards may be waived in meeting
the objectives of this subsection.
(8)
§ 315-29 UTILITIES § 315-29
290:601
Authority to impose conditions. The city shall have the authority to
impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly
related to and incidental to the proposed telecommunications tower
special use or site plan.
Removal upon abandonment. Such conditions may include
provisions for dismantling and removal of towers and accessory
facilities upon abandonment of use.
(1)
D.
§ 315-29 HORNELL CODE § 315-29
290:602
ARTICLE VII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 315-30. General administration and enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer appointed by the Common Council shall
administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter. No building permit
required under the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code shall be issued unless the project meets all standards and criteria in
this chapter. If no building permit is required to undertake a project or land
use, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for ensuring that the
project or land use meets all the standards and criteria of this chapter.
§ 315-31. Powers and duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
Procedures and forms. The Common Council shall make and adopt such
procedures and forms as necessary for the proper enforcement and
administration of this chapter and to secure its stated purposes and
intent. The Common Council may delegate the responsibility to prepare
such procedures and forms to the Code Enforcement Officer subject
to approval by the Common Council before such forms and procedures
are utilized. The procedures and forms shall not be in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter or any other chapter of the city. The
procedures and forms as approved by the Common Council shall be
kept on file in the office of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the City
Clerk and available to the public.
A.
Assistants. The Common Council may appoint Code Enforcement
Officer assistants or deputies to assist the Code Enforcement Officer
with such powers and responsibilities as the Common Council deems
appropriate. The use of the term "Code Enforcement Officer" also
includes his or her duly authorized and appointed assistants or
deputies, if any.
B.
Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right to enter
and inspect any building or enter upon any land at any reasonable hour
as necessary in the execution of these duties, subject to the following
conditions:
The Code Enforcement Officer should make efforts in good faith to
notify the owner and/or tenant before conducting any inspection.
(1)
The Code Enforcement Officer should display proper identification
upon commencing an inspection.
(2)
Inspections should be conducted in the presence of the owner
or the owner's representative or tenant if he/she so requests in
writing. A written report of each inspection shall be prepared and
kept on file in the office of the Code Enforcement Officer. A copy of
(3)
A.
§ 315-30 UTILITIES § 315-31
290:603
the inspection report shall also be sent to the owner or the owner's
representative.
Records. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain files in his office,
the Building Department or the City Clerk's office, open to the public,
of all applications for certificates of compliance, special use permits,
building permits, certificates of occupancy or use, inspection reports,
any and all plans submitted, as well as finial certificates and permits.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall also maintain records of every
complaint of a violation of the provisions of this chapter as well as any
action taken as a result of a complaint of violation.
B.
Maintenance of Zoning Map. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
maintain for use by the public an up-to-date Zoning Map showing all
district boundaries.
C.
Report to the Common Council. The Code Enforcement Officer shall,
each month, submit to the Common Council a written report
summarizing for the preceding calendar month all permits and
certificates issued as well as the number of violations recorded, action
taken on violations, and the number and types of inspections
conducted.
D.
Certificate of compliance.
In all districts, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
certificate of compliance before:
Any structure coming under the provisions of this chapter
is erected, reconstructed, structurally altered or moved
(excluding usual maintenance or repair);
(a)
(b) Any change in use occurs in an existing building;
(c) Any change in use occurs in a nonconforming building;
(d) Any land is used or a use is established.
(1)
Nothing in this provision shall be interpreted to supersede the
requirements of any chapter enacted by the Common Council, or
the requirements of any applicable state law, with respect to the
administration and enforcement of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(2)
All applications for a certificate of compliance shall be
accompanied by such sketch plans or supporting documentation
as the Code Enforcement Officer may be required to determine
compliance with this chapter. The Common Council may establish
a fee for a certificate of compliance.
(3)
The certificate of compliance shall state that the proposed
structure or land use complies with all provisions of this chapter.
(4)
E.
§ 315-31 HORNELL CODE § 315-31
290:604
Building permits. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible
for issuing building permits as required by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
follow the procedures established under the Uniform Code as well as
determine full compliance with this and other chapters prior to issuing
a building permit.135
F.
Certificate of occupancy. In all districts and any overlay zone, no
building or structure for which a building permit has been issued
shall be occupied or used unless the Code Enforcement Officer issues
a Certificate of Occupancy. The Certificate of Occupancy shall state
that the building or structure fully complies with the requirements of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code as
administered by the City of Hornell, this chapter and the terms of any
variance, special use permit or site plan approval properly granted
under the procedures established by this chapter.
G.
Issuance of notices of violation. Whenever in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer and after proper inspection there appears to exist
a violation of any provision of this chapter or any procedure adopted
pursuant thereto, the Code Enforcement Officer shall serve written
notice upon the appropriate person responsible for the alleged
violation. This notice shall inform the recipient of the following:
(1) The nature and specific details of the violation.
The date by which the violation must be remedied or removed,
which period shall not exceed 30 days from the date of notice.
(2)
H.
Issuance of stop-work orders. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer
has reasonable grounds to believe that work on any building or
structure or any use of land is occurring either in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, not in conformity with any application made,
permit granted or other approval issued hereunder, or in an unsafe
or dangerous manner, the Code Enforcement Officer shall promptly
notify the appropriate person responsible to suspend work on any such
building or structure or the use of any such land. Such person shall
immediately suspend such activity until the time that the stop order
has been rescinded. The order and notice shall be in writing, shall
state the conditions under which the work or use may be resumed,
and may be served upon the person to whom it is directed either by
delivering it personally to that person or by posting the stop order upon
a conspicuous portion of the building under construction or premises in
use and additionally sending a copy of the same by certified mail.
I.
Taking of emergency action. If in the opinion of the Code Enforcement
Officer a violation exists which requires immediate action to avoid
a direct hazard or imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare
of occupants of a building or to other persons or the environment,
J.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
§ 315-31 UTILITIES § 315-31
290:605
§ 315-32. Penalties for offenses.
Violation by any person, firm or corporation of any provision or requirement
of this chapter or violation of any statement, plan, application, permit or
certificate approved under the provisions of this chapter shall be considered
an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, penalties shall be imposed as
provided elsewhere in this Code.136 Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 315-33. Nonconforming uses and buildings.
The lawful use of any building existing at the time of the enactment or
amendment of this chapter may be continued although such use does not
conform to the requirements for the district in which it is located.
§ 315-34. Building permits.
the Code Enforcement Officer may direct that such violation be
immediately remedied or may take direct action on his/her own
initiative to abate the hazard or danger. Any costs incurred by such
action shall be paid for by the owner, occupant or person responsible
for the violation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep on file an
affidavit stating the items of expense and date of execution of action
taken and is furthermore authorized to institute a suit, if necessary,
against the person liable for such expenses, or place a lien against
property, in order to recover the said costs.
Unsafe structures. Any building declared unsafe by a competent
authority may be restored to a safe condition.
A.
B. Extension. A nonconforming use can not be extended.
Completion. Any building authorized by a building permit issued prior
to the enactment of this chapter may be constructed in accordance with
such permit and the plans on file and approved by the Common Council,
provided that the foundation is completed at the time this chapter is
enacted or amended and the structure is completed one year thereafter.
C.
Restoration. Any nonconforming building which has been damaged by
fire or other causes must be repaired or rebuilt within one year from
the date the damage occurred; otherwise, it cannot be rebuilt.
D.
Abandonment. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or land has
been inoperative for any reason whatever for a period of one year, such
use shall not thereafter be reestablished.
E.
Changes. A nonconforming use may be changed to a nonconforming
use of the same or higher classification; and when so changed to a
higher classification, such use thereafter shall not be changed to a
lower classification.
F.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, Penalties.
§ 315-31 HORNELL CODE § 315-34
290:606
§ 315-35. Certificates of occupancy.
§ 315-36. Conflicts with other provisions.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances,
the more restrictive or that ordinance imposing the higher standards shall
govern.
§ 315-37. Site plan review.
No building shall be erected, relocated, added to or structurally altered
until a permit therefor has been issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Except upon a written order of the Board of Appeals, no such
permit shall be issued for any building where said construction,
addition or alteration would be in variance with any of the provisions of
this chapter.
A.
There shall be submitted with all applications for building permits two
copies of a layout or plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the
lot of the building and accessory buildings to be erected and such other
information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
B.
One copy of such layout or plot plan shall be returned, when approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer, together with such permit, to the
applicant upon the payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 142, Fees.
C.
Building permits must be applied for by the property owner or his legal
representative.
D.
No land shall be occupied or used or changed in use and no building
hereinafter erected, altered or extended shall be used or changed in
use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer stating that the building and the proposed use
thereof or the proposed use of land complies with the provisions of this
chapter.
A.
Certificates of occupancy must be applied for by the property owner or
his legal representative.
B.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a record of all building
permits and certificates of occupancy, and copies shall be furnished,
upon request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
the building affected.
C.
Purpose and intent.
As authorized by General City Law 27-a, it is the intent of these site
plan review regulations to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the city. A clean, wholesome, attractive environment
is declared to be of importance to the health and safety of the
(1)
A.
§ 315-34 UTILITIES § 315-37
290:607
inhabitants of the city and, in addition, such an environment is
deemed essential to the maintenance and continued development
of the economy of the city and the general welfare of its
inhabitants.
It is further the intent to ensure the optimum overall conservation,
protection, preservation, development and use of the natural and
man-related resources of the city, by regulating land use activity
within the city through review and approval of site plans. It is not
the intent to prohibit, per se, any land use activity but to allow all
land use activities which will meet the standards set forth.
(2)
Authorization to review site plans. The Planning and Development
Committee of the Common Council (hereafter referred to as "the city")
is hereby authorized to review and approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove site plans for land uses within the city
as hereinafter designated pursuant to and in accordance with the
standards and procedures set forth in this local law. The city may
require that site plans be prepared by a licensed architect, landscape
architect, surveyor or engineer. Such requirement shall be made as
soon as possible in the application review process as part of
determining that an application is complete and shall be based on the
complexity of the site features and of the proposed structures(s) or land
use as related to same.
B.
Applicability of review requirements.
In all zoning districts, all new principal uses as defined in the
zoning code within the city shall require site plan review and
approval before being undertaken, except the following:
Landscaping or grading which is not intended to be used in
connection with a land use subject to review under the
provisions of this local law.
(a)
Ordinary repair or maintenance or interior alterations to
existing structures or uses.
(b)
Exterior alterations or additions to existing structures which
would not increase the square footage of the existing structure
by more than 25% and having a cost value of less than $35,000.
[Amended 11-27-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007; 5-27-2008 by
L.L. No. 4-2008]
(c)
Nonstructural agricultural or gardening uses not involving
substantial timber cutting.
(d)
(e) Signs in conformance with the Hornell Zoning Code.137
(1)
C.
137. Editor's Note: See § 315-27, Signs.
§ 315-37 HORNELL CODE § 315-37
290:608
The sale of agricultural produce and temporary structures
related to sale of agricultural produce.
(f)
Garage, lawn and porch sales not exceeding three days. If such
sales take place more often than three times in any calendar
year, site plan approval will be required.
(g)
Any person uncertain of the applicability of this section to a given
land use activity may apply in writing to the Code Enforcement
Office for a written jurisdictional determination.
(2)
Effect on existing uses. This site plan review does not apply to uses and
structures that are lawfully in existence as of the effective date of this
regulation. Any use, which would otherwise be subject to this review,
that has been discontinued for a period of one year shall be considered
discontinued and subject to review.
D.
Sketch plan advisory option.
Prior to undertaking any new land use or activity authorized in
the applicable zoning district as a special use, a site plan approval
is required. Applicants for site plan approval are encouraged to
follow the recommended procedures related to the sketch plan
conference as hereinafter set forth. Applicants must comply with
all other procedures and requirements of site plan review.
(1)
Upon request to the Code Enforcement Officer, a sketch plan
conference may be held between the Planning Board and the
applicant prior to the preparation and submission of a formal site
plan. The intent of such a conference is to enable the applicant
to inform the Planning Board of his or her proposal prior to the
preparation of a detailed site plan and for the Planning Board to
review the basic site design concept, advise the applicant as to
potential problems and concerns and to generally determine the
information to be required on the site plan, including if the site
plan should be completed by a licensed professional. In order to
accomplish these objectives, the applicant shall provide to the Code
Enforcement Officer and to the Planning Board the following:
A sketch showing the locations and dimensions of existing
and proposed structures, parking areas, access, signs (with
descriptions), existing and proposed vegetation, and other
planned features; anticipated changes in the existing
topography and natural features; and, where applicable,
measures and features to comply with flood hazard and flood
insurance regulations;
(a)
A general area map showing the location of the parcel under
consideration for site plan review, that portion of the
applicant's property under consideration for development and
any adjacent parcels owned by the applicant, and all adjacent
(b)
(2)
E.
§ 315-37 UTILITIES § 315-37
290:609
properties, subdivisions, streets, rights-of-way, easements and
other pertinent features;
Site plan review procedures.
Basic procedures.
Applicants for site plan review shall submit to the Code
Enforcement Officer a complete application consistent with
the requirements listed. Upon determination by the Code
Enforcement Officer that such application is complete and is
subject to site plan review, the application shall be placed as
a review item on the next available Planning and Development
Committee meeting. A copy of the application will also be
forwarded to the Chair of the Planning Board. The Planning
and Development Committee of the Common Council shall
then place the site plan application as a review item on its next
available meeting.
(a)
The Planning Board shall have 30 days from the date of the
aforementioned meeting to make a recommendation with
supporting documentation to the Planning and Development
Committee of the Common Council on whether to approve,
approve with modifications, or disapprove the proposed site
plan. The Planning Board may also extend the time available to
make such recommendation, either by mutual agreement with
the applicant or when authorized in writing by the Planning
and Development Committee.
(b)
(1)
Public hearing; when required to be held. The city may conduct a
public hearing on the site plan if considered desirable by a majority
of its members. Such hearing shall be required within 62 days of
the receipt of the complete application from the Code Enforcement
Officer for site plan review and shall be advertised in the city's
official newspaper or, if there is none, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town at least five days before the public hearing.
(2)
Final decision. Within 62 days of the Code Enforcement Officer's
receipt of a complete application for site plan approval or, if a
public hearing is held, within 62 days of the close of the public
hearing, the city shall render a decision. In its decision the city
may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the site
plan. This time period may be extended by mutual consent of the
applicant and city.
Approval. Upon approval of the site plan, and payment by the
applicant of all fees and reimbursable costs due the city, the
Planning Board shall endorse its approval on a copy of the site
plan and shall immediately file it and a written statement of
approval with the City Clerk. A copy of the written statement
of approval shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
(a)
(3)
F.
§ 315-37 HORNELL CODE § 315-37
290:610
Approval with modifications. The city may conditionally
approve the final site plan. A copy of the written statement
containing the modifications required by the conditional
approval will be mailed to the applicant by certified mail,
return receipt requested. After adequate demonstration to the
Planning Board that all conditions have been met, and payment
by the applicant of all fees and reimbursable costs due the city,
the Planning Board shall endorse its approval on a copy of the
site plan and shall immediately file it and a written statement
of approval with the City Clerk. A copy of the written statement
of approval shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
(b)
Disapproval. Upon disapproval of the site plan, the decision of
the city shall immediately be filed with the City Clerk and a
copy thereof mailed to the applicant by certified mail, return
receipt requested, along with the Planning Board's reasons for
disapproval.
(c)
Application requirements.
An application for site plan approval shall be made initially
in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be
accompanied by information contained on the following
checklist. Where the sketch plan conference was held, the
accompanying information shall be drawn from the following
checklist as determined necessary by the Planning Board at
said sketch plan conference. A site plan is a rendering or
drawing prepared to the following specifications shown in this
checklist:
Title of drawing, name and address of applicant, and
person responsible for preparation of such drawing.
[1]
[2] North arrow, scale and date.
Boundaries of the property plotted to scale by a New
York State licensed surveyor. The city may waive this
requirement and allow reuse of tax maps or other existing
maps as a base map showing the property boundaries
when either such preexisting information is available and
current or the proposal is of modest scale.
[3]
Location, design, type of construction, proposed use and
exterior dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings.
[4]
Grading and drainage plan, showing existing and proposed
contours, rock outcrops, depth to bedrock, soil
characteristics and watercourses.
[5]
Location, design and type of construction of all parking
and truck loading areas, showing access and egress.
[6]
(a)
(4)
§ 315-37 UTILITIES § 315-37
290:611
[7] Provision for pedestrian access.
[8] Location of any proposed outdoor storage.
Location, design and construction materials of all existing
or proposed site improvements, including streets,
easements, drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences.
[9]
Description of the method of any new sewage disposal, and
location, design and construction materials of such new
facilities.
[10]
Description of the method of securing public water, and
location, design and construction materials of any new
facilities.
[11]
Location of fire and other emergency zones, including the
location of fire hydrants.
[12]
Location, design and construction materials of all
proposed energy distribution facilities, including
electrical, gas and solar energy.
[13]
Location, size and design and type of construction of all
proposed signs.
[14]
Location and proposed development of all open areas,
including existing vegetative cover.
[15]
[16]Location and design of proposed outdoor lighting.
[17]Landscaping plan and planting schedule.
[18]An estimated project construction schedule.
Identification of any permits from other governmental
bodies required for the project's execution.
[19]
As a condition of final approval, the city may require such
additional information that appears necessary for a complete
assessment of the project.
(b)
Required fee. An application for site plan review shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by the Common Council
available in the office of the City Clerk. All fees must be paid in full
prior to any approval.
(5)
Reimbursable costs. Reasonable costs incurred by the city for
consultation fees or other expenses in connection with the
technical review of a proposed site plan, including but not limited
to administrative, legal and engineering costs, shall be charged to
the applicant and collected in accordance with such procedures
and fees established by the Common Council.
(6)
§ 315-37 HORNELL CODE § 315-37
290:612
Review standards: general standards and considerations.
As authorized by General City Law 27-a, Subdivision (2), site
plan review shall consider, where appropriate, elements
related to parking, means of access, screening, signs,
landscaping, architectural features, location and dimension of
buildings, adjacent land uses and physical features meant to
protect adjacent land uses as well as any additional elements
specified in the Zoning Code. More specifically, the city's
review of the site plan shall include, as appropriate, but is not
limited to, the following considerations:
Location, arrangement, size, design and general site
compatibility of buildings, lighting and signs.
[1]
Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and
circulation, including intersections, road widths, pavement
surfaces, dividers and traffic control.
[2]
Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of offstreet
parking and loading.
[3]
Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access
and circulation, walkway structures, control of
intersections with vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian
convenience and safety.
[4]
[5] Adequacy of stormwater and drainage facilities.
[6] Adequacy of water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and
other landscaping constituting a visual and or noise buffer
between the applicant's and adjoining lands, including the
maximum retention of existing vegetation.
[7]
Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the
provision of fire hydrants.
[8]
Special attention to the adequacy and impact of
structures, roadways and landscaping in areas with
susceptibility to ponding, flooding and/or erosion.
[9]
Overall impact on the neighborhood, including
compatibility of design considerations, natural features,
environmental effects, neighborhood character, lighting
and excessive noise or odor.
[10]
Relationship of the various uses to one another and their
scale.
[11]
[12]Adequacy of floodproofing and prevention.
(a)
(7)
§ 315-37 UTILITIES § 315-37
290:613
Adequacy of building orientation and site design for
consistency with neighboring properties and for energy
efficiency. The extent of which the proposed plan
conserves energy use and energy resources in the
community, including the protection of adequate sunlight
for use by solar energy systems.
[13]
Adequacy of open space for play areas, informal recreation
and the retention of natural areas such as wildlife habitats,
wetlands and wooded areas.
[14]
In its review of a sketch plan, the Planning Board shall consult
with the Code Enforcement Officer, and may consult with any
other municipal, regional, state or federal official or agency
as well as any nongovernmental agency that might provide
valuable information on the subject review.
(b)
Review standards: special considerations.
Conditions. The city shall have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions on a site plan approval
as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed site
plan approval. Upon its approval, any such conditions must be
met in connection with the issuance of permits of any agent or
officer of the city.
(a)
Reservation of parkland on residential site plans. As authorized
by General City Law 27-a, Subdivision (6), The Planning Board
may require that a park or parks suitable for recreation
purposes be included in the site plan approval or a payment
in lieu of such parkland be made to the city consistent with
applicable fees. The Planning Board must make a finding of the
suitability of such park or parkland to the needs of the city as
contributed by the particular site plan and the conditions of
the subject property under review prior to any requirement for
parkland or payment in lieu thereof. The applicable standards
of General City Law 27-a, Subdivision (6)(a-d) shall apply to
this review.
(b)
Performance bond or other security. As an alternative to the
installation of required infrastructure and improvement, prior
to approval by the Planning Board, a performance bond or
other security sufficient to cover the full cost of the same,
as estimated by the Building Department or Public Works
Department, shall be furnished to the city by the applicant.
(c)
State Environmental Quality Review Act compliance required.
The State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQR) requires
the City of Hornell to incorporate consideration of
environmental impacts into its planning, review and decisionmaking
processes, including land use and development and
related zoning and other reviews and decisions required to be
(d)
(8)
§ 315-37 HORNELL CODE § 315-37
290:614
§ 315-38. Board of Appeals; appeals procedure.
made under these regulations. Accordingly, compliance with
SEQR shall be an integral part of these regulations. The city
shall consider the environmental impacts of land use and
development and related construction actions as determined
under SEQR as part of and prior to any approval and
authorization of actions prescribed in these regulations.
Standards in the Neighborhood Overlay District. In addition
to the other provisions of site plan review, activities subject
to review in the Neighborhood Overlay District shall also take
into account these additional standards:
The general design, character and appropriateness of the
proposed use.
[1]
The scale of the proposal in relation to its site, surrounding
properties and the neighborhood.
[2]
Texture, materials and color for any new construction and
their relation to similar features of other properties in the
neighborhood.
[3]
Visual compatibility with surrounding properties,
including the proportion of the front facade, proportion
and arrangement of windows and other openings in that
facade roof shape, and the general rhythm of spacing of
properties along the street, including setback and building
orientation.
[4]
The importance of historic, architectural or other features
of significance on or adjacent to the proposed use.
[5]
(e)
Appeal procedure. Any person aggrieved by a decision of any
officer, department, board, committee or bureau of the city may
apply to the Supreme Court for a review by a proceeding under
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such proceedings
shall be instituted within 30 days after the filing of a decision in the
office of the City Clerk.
(9)
Appeal for area variance. An applicant for a site plan review at any
time during such review may appeal directly to the Zoning Board
of Appeals for an area variance consistent with the procedures
established in General City Law 27-a.
(10)
Establishment; membership; meeting.
A Board of Appeals is hereby established in accordance with the
provisions of § 81 of the General City Law applicable thereto. The
Common Council may also provide for compensation to be paid to
the members of said Board, experts, consultants, attorneys, clerks
(1)
A.
§ 315-37 UTILITIES § 315-38
290:615
and/or a secretary and provide for such other expenses as may be
necessary and proper, not exceeding the appropriations that may
be made by the Common Council for such Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by
the Mayor, each to serve for a term of five years, except that the
terms of the five members first appointed or first serving a fiveyear
term shall be set so that only one member's term expires
in any one year pursuant to the provisions of General City Law
§ 81, Subdivisions 3 and 4. Vacancies for the unexpired term of
any members shall be filled for such unexpired period only by the
Mayor, or City Manager, if applicable. Pursuant to § 81, Subdivision
2, of the General City Law, no person who is a member of the
legislative body of the City of Hornell shall be eligible for
membership on the Board of Appeals.
(2)
The Mayor, or City Manager, if applicable, may designate a member
of the Board of Appeals to serve as Chairman. If a member is not
so designated, the Board of Appeals shall choose its own Chairman
and, in his absence, an Acting Chairman. All meetings of the Board
of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such
other times as the Board may determine.
(3)
Such Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(4)
All meetings of such Board shall be open to the public. Such Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member on every question. If any member is absent or fails to vote,
the minutes shall indicate such fact.
(5)
The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be
necessary to make any decision or take action on any appeal or
application or any matter before it which said Board is required to
pass upon under the provisions of this chapter.
(6)
Appeals procedure.
Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the city
pursuant to the provisions of § 81-a of the General City Law.
(1)
Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days after the Code
Enforcement Officer has taken action on any matter under the
provisions of this chapter and after the filing in the City Clerk's
office of any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer by filing with the
Code Enforcement Officer and with the Board of Appeals a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the relief sought.
(2)
The Code Enforcement Officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers
(3)
B.
§ 315-38 HORNELL CODE § 315-38
290:616
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
The Board of Appeals shall conform to the procedures set forth in
§§ 81-a and 81-b of the General City Law with respect to matters
within its appellate jurisdiction and § 315-38C of this chapter and
§ 27-b of the General City Law with respect to its original
jurisdiction over special use permits or special exceptions as set
forth below.
(4)
The Board of Appeals may also adopt its own rules of procedure to
govern the review of appeals and applications and the conduct of
its business. At a minimum, all applications made to the Board of
Appeals shall be in writing and on a form prescribed by the Board
of Appeals and provided by the City Clerk. Every application shall
refer to the specific provisions of the law or action being appealed
and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the
use for which the variance is sought or the details of the appeal
that is applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the
appeal should be granted, as the case may be. The Board of Appeals
may require additional information which it deems necessary for
adequate review and evaluation of the interpretation, variance or
appeal being sought.
(5)
A hearing shall be held for all appeals, in conformance with the
requirements of General City Law § 81-a. Every decision of the
Board of Appeals shall contain a full description of reasons for
granting or denying the appeal and shall immediately be filed in the
office of the City Clerk and copies thereof mailed to the applicant
and to the Zoning Officer. The reasons for the Board of Appeals'
action shall be set forth in the minutes of the Board of Appeals
meeting at which the action was taken. Each member's vote shall
be recorded.
(6)
Every rule and regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and
every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board
of Appeals shall, within five business days after such decision is
rendered or such action taken, be filed in the office of the City Clerk
and shall be a public record.
(7)
Required referral.
A full statement of any appeal that meets the referral
requirements of § 239-m of the General Municipal Law shall
also be referred at least five days prior to the public hearing to
the County Planning Agency for its review, pursuant to § 81-a
of the General City Law. Such actions shall include those that
affect property located within 500 feet of the following:
[1] Municipal boundary.
(a)
(8)
§ 315-38 UTILITIES § 315-38
290:617
Boundary of any existing or proposed county or state park
or other recreation area.
[2]
Right-of-way of any existing or proposed county or state
parkway, thruway, expressway, road or highway.
[3]
Existing or proposed right-of-way of any stream or
drainage channel owned by the county or for which the
county has established channel lines.
[4]
Existing or proposed boundary of any county- or stateowned
land on which a public building or institution is
situated.
[5]
No action shall be taken by the Board of Appeals on such
appeal until an advisory recommendation has been received
from said county bureau or 30 calendar days have elapsed
since said county bureau was sent such full statement.
(b)
The Board of Appeals shall comply with the provisions of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act and its implementing
regulations with respect to any appeal or application before it
which requires such compliance.
(9)
Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers
and duties prescribed by § 81-b of the General City Law with respect
to appeals and § 27-b of the General City Law with respect to special
exceptions and by this chapter, which include the following:
Interpretations: upon appeal from a decision by the Code
Enforcement Officer, to decide any question involving the
interpretation of any provision of this chapter, including
determination of the exact location of any zoning district boundary.
(1)
Variances: to vary or adapt the strict application of any of the
requirements of this chapter with respect to use variances and/or
area variances as such terms are defined in § 81-b of the General
City Law. In granting any such variance, the Board of Appeals shall
follow the tests prescribed in § 81-b, Subdivisions 3 and 4, of the
General City Law. The Board of Appeals may also prescribe any
conditions to an area variance and/or use variance that it deems
necessary or desirable pursuant to the guidance set forth in § 81-b,
Subdivision 5, of the General City Law.
(2)
Referrals/recommendations: to review and provide a
recommendation, if required, with respect to any matter or
application referred to it pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(3)
Special exceptions. When, in its judgment, the public convenience
and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use
of neighboring property will not be injured thereby, the Board of
Appeals may, in a specific case, after due notice and public hearing
(4)
C.
§ 315-38 HORNELL CODE § 315-38
290:618
and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, determine
and vary the application of the regulations of this chapter in
harmony with their general purposes and intent as follows:
Grant, in undeveloped sections of the city, temporary and
conditional permits for not more than two years for structures
and uses in contravention of the use regulations controlling
residence districts, provided that such uses are important to
the undeveloped sections, and also provided that such uses are
not prejudicial to adjoining and neighboring sections already
developed.
(a)
Permit public utility or public service uses or public buildings
in any district when found to be necessary for the public
health, safety or the general welfare.
(b)
Permit fraternal, society or club buildings in residence zones,
provided that they are not used chiefly for a service
customarily carried on as a gainful business, and further
provided that the applicant files with said Board of Appeals the
written consents, duly acknowledged, of the owners of at least
75% of all land, other than city or public streets, within the city
which lies outside of and within 600 feet of each boundary line
of the lot or lots to be used for such buildings.
(c)
Dwellings on small lots. Notwithstanding the limitations
imposed by any other provision of this chapter, the Board of
Appeals may permit the erection of a dwelling on any parcel
of land separately owned or under contract of sale at the time
of the passage of this chapter and containing an area or width
smaller than that required for a dwelling under this chapter,
provided that the yard dimensions and other requirements
shall conform as closely as possible to the requirements for
residential districts.
(d)
Decisions. The Board of Appeals shall render a decision on an appeal
or other application before it within 62 days of the close of the public
hearing. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be recorded in
accordance with standard forms adopted by said Board and shall fully
set forth the circumstances of the case and shall contain a full record
of the findings on which the decision is based. Every decision shall be
by resolution of said Board, with each such decision being filed in the
office of the City Clerk within five business days thereof. The Board of
Appeals shall also notify the Code Enforcement Officer, the Secretary
of the Board of Appeals and any affected municipality given notice of
hearing of its decision in each case. If applicable, a report on the action
taken shall also be filed within seven calendar days of said action with
the County Planning Agency.
D.
Attachment of conditions. In all cases where the Board of Appeals
grants a variance from the strict application of the requirements of this
E.
§ 315-38 UTILITIES § 315-38
290:619
§ 315-39. Amendments.
All amendments to this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions
of the General City Law and the City Charter applicable thereto. Such
amendments shall require an advisory review by the Planning Board
consistent with procedures for such review established by the Common
Council. In the absence of such procedures, the Planning Board shall have
30 days from receipt of a proposed amendment to forward to the Common
Council such written advisory review.
chapter, it shall be the duty of said Board to attach such conditions and
safeguards as may be required in order that the result of its action shall
be as nearly as possible in accordance with the spirit and intent of this
chapter and with § 81-b, Subdivision 5, of the General City Law.
Expiration of approval. Unless construction or use is commenced and
diligently pursued within one calendar year from the date of the
granting of a variance, such variance shall become null and void
without further hearing by the Board of Appeals.
F.
Modification of time periods. Any period of time specified in this article
may be extended by mutual written consent of the applicant and the
Board of Appeals.
G.
Relief from decisions. Any person or persons, jointly or severally
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals, may apply to the
Supreme Court of the State of New York for relief through a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and regulations of the State of
New York. Such proceeding shall be governed by the specific provisions
of Article 78, except that the action must be initiated as therein
provided within 30 days after the filing of the decision of the Board of
Appeals in the office of the City Clerk.
H.
§ 315-38 HORNELL CODE § 315-39
290:620
ARTICLE VIII
Airport Zoning Regulations
[Added 10-15-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
§ 315-40. Purpose.
The Common Council deems it necessary to adopt these regulations as an
exercise of the police power in order to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the City by preventing the creation or
establishment of airport hazards, thereby protecting the lives and property
of the users of the Hornell City Airport and the occupants of the land in the
vicinity of said airport and the public investment therein.
§ 315-41. Legislative authority.
§ 315-42. Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall
govern the construction of this article:
AIRPORT — Any area designated and set aside for the landing and taking
off of aircraft, and utilized or to be utilized in the interest of the public for
such purposes, a map of which has been or is hereafter included as a part
of the Airport Zoning Map of the City of Hornell.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs
the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an
airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT — The elevation of the highest point on the
usable or designed runway as established by the City's Designee.
AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT — The point established at the approximate
geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated.
HEIGHT — Used for the purpose of determining height limits in all zones
set forth in this article, means the vertical elevation in feet above the
established airport elevation unless otherwise stated.
LANDING ARE — The area of the airport used, or to be used, for the
landing, taking off or taxiing of aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any structure, tree or use of land which does
not conform to the provisions of this article at the time this article is made
applicable to a particular airport.
PERSON — Any individual, firm co-partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, city, county or district, and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof.
RUNWAY — The paved surface of an airport landing area designated for the
landing or taking off of aircraft.
§ 315-40 UTILITIES § 315-42
290:621
STRUCTURE — Any object constructed, installed or placed on real property
by man including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, smokestacks and
overhead lines.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
ZONING BOARD — The Zoning Board of the City of Hornell.
§ 315-43. Types of zones and height limits.
Six types of zones, and the height limits for said zones, are hereby
established for the purpose of airport zoning. Except as otherwise provided
in this article no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to
grow or maintained in any zone to a height in excess of the height limit
established for such zone. The datum plane for measurement of such height
in excess of the height limit established for such zone. The datum plane for
measurement of such height, except as otherwise specified herein, shall be
based on the airport elevation, as defined by § 315-42. Said zones are as
follows:
Runway safety area. A surface, and the airspace above it, rectangular in
shape, longitudinally centered on the runway and extending in length
300 feet beyond the ends of the runway. The runway safety area shall
have an elevation, at any point along its longitudinal profile, coincident
with the runway centerline or centerline prolongations as appropriate.
The runway safety area shall have the width specified on each map
adopted pursuant to § 315-44.
A.
Protection zone: A plane surface, and the airspace above it, trapezoidal
in shape, longitudinally centered on the prolongation of the runway
centerline, beginning at each end of each landing zone, coinciding in
width with the landing zone where they join. The height and width of
the approach zone shall be specified on each map adopted pursuant to
§ 315-44.
B.
Transition surface zone: A plane surface, and the airspace above it,
rectangular in shape, lying adjacent and parallel to each side of each
landing zone, having a length equal to the landing zone and extending
outward and upward, at right angles to the runway centerline, at a
slope of seven to one to a height of 150 feet above the established
airport elevation.
C.
Nonprecision approach zone: A plane surface, and the airspace above
it, triangular in shape, lying adjacent to each side of each approach
zone and at each end of each landing transition zone, coinciding in
height with the approach zone and landing transition zone where they
join and extending outward and upward, at right angles to the
prolongation of the runway centerline, at a slope of seven to one to a
maximum height of 150 feet above the established airport elevation or
to the conical zone surface, whichever is higher.
D.
§ 315-42 HORNELL CODE § 315-43
290:622
§ 315-44. Airport master plan of 07/2010.
§ 315-45. Administration and enforcement.
Horizontal surface: A horizontal circular plane surface, and the
airspace above it, 150 feet above the established airport elevation, its
radius point being the airport reference point and having the radius
specified on each map adopted pursuant to § 315-44. The horizontal
surface does not include the runway safety area, protection zone or
transition surface zones.
E.
Conical surface: A conical surface of an inverted conical fustrum, and
the airspace above it, its minor base being coincidental with the
periphery of the horizontal surface and extending outward and upward,
radially to its axis, at a slope of 20 to one for the horizontal distance
specified on each map adopted pursuant to § 315-44. The conical
surface does not include the protection zone or the nonprecision
approach zone.
F.
The several zones established by § 315-43 of this article shall be shown
and delineated on the Airport Master Plan of the City of Hornell which
is hereby adopted. Said Master Plan, for convenience and identification,
is divided into parts corresponding to the operational areas of the
respective airports included within the provisions of this article.
Additional parts of the Airport Master Plan may be adopted from time
to time by ordinance. Each part of the Airport Master Plan of the City
of Hornell hereby adopted or hereafter adopted by ordinance shall be
described by a descriptive title sufficient to identify the subject and the
location and shall contain a map and diagrams including a plot plan
of the subject airport showing the location, direction and dimensions
of all runways, the location and dimensions of all zones described in
§ 315-43 of this article and the specific values applied to said zones in
accordance with the formulas established for the regulation of heights
pursuant to § 315-43.
A.
The Airport Master Plan and amendments or additional parts thereof
adopted pursuant to this article shall not be included in or made a part
of this Code.
B.
The Zoning Board is hereby designated as the agency for the
administration and enforcement of this article.
A.
The Zoning Board shall not issue building permits for the construction,
reconstruction or structural alteration of any structure within any of
the zones established by § 315-43 if said construction, reconstruction
or structural alteration would result in violation of the restrictions
imposed on said zoned by this article. Any building permit issued in
violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be null and void.
B.
§ 315-43 UTILITIES § 315-46
290:623
§ 315-46. Nonconforming uses.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or tree which did
not conform to the provisions of this article at the time this article was
made applicable or to authorize interference with the continuance of any
such nonconforming use except as provided in § 315-43. Nothing contained
in this article shall require any change in the construction, alteration or
intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was
commenced prior to the date this article was made.
§ 315-47. Permits.
Before that portion of any nonconforming structure which exceeds the
height limitation established by the Airport Master Plan and § 315-43 may
be structurally altered and before any nonconforming structure or tree
may be replaced, reconstructed, allowed to grow higher or replanted, a
permit must be secured from the Zoning Board authorizing such structural
alteration, replacement, reconstruction or change. Those portions of an
existing nonconforming structure below the applicable height limitations
may be structurally altered, repaired and added to, and those portions of
an existing nonconforming structure above the applicable height limitation
may be repaired and minor replacements made therein, without securing
such a permit unless such structural alteration, repair, addition or minor
replacement would increase the height of the structure or enlarge that
portion of the structure which exceeds the applicable height limitation. No
such permit shall be granted that will allow the establishment or creation
of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming structure or tree or
nonconforming use to be made or become higher or become a greater
hazard to air navigation than it was on the date that this article was made
applicable to the airport or than it was when the application for a permit
was made, but all other applications for such permits shall be granted.
§ 315-48. Variances.
If practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with
the general purpose of this article result through the strict and literal
interpretation and enforcement of this article then the Zoning Board shall
have the authority to grant a variance from the provisions of this article
such as may be in harmony with its general purpose and intent, so that the
spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety and welfare served and
substantial justice done.
§ 315-49. Applications for permits and variances.
The Zoning Board shall grant a permit or a variance under the provisions
of this article only upon the filing of a written application therefore by the
owner of the real property affected or his authorized representative. The
Zoning Board shall prescribe the form of applications for such permits and
variances. At the time of filing his application, the applicant shall pay a fee
§ 315-46 HORNELL CODE § 315-49
290:624
to defray the expense of postage, publication and the mailing of the notice
of hearing, and other expenses incidental to the proceedings. The amount
of said fee shall be established, and may be modified from time to time, by
resolution of the Common Council. No part of said fee shall be returned to
the applicant regardless of whether the applicant subsequently withdraws
his application for such permit or variance.
§ 315-50. Procedure for processing permits and variances.
Before granting a permit or variance the Zoning Board shall hold at least
one public hearing. Notice of such public hearing shall be given by
publishing a notice of such hearing setting forth the time and place of the
hearing and the nature of the permit or variance requested, in a newspaper
of general circulation published in the City, once, not less than 10 days prior
to the date of such public hearing, and by mailing a copy of the published
notice of said hearing, not less than 10 days prior to the date of such
public hearing, to the management of the airport affected and to all owners
of property within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property on
which the structure or tree is located for which the permit or variance is
requested. When mailing notices of said hearings to the property owners,
the Zoning Board shall use the last known names and addresses of such
owners as the same are shown on the assessment roll of Hornell City. After
the public hearing the Zoning Board shall, by resolution, grant or deny the
permit or variance and said resolution shall recite in full the findings upon
which the Zoning Board granted or denied such permit or variance. A copy
of such resolution shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown
upon the written application and to the appropriate airport management.
A copy of such resolution shall also be delivered to the Common Council.
The action of the Zoning Board on an application for a permit or variance
shall be final and conclusive 10 days after said resolution is mailed to the
applicant.
§ 315-51. Permits and variances; conditions.
Any variance or permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this article
may be allowed subject to any reasonable conditions that the Zoning Board
may deem necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article. If such action
is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and reasonable
under the circumstances, any such variance or permit may be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree to permit the
appropriate airport management, at its own expense, to install, operate and
maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate
to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. Any variance or permit which
is granted, subject to any conditions, shall be deemed to be automatically
revoked if any of the conditions are violated.
§ 315-52. Conflicting regulations.
If there is a conflict between this article and any other laws or ordinances
applicable to the same area or parcel of land, whether the conflict be
§ 315-49 UTILITIES § 315-52
290:625
with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land or any
other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and
prevail.
§ 315-53. Violations.
Every person violating any provision of this article or of any permit or
variance granted pursuant to this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$300 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 15 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be deemed guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which
any violation of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, and shall be punishable therefore as hereinabove provided.
§ 315-52 HORNELL CODE § 315-53
290:626
Appendix
Chapter A320
ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
CHARTER REFERENCES
Boundaries and civil divisions — See Title I.
§ 315-53 UTILITIES § 315-53
290:627

ARTICLE I
1957 Annexation
[Adopted as Sub-Part H of the 1970 Municipal Code 138]
§ A320-1. Territory described.
Subject to the provisions of § A320-8 of this Article and without a
referendum vote as provided by § 14 of Article 9 of the Constitution, there
being no people in the territory proposed to be annexed, all that part
of the Town of Hornellsville in the County of Steuben included in the
following described territory is hereby annexed to and shall form a part
of the City of Hornell: All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town
of Hornellsville, Steuben County, New York, and bounded and described as
follows: beginning at a point on the present north line of the City of Hornell
at its intersection with the east line of lands of the Erie Railroad, said point
being north 81° 01' 50" east 22.61 feet from a concrete monument; thence
along the lands of the Erie Railroad the following 6 courses and distances:
north 36° 38' 00" west a distance of 85.61 feet to a point; thence on a
curve to the left having a radius of 440.92 feet a distance of 468.96 feet
to a point, the last mentioned curve being subtended by a chord having a
bearing of north 67° 16' 10" west and a length of 447.16 feet; thence south
82° 15' 40" west a distance of 72.78 feet to a point; thence on a curve to
the right having a radius of 445.34 feet a distance of 601.39 feet to a point,
the last mentioned curve being subtended by a chord having a bearing of
north 59° 03' 10" west and a length of 556.72 feet; thence north 59° 03' 10"
west a distance of 119.63 feet to a point; thence north 14° 38' 30" west a
distance of 2794.43 feet to a point opposite Milepost No. 19 of the old P.S.
& N. Railroad; thence north 75° 21' 30" east a distance of 122 feet more
or less to the lands acquired by the people of the State of New York for
flood-control purposes, being Map 16, Parcel 26; thence along said lands
the following 10 courses and distances: south 34° 08' 00" east 57 feet more
or less to a concrete monument; thence south 31° 28' 30" east a distance
of 2435.85 feet to a point; thence south 87° 57' 20" west a distance of
95.13 feet to a point; thence south 31° 28' 20" east a distance of 316.23
feet to a point; thence north 0° 25' 00" west a distance of 167.26 feet to a
point; thence south 31° 28' 20" east a distance of 726.94 feet to a concrete
monument; thence south 39° 55' 00" east a distance of 168.00 feet to a
concrete monument; thence south 45° 55' 00" east a distance of 214.00 feet
to a concrete monument; thence south 59° 12' 00" east a distance of 224.00
feet to a concrete monument; thence south 68° 44' 00" east a distance of 63
feet more or less to a point on the north line of the City of Hornell; thence
along the north line of the City of Hornell south 81° 01' 50" west a distance
of 630 feet more or less to the point of beginning, containing 50.845 acres,
more or less. All bearings refer to true North. The above description was
prepared from surveys made by the Erie Railroad and the State Department
of Public Works by Richard W. Howard, Licensed Land Surveyor No. 28724.
138. Editor's Note: This Sub-Part H was derived from Chapter 1002 of the Laws of 1957 of the
Legislature of the State of New York, as amended by Chapter 1 of the Laws of 1958.
§ A320-1 UTILITIES § A320-2
290:629
§ A320-2. Territory to constitute part of First Ward; effect on unpaid
taxes.
§ A320-3. Effect on school districts.
The territory hereby annexed to the City of Hornell shall cease to be a
part of the Town of Hornellsville or of the school districts in which such
territory is now located. The Town of Hornellsville, excluding the portions
now hereby annexed, shall remain a separate and distinct town, except
as hereafter may be provided pursuant to law. The portions of the school
districts not embraced in the territory so annexed shall remain separate and
distinct school districts, subject to restriction, providing for alteration and
installation of school districts in towns.
§ A320-4. Assumption by city of indebtedness of annexed territory.
The bonded and other indebtedness of that part of the Town of Hornellsville
included in the territory to be annexed under this Article, or that of any
other municipal corporation or school district included wholly or partly
within such territory, including principal and interest, which exists when
this Article takes effect, shall be a charge upon and shall be paid by the City
of Hornell as the same shall become due and payable, to the Supervisor,
Treasurer, Acting Treasurer or other such officer performing the duties of
Treasurer of such town, municipal corporation or school district, as the
case may be, as the same shall become due and payable, in the same
proportion to the whole bonded and other indebtedness of such town,
municipal corporation or school district as the assessed valuation of the
territory to be annexed bears to the assessed valuation of such town,
municipal corporation or school district, as shown by the last assessment
roll of the Town of Hornellsville made prior to the date when such
annexation shall become effective under this Article.
§ A320-5. Apportionment of taxes.
All questions arising as to the apportionment of any taxes to be borne by
the territory to be annexed prior to the date when annexation shall become
effective shall be equitably and fairly agreed upon by representatives of the
City of Hornell, of the Town of Hornellsville and of any other party or parties
interested therein or affected thereby, and such representatives shall have
power to adjust any other disputes, differences or matters which may arise
The territory described in § A320-1 of this Article, when annexed to the
City of Hornell, shall constitute a part of the First Ward of said city, until
otherwise provided by law, and all the laws applicable to the City of
Hornell, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article shall apply
to such territory.
A.
All unpaid taxes heretofore levied against such annexed territory and
existing at the time this Article shall take effect shall be due and
payable and collected in all respects the same as if this law had not
been enacted.
B.
§ A320-2 HORNELL CODE § A320-5
290:630
because of such annexation and for which no definite solution is expressly
provided for herein.
§ A320-6. Effect on assembly and senatorial districts.
This Article shall in no way affect the assembly district of the County of
Steuben nor the senatorial district of which the County of Steuben is a part.
§ A320-7. Survey and map.
Within a reasonable time after such annexation, the City of Hornell shall
cause a survey to be made to the annexed territory and cause the
boundaries of the same to be marked with monuments or adopt and ratify
such a survey and marking previously made and shall cause a map of the
city, including the territory annexed, to be made and filed in the Steuben
County Clerk's office.
§ A320-8. Consent required.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article, the territory
described in § A320-1 hereof shall not become annexed to the City of
Hornell nor shall any of the foregoing provisions of this Article become
operative unless and until the consent of the City of Hornell, by its Mayor or
Acting Mayor and Council be obtained in the manner provided by law for the
passage of local ordinances, such consent to be given or denied by said city
authorities on or before the 27th day of January 1958. If such consent shall
be given on or before said date, then the territory described in § A320-1
hereof shall become a part of the City of Hornell upon the last day of January
1958 and all provisions of this Article shall be and become effective.
§ A320-9. When effective.
This Article shall take effect immediately.
§ A320-5 UTILITIES § A320-9
290:631

ARTICLE II
1969 Annexation
[Adopted as Sub-Part S of the 1970 Municipal Code]
§ A320-10. Territory described.
The City of Hornell shall contain, on and after the effective date of this
section, in addition to the territory theretofore contained within its
boundaries, the following described territory. Said property is generally
described as follows: on the north by the New York State Highway Route
No. 21, on the west and south by Canacadea Creek and on the east by
the city line of the City of Hornell, New York. Said property is more fully
described in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof.
SCHEDULE A
All that tract, piece or parcel of land, situate in the Town of Hornellsville,
County of Steuben and State of New York, bounded and described as
follows:
Being all of the land and premises situate north of the Erie Lackawanna
Railroad Company right-of-way bounded on the south by the Erie
Lackawanna Railroad Company, north boundary line thereof running
thence along the Canacadea Creek; on the east by lands of Arcieri and
Oyer, formerly; on the north by lands of Morris O'Connor; and on the east
by lands of Morris O'Connor.
Conveying and intending to convey all of the land and premises without
buildings thereon owned by the Grantors, Flanagan and situate north of
the said railroad north boundary line, consisting of about 1 1/2 and 2 acres
of land, more or less. Being the same premises set forth in a deed to
Birchwood Acres, Inc. recorded in the Steuben County Clerk's Office in
Liber 868 of Deeds at page 779.
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Hornellsville County
of Steuben and State of New York, bounded and described as follows:
§ A320-10 UTILITIES § A320-10
290:633
Beginning at an iron pin on the easterly boundary of the existing Hornell-
Almond State Highway at the intersection of said boundary with the
division line between the property of L. Morris O'Connor and Lydia
O'Connor on the west and the property of Birchwood Acres, Inc. on the
east; thence south 2° 30' 00" west along said division line 437.88 feet to
an iron pin on the northerly line of property conveyed to Birchwood Acres,
Inc., by Paul Flanagan and Louis Flanagan; thence north 87° 12' 00" west
along the north line of said property a distance of 933.50 feet to a point on
the easterly bank of Canacadea Creek; thence along the easterly bank of
Canacadea Creek the following 8 courses and distances: north 23° 41' 56"
west a distance of 75.29 feet; thence north 28° 17' 46" west a distance of
74.54 feet; thence north 22° 45' 30" west a distance of 106.45 feet; thence
north 27° 49' 22" west a distance of 93.77 feet; thence north 23° 41' 56"
west a distance of 100.08 feet; thence north 25° 24' 59" west a distance of
100.0 feet; thence north 25° 59' 22" west a distance of 100.0 feet; thence
north 11° 03' 29" a distance of 69.12 feet to a point on the southerly
boundary of said existing Hornell-Almond State Highway; thence north 80°
59' 30" east along said southerly boundary a distance of 97.62 feet to
a point; thence south 81° 03' 10" east along said southerly boundary a
distance of 219.14 feet to a point; thence south 75° 12' 50" east along said
southerly boundary line a distance of 962.19 feet to the point of beginning,
being 14.04 acres, more or less, as shown on a map made from a survey by
Stuart and Howard dated September 30, 1968.
PARCEL I.
All that tract or parcel of land, situate in the Town of Hornellsville, Steuben
County, New York, bounded and described as follows: beginning at a point
in the southerly bounds of the Hornell-Almond State Highway on the
division line between the lands of O'Connor on the west and the lands
herein conveyed on the east; thence south 10° 42' west 437.78 feet to a
point; thence south 79° 00' east 137.28 feet to an iron stake; thence north
17° 32' east 398.09 feet to the southerly bounds of the Hornell-Almond
State Highway; thence north 66° 7' west along the southerly bounds of the
Hornell-Almond State Highway 189.65 feet to the place of beginning.
Being a portion of the premises described in a warranty deed dated the
25th day of March 1946 from Joseph Arcieri to Joseph Arcieri and Novenia
Arcieri, his wife, as tenants by the entirety, and recorded in the Steuben
County Clerk's Office on the 25th day of April 1946, in Liber 516 of Deeds
at Page 557.
Subject to an easement dated June 21, 1950, from Joseph Arcieri to New
York State Electric and Gas Corporation and recorded September 14, 1950,
in Liber 603 of Deeds at Page 112.
Being the same premises described in executor's deed dated the 28th
day of June 1968, from Louis F. Arcieri, as executor of the last will and
testament of Joseph Arcieri to Alben, Inc. and recorded in the Steuben
County Clerk's Office September 20, 1968, in Liber 868, page 71.
PARCEL II.
§ A320-10 HORNELL CODE § A320-10
290:634
All that tract or parcel of land, situate in the Town of Hornellsville,
Steuben County, New York, bounded and described as follows: beginning
at a point in the southerly bounds of the Hornell-Almond State Highway on
the division line between the lands of Oyer on the east and the lands herein
conveyed on the west; thence south 24° 16' west 365.08 feet to an iron
stake; thence north 79° 00' west 68.64 feet to an iron stake; thence north
20° 53' east 380.87 feet to the southerly bounds of the Hornell-Almond
State Highway; thence along the southerly bounds of said highway 66° 7'
east 89.24 feet to the place of beginning.
Subject to a drainage permit dated May 21, 1935, from Flora R. Burdick
to the department of public works and recorded in Book 449 at page 433.
Being the same lands and premises described in a warranty deed dated
the 3rd day of July 1947, from Joseph Arcieri and Novenia Arcieri, his wife,
to Louis F. Arcieri and Shirley D. Arcieri, his wife, as tenants by the entirety,
and recorded in the Steuben County Clerk's Office on the 10th day of July
1947, in Book 541 of Deeds at page 372.
PARCEL III.
All that tract or parcel of land, situate in the Town of Hornellsville,
Steuben County, New York, bounded and described as follows: beginning in
the southerly bounds of the Hornell-Almond State Highway on the division
line between the lands of Louis F. Arcieri on the east and the lands herein
conveyed on the west; thence south 20° 53' west 380.87 feet to an iron
stake; thence north 79° 00' west 68.64 feet to an iron stake; thence north
17° 32' east 398.09 feet to the southerly bounds of the Hornell-Almond
State Highway; thence along the southerly bounds of said highway south
66° 7' east a distance of 91 feet to the place of beginning.
Being a lot devised to Louis F. Arcieri under the last will and testament
of Joseph Arcieri, deceased.
Subject to an easement dated June 21, 1950, from Joseph Arcieri to New
York State Electric and Gas Corporation and recorded September 14, 1950,
in Liber 603 of Deeds at Page 112.
Being the same premises described in warranty deed dated June 28,
1968, from Louis F. Arcieri to Alben, Inc., and recorded in the Steuben
County Clerk's Office September 20, 1968, in Book 868 of Deeds at page
73.
PARCEL IV.
§ A320-10 UTILITIES § A320-10
290:635
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Hornellsville,
County of Steuben and State of New York, bounded and described as
follows: beginning at a point in the southerly line of the Hornell-Almond
State Highway about 450 feet easterly from the estate line of the Ayers
property formerly, which point is the northeasterly corner of lands of
Galpin and running thence easterly along the southerly line of said state
highway a distance of 835 feet to a point; thence southerly a distance of
750 feet to a point which point is 690 feet easterly from said Ayers east
line; thence westerly a distance of 690 feet to said Ayers east line; thence
northerly along said Ayers east line to the southwesterly corner of lands of
Galpin, formerly; thence easterly along said Galpin's southerly line to the
southeast corner of said Galpin's land; thence northerly along said Galpin's
east line to the place of beginning, be the same more or less.
Also conveying to the grantee a right-of-way on and over a strip of
land 12 feet in width on the westerly side of the lands of Horace Galpin
commencing at the Hornell-Almond State Highway and extending in a
southerly direction to the center of a ditch at the foot of the hill.
Hereby conveying and intending to convey to the grantee all of the right,
title and interest in and to the premises owned by the grantors and situate
on the south side of the Hornell-Almond State Highway in said Town of
Hornellsville, Steuben County, New York.
Excepting and reserving from the foregoing described premises:
(1) The premises described in the deed from Helen R. Voght to the County
of Steuben, dated September 4, 1934, and recorded October 13th,
1934, in Book 446 of Deeds at page 375.
(2) All of the land located on the northerly side of the north line of the
new state highway, running from Hornell west to Almond, a portion of
which highway was constructed upon the property conveyed by Helen
R. Voght to the County of Steuben, by deed dated September 4, 1934,
and recorded October 13, 1934, in Book 446 of Deeds at page 375.
(3) Subject to the right-of-way granted by Estella Oyer to Empire Gas and
Fuel Company, dated September 29, 1941, recorded October 7, 1941,
in Book 491 of Deeds at page 117.
(4) Subject to the right-of-way given by Ellsworth E. Oyer and Edward
J. Oyer and Estella H. Oyer to New York State Electric and Gas
Corporation, dated February 24, 1938, and recorded October 9, 1946.
(5) Also subject to the permanent easement acquired by the State of New
York for the rights to construct stream channel, work area, access road
and drainage ditches for channel improvement on Canacadea Creek,
dated August 17, 1951, recorded September 10, 1951, in Book 623 at
page 58.
Being the same premises mentioned and described in executor's deed
dated April 22, 1966, from Ellsworth E. Oyer and Doris Oyer Moncofsky, as
executors of the last will and testament of Estella Oyer, to Alben, Inc., and
recorded in August 23, 1967, in Liber 854 of Deeds at page 866.
§ A320-10 HORNELL CODE § A320-11
290:636
§ A320-11. Legislative authority.
The territory described in § A320-10 of this Article is hereby annexed to
the City of Hornell pursuant to the provisions of Article 17 of the General
Municipal Law.
§ A320-12. Territory to constitute part of Fourth Ward.
The territory described in § A320-10 of this Article and annexed to the City
of Hornell by this Article shall be included in the Fourth Ward, seventh
voting district, of the City of Hornell.
§ A320-13. When effective.
Effective date of annexation. The annexation of the above territory
described in § A320-10 of this Article shall become effective on the 30th
day of April 1969.
A.
B. Effective date of local law. This Article shall take effect immediately.
§ A320-11 UTILITIES § A320-13
290:637

ARTICLE III
1986 Exclusion
[Adopted 4-14-1986]
§ A320-14. Territory amended described.
The description of the corporate boundaries of the City of Hornell, as
recorded in a resolution of the Hornell Common Council dated February
14, 1939, is hereby amended to read as follows: All that district of country
in the County of Steuben included within the following mentioned and
described line shall hereafter form and constitute the City of Hornell,
namely: beginning at a point on the present west boundary of the present
City of Hornell, said point being on the division line between Great Lots
Number Five and Six and at the center of a poplar tree 31 feet distant
north of the center line of the present state (or county) road to Almond,
thence north along said great line 7 chains and 77 links; thence north 72°
east 15 chains to the north side of road leading to Bald Hill; thence north
84° 15' east and 30 chains to a marked Basswood tree (said line crossing
Erie Railway tacks 3 chains and 52 links south of south end of theformer
Number Two Bridge of said railway); thence along the southwesterly bank
of Canisteo River 44 chains and 88 links, to the line between the Great
Lots Seven and Eight; thence southerly and southeasterly along west bank
of Canisteo River to a stake (said stake being south 13° west and 72 feet
distant from a marked elm tree on the east bank of said river, and also
north 17° 30' west and 23 1/2 feet distant from a marked oak tree on the
west bank of said river); thence south 84° east along the line between the
lands formerly owned by Martin Adsit and Martin Curry, a distance of 16
chains and 69 links to a stake 10 rods east of the east line of Lincoln Street
(said stake being south 23° west and 23 feet distant from a marked ash
tree, and also north 50° west and 35 feet distant from a marked ash tree,
and being on lands formerly owned by Martin Adsit) thence south 9° 15'
east a distance of 56 chains and 21 links to the south line of lands formerly
owned by Dugald Cameron, deceased; thence easterly along said south line
of Cameron lands to the line between the Great Lots Numbers Nine and Ten,
thence south along said line between said Great Lots Numbers Nine and Ten
83 chains and 43 links to the present most southerly boundary of said city
(April 20th, 1906); thence continuing south 13 chains and 3 links to a point
on the above mentioned line (between Great Lots Nine and Ten) extended;
thence westerly to an iron stake in the division line between Great Lots
Seven and Eight; thence north 11° 57' 55" east along said Great Lot Line
a distance of 1101.10 feet to a point, said point being located northerly
from the center line of Spencer Avenue; thence south 75° 10' 19" west,
approximately along the northerly bounds of Gypsy Hill Road, so called,
passing through an existing monument, at a distance of 55.03 feet, a total
distance of 947.90 feet, to a point; thence south 69° 17' 30" west continuing
along said approximate northerly bounds a distance of 559.00 feet, to a
point; thence south 43° 42' 31" west continuing along said approximate
northerly bounds a distance of 524.50 feet to an existing monument, said
point located along the center line of Prentiss Street, a street not now in
§ A320-14 UTILITIES § A320-14
290:639
use; thence north 7° 59' 42" east along said center line a distance of 527.41
feet to a point; thence north 41° 48' 03" east continuing along said center
line a distance of 753.72 feet to a point, said point intended to be along the
southerly line of Year 1906 city line; thence north 78° 15' 18" west along
said 1906 city line, passing through an iron pipe located along the westerly
bounds of said Prentiss Street, a distance of 1139.43 feet to an existing
monument, said point intended to be located along the westerly city line,
the westerly line of said Great Lot Number Seven; thence continuing north
along the line between Great Lots Number Six and Seven, 83 chains, thence
northerly 32 chains and 67 links, more or less, through a point on the center
line and at the westerly end of the concrete pavement west of the new
overhead crossing of the Erie Railroad to a point in the recent addition to
the Catholic cemetery, said point being distant northerly 100 feet from the
above-mentioned center line of western end of concrete pavement; thence
northwesterly 35 chains to the place of beginning.
§ A320-14 HORNELL CODE § A320-14
290:640
ARTICLE IV
1993 Annexation
[Adopted 1-25-1993 as L.L. No. 1-1993]
§ A320-15. Territory described.
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Hornellsville, County
of Steuben, State of New York, and being more particularly bounded and
described as follows:
Beginning at a found iron pin, said pin being located on the westerly
bounds of New York State Route 36 at the intersection of the northerly line
of the parcel conveyed from SJM Properties, Inc. to the Hornell Industrial
Development Agency; thence along the westerly bounds of Route 36.
1.) South 202 35' 54” east, 316.30' to a found concrete monument;
thence
2.) South 08 32' 08” east, 405.25' to a found concrete monument;
thence
3.) South 15 38' 48” east, 519.36' to a found concrete monument;
thence
4.) South 21 14' 02” east, 1686.06' to a found concrete monument;
thence
5.) South 18 48' 51” east, 289.19' to a found concrete monument;
thence
6.) South 21 54' 24” east, 401.81' to a found concrete monument;
thence
7.) South 08 37' 32” east, 343.89' to a found concrete monument;
thence
8.) South 00 33' 44” east, 4O8.33' to a found concrete monument;
thence
9.) South 62 07' 01” west, 210.01' to a point; thence
10.) South 03 49' 17” west, 210.01' to a point; thence
11.) South 24 41' 16” east, 102.96' to a point; thence
12.) South 02 27' 59” west, 103.09' to a point in the Center of the
Canisteo River;
13.) North 31 28' 02” west, 3846.37' to a point; thence
14.) North 06 49' 06” east, 473.71' to a point; thence
15.) North 84 48' 20” east, 220.91' to a point; thence
16.) North 27 53' 50” east, 96.18' to a point; thence
17.) North 13 46' 54” west, 272.86' to a point; thence
18.) South 86 31' 54” west, 165.30' to a point; thence
19.) North 60 15' 18” west, 120.93' to a point; thence
§ A320-15 UTILITIES § A320-15
290:641
20.) North 22 22' 49” west, 80.42' to a point; thence
21.) South 87 37' 01” east, 820.59' to a point; thence
22.) North 01 56' 57” east, 430.34' to a point; thence
23.) South 88 04' 21” east, 157.92' to the point and place of beginning
containing 79.969 acres of land.
§ A320-15 HORNELL CODE § A320-15
290:642
ARTICLE V
1995 Annexation
[Adopted 5-25-1995 as L.L. No. 1-1995]
§ A320-16. Purpose and background.
The purpose of this Article is to annex approximately 80 acres of land (as
hereinafter described) owned by the City of Hornell Industrial Development
Agency into the City of Hornell. This Article is made pursuant to:
§ A320-17. Territory described.
The City of Hornell shall contain, on and after the effective date of this
Article, in addition to the territory heretofore confined within its
boundaries, the following described territory:
Request and permission of City of Hornell Industrial Development
Agency as owner of the property to be annexed.
A.
Consent and approval to such annexation by the Town of Hornellsville
as evidenced by a certain annexation agreement dated September 8,
1992, between the City of Hornell, the City of Hornell Industrial
Development Agency and the Town of Hornellsville.
B.
Approval and consent to such annexation by the Village of North
Hornell as evidenced by an October 13, 1992, annexation agreement
between the City of Hornell, The City of Hornell Industrial Development
Agency and the Village of North Hornell.
C.
Public hearings before the City Council on January 25, 1993, December
27, 1993, and May 24, 1995, concerning this proposed annexation.
D.
Environmental Review Record for proposed Hornell Shopping Center
which record includes: - DEIS dated April 1993.
E.
F. Comments on DEIS received through June 1, 1993.
Response to comments on 4/93 DEIS as contained in a July 1993
document then entitled "Final Environmental Impact Statement"
(hereafter 7/93 FEIS).
G.
Supplemental Draft Environmental Impact Statement (SDEIS) dated
March 20, 1995.
H.
Comments on SDEIS and document dated May 12, 1995, entitled "Final
Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS)."
I.
J. SEQRA Lead Agency findings dated May 24, 1995.
K. Findings and determinations of this City Council made May 25, 1995.
§ A320-16 UTILITIES § A320-17
290:643
All that tract or parcel of land formerly situate in the Village of North
Hornell Town of Hornellsville County of Steuben, State of New York, and
being more particularly bounded and described as follows:
Beginning at a found iron pin, said pin being located on the westerly
bounds of New York State Route 36 at the intersection of the northerly line
of the parcel conveyed from SJM Properties, Inc. to the Hornell Industrial
Development Agency by deed recorded in the Steuben County Clerk's
Office on April 30, 1991, at Liber 1300 of Deeds at page 337; thence along
the westerly bounds of Route 36.
1.) S202 35' 54” E, 316.30' to a found concrete monument; thence
2.) S08 32' 08” E, 405.25' to a found concrete monument; thence
3.) S15 38' 48” E, 519.36' to a found concrete monument; thence
4.) S21 14' 02” E, 1686.06' to a found concrete monument; thence
5.) S18 48' 51” E, 289.19' to a found concrete monument; thence
6.) S21 54' 24” E, 401.81' to a found concrete monument; thence
7.) S08 37' 32” E, 343.89' to a found concrete monument; thence
8.) S00 33' 44” E, 408.33' to a found concrete monument; thence
9.) S62 07' 01” W, 210.01' to a point; thence
10.) S03 49' 17” W, 210.01' to a point; thence
11.) S24 41' 16” E, 102.96' to a point; thence
12.) S02 27' 59” W, 103.09' to a point in the Center of the Canisteo
River;
13.) N31 28' 02” W, 3846.37' to a point; thence
14.) N06 49' 06” E, 473.71' to a point; thence
15.) N84 48' 20” E, 220.91' to a point; thence
16.) N27 53' 50” E, 96.18' to a point; thence
17.) N13 46' 54” W, 272.86' to a point; thence
18.) S86 31' 54” W, 165.30' to a point; thence
19.) N60 15' 18” W, 120.93' to a point; thence
20.) N22 22' 49” W, 80.42' to a point; thence
21.) S87, 37' 01” E, 820.59' to a point; thence
22.) N01 56' 57” E, 430.34' to a point; thence
23.) S88 04' 21” E, 157.92' to the point and place of beginning
containing 79.969 acres of land.
§ A320-18. Legislative authority.
The territory described above is hereby annexed to the City of Hornell
pursuant to the provisions and authority of Article 17 of the General
Municipal Law.
§ A320-17 HORNELL CODE § A320-19
290:644
§ A320-19. Territory to constitute part of First Ward.
The territory hereby annexed to the City of Hornell shall be included in
the First Ward Voting District of the City of Hornell. This designation is for
administrative convenience insofar as no voters reside in such territory and
it is not intended that any residences will be constructed in the annexed
territory.
§ A320-20. Zoning classification.
The territory hereby annexed to the City of Hornell shall be classified on the
Official Zoning Map and in the official Zoning Code of the City of Hornell as
B-2 Commercial, and such map and Code are hereby so amended.139
139. Editor's Note: Said Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
City Clerk.
§ A320-19 UTILITIES § A320-20
290:645

ARTICLE VI
2004 Annexation
[Adopted 3-22-2004]
§ A320-21. Territory described.
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Hornellsville, County
of Steuben, State of New York, and being more particularly bounded and
described as follows;
Beginning at a point where the center line of Ice House Road intersects
with the City of Hornell/Town of Hornellsville line being approximately
570±' from the center line intersection of Ice House Road and East Avenue;
at station 5+70.13±; thence along the center line of Ice House Road
1. S 10°16'01" E a distance of 110.61' to a point; thence continuing
2. S 14°37'30" E a distance of 137.90' to a point; thence continuing
3. S 16°29'l 4" E a distance of 1816.38' to a point where the center line of
Ice House Road intersects the north bounds of the Hornell Industrial
Development Agency, said point being station 26+35.00 in the center
line of Ice House Road, said center line having its 0+00 point at its
intersection with the centerline of East Avenue.
Intending to convey all of Ice House Road from the City of Hornell/Town
of Hornellsville line to the north line of Hornell Industrial Development
Agency, said road being a three-rod (49.5') wide strip of land centering on
the above description; and
Whereas, the Town of Hornellsville agreed, on September 8, 2003, to allow
the City of Hornell annexation rights to the Ice House Road parcel; and
whereas, the Common Council of the City of Hornell formally accepted
the property description of Ice House Road on February 23, 2004; now,
therefore, the Common Council, duly convened does hereby resolve that
the Common Council approves the annexation of the Ice House Road
parcel, as described by the above description.
§ A320-21 UTILITIES § A320-21
290:647

ARTICLE VII
2005 Annexation
[Adopted 11-14-2005]
§ A320-22. Territory described.
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Hornellsville, County
of Steuben, State of New York, and being more particularly bounded and
described as follows:
Beginning at a point where the centerline of Ice House Road intersects
with the City of Hornell/Town of Hornellsville line being approximately
570+' from the centerline intersection of Ice House Road and East Avenue;
at station 5+70.13+; thence along the centerline of Ice House Road
1. S 10°16'01"E, a distance of 110.61' to a point; thence continuing
2. S 14°37'30"E, a distance of 137.90' to a point; thence continuing
3. S 16°29'14" E, a distance of 1816.38' to a point where the centerline
of Ice House Road intersects the north bounds of the Hornell
Industrial Development Agency, said point being station 26+35.00 in
the centerline of Ice House Road, said centerline having its 0+00
point at its intersection with the centerline of East Avenue. Thence
along the lands of the Hornell IDA the following courses and distances
4. N 73°30'46" E, a distance of 24.75' to a point on the easterly bounds
of Ice House Road; thence continuing
5. N 74° E, a distance of 298+ feet to a point approximately 30 feet
westerly of and at right angles to the centerline of Conrail
Corporation's track No. 117; thence
6. S 43° E, a distance of 1034+ feet; thence
7. S 38° E, a distance of 1725+ feet; thence
8. S 60° E, a distance of 1331+ feet; the last three courses and distances
generally paralleling at a distance of approximately 30 feet westerly
there from the centerline of said Track No. 117; thence
9. S 27° W, a distance of 106+ feet to a point on the before mentioned
easterly highway boundary of Ice House Road; thence along said
easterly boundary
10. 4294+ feet to course no. 5 above.
Intending to convey 23.92 acres of land more or less set forth in courses
five through ten and a 249.5' width road centering on courses one through
three. This would be a 49.5' roadway and a 100-foot wide strip of land on
either side from the present City of Hornell to the northerly terminus of the
lands of the Hornell I.D.A.
§ A320-22 UTILITIES § A320-22
290:649
Also intending to convey all that tract or parcel of land lying along the
westerly line of the above 23.92 acres being a strip of land 49.5' in width.
Said strip of land being the location of Ice House Road from Station
26+35.00 to approximately Station 69+29.00+ and ending at the southerly
limit of said above 23.92 acre parcel; and
Whereas, the Town of Hornellsville has agreed to a memorandum of
understanding with the City of Hornell to allow the friendly annexation of
real property being commonly known as the South Yards property from
the Town into the City of Hornell; and whereas, a public hearing on
said annexation was properly and formally held at 6:45 p.m. November
14, 2005, in Hornell City Hall; now, therefore, the Common Council duly
convened, does hereby resolve that the Common Council approves the
annexation of the South Yards property, as described by the above
description, into the City of Hornell.
§ A320-22 HORNELL CODE § A320-22
290:650
ARTICLE VIII
2008 Annexation
[Adopted 4-2-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
§ A320-23. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the annexation by the City of
certain territory of the Town and Village in accordance with and pursuant
to Article 17 (the Municipal Annexation Law) of the General Municipal Law
of the State of New York. It is the intent of this article to permit the City to
complete the annexation of such territory based upon the following:
§ A320-24. Territory described.
In accordance with and pursuant to Article 17 (the Municipal Annexation
Law) of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, the City hereby
annexes the following described territory situated within the Town and the
Village, and thereupon, the City shall contain and include such property in
addition to all of the territory heretofore contained within its boundaries:
All that tract or parcel of land, situate in the Town of Hornellsville, Village
of North Hornell, County of Steuben, State of New York, more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the southerly line of Bethesda Drive and the
easterly line of New
York State Routes 21 and 36. Said point of beginning being witnessed by a
ROW Mon found 1.0' North and 0.6' West
The governing board of the City, at a meeting held on December 17,
2007, as required by law having made a negative declaration under
the State Environmental Quality Review Act and thereby having
determined that the proposed annexation will not result in any adverse
environmental impacts;
A.
The governing board of the City, at a meeting held on January 28, 2008,
as required by law having made the necessary findings and order that
the proposed annexation is in the overall public interest, and the filing
thereof in the offices of the clerks of the Village and Town, together
with all other documents required pursuant to Article 17 (the Municipal
Annexation Law) of the General Municipal Law;
B.
The governing board of the Town, as required by law having made
the necessary findings and order that the proposed annexation is in
the overall public interest, and the filing thereof in the offices of the
affected governments;
C.
The governing board of the Village, as required by law having made
the necessary findings and order that the proposed annexation is in the
overall public interest, and the filing thereof in the offices of the clerks
of governments.
D.
§ A320-23 UTILITIES § A320-24
290:651
1. Thence, North 69°03'56" East, continuing in said southerly line of
Bethesda Drive, a distance of 175.58 feet to a point witnessed by a
ROW Mon found 0.0' north and 0.0' east;
2. Thence, North 74°45'34" East, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 143.39 feet;
3. Thence, North 81°52'48" East, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 197.89 feet to a point witnessed by a Rebar found 0.0'
north and 0.1' west;
4. Thence, North 74°45'34" East, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 143.39 feet;
5. Thence, South 88°32'01" East, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 261.39 feet to a point witnessed by a Rebar found 0.5'
south and 0.2' east;
6. Thence, South 02°58'33" West, a distance of 498.67 feet;
7. Thence, North 87°01'27" West, a distance of 41.12 feet to a point
witnessed by a Rebar found 0.2' south and 2.6' west;
8. Thence, South 02°58'33" West, a distance of 118.00 feet;
9. Thence, South 04°35'27" East, a distance of 97.01 feet;
10. Thence, South 29°21'27" East, a distance of 42.00 feet;
11. Thence, South 16°17'27" East, a distance of 74.53 feet;
12. Thence, North 87°01'27" West, a distance of 17.00 feet;
13. Thence, South 02°58'33" West, a distance of 605.00 feet to a point
witnessed by a Rebar found 0.0' north and 0.1' east;
14. Thence, South 87°01'27" East, a distance of 9.93 feet to a point
witnessed by a Rebar found 0.4' north and 0.1' east;
15. Thence, South 05°02'02" East, a distance of 1455.35 feet to a point
located near the approximate center line of the Canisteo River;
16. Thence, Northwesterly along the said center line of the Canisteo
River, on a nontangent curve to the right, having an arc length
of 674.11 feet, a radius of 1123.94 feet and an included angle of
34°22'40", said point being located along the easterly bounds of the
relocated NYS Route 36 and 21 and the approximate center line of
the Canisteo River;
17. Thence, North 08°19'43" East, in said easterly line of NYS Routes 36
and 21, a distance of 410.72 feet to a point witnessed by a ROW Mon
found 0.7' south and 1.1' west;
18. Thence, North 05°39'13" East, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 345.02 feet to a point witnessed by a ROW Mon found 0.7'
south and 0.8' west;
19. Thence, North 00°30'27" West, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 240.10 feet to a point witnessed by a ROW Mon found 0.3'
south and 0.5' west;
§ A320-24 HORNELL CODE § A320-24
290:652
20. Thence, North 06°40'26" West, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 445.19 feet to a point witnessed by a ROW Mon found 0.0'
north and 0.0' east;
21. Thence, North 14°48'39" West, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 381.03 feet to a point witnessed by a ROW Mon found 0.
8' north and 0.0' east;
22. Thence, North 14°44'41" West, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 156.36 feet to a point witnessed by a ROW Mon found 0
.3' north and 1.4' west;
23. Thence, North 20°50'51" West, continuing in same said line, a
distance of 560.67 feet to the point of beginning.
Containing 1,509,956 square feet, (34.664± acres)
Intending to describe a parcel of land shown on map prepared by Clough
Harbour and Associates, LLP titled "Survey for Lowe's Home Centers, Inc."
project No. 14611, dated 10/1/05.
The above-described parcel is further designated as Tax Map Parcel
Number 136.18-01.002.11 on the Tax Map of the Town of Hornellsville,
Steuben County, New York.
§ A320-24 UTILITIES § A320-24
290:653
Chapter A325
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fair housing — See Ch. 176. Housing standards — See Ch. 178.
§ A325-1. Creation; powers and duties; organization.
A municipal housing authority to be known as the "City of Hornell Housing
Authority" is hereby created and established for the City of Hornell in the
County of Steuben for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
specified in Article 18 of the Constitution of the State of New York. It shall
constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and consist
of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter
conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be
organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of
this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and its
operations and activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions
of this chapter.
§ A325-2. When effective.
This act shall take effect immediately.
Chapter A330
MEETINGS
§ A320-24 HORNELL CODE § A325-2
A325:654
ARTICLE I
Town of Hornellsville Officials
[Adopted as Sub-Part I of the 1970 Municipal Code140]
§ A330-1. Authorization granted to hold meetings in city.
Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, the town board and
any other boards, commissions, committees or agencies of the Town of
Hornellsville, Steuben County, are hereby authorized and empowered to
hold meetings and hearings in the City of Hornell, and any Justice of the
Peace of such town is hereby authorized to hold Justice Court, a Court
of Special Sessions or Magistrate Court for the Town of Hornellsville and
perform any function for such town within his jurisdiction in the City of
Hornell.
§ A330-2. When effective.
This Article shall take effect immediately.
140. Editor's Note: This Sub-Part I was derived from Chapter 1077 of the Laws of 1960 of the
Legislature of the State of New York.
§ A330-1 MEETINGS § A330-2
A330:655
Chapter A335
PARKLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 205.
§ A330-2 HORNELL CODE § A330-2
A335:656
ARTICLE I
Maple City Park
[Adopted as Sub-Part K of the 1970 Municipal Code141]
§ A335-1. Discontinuance and conveyance of parklands.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local law, the City
of Hornell may, by local law or ordinance, discontinue the use for park,
recreational or other public purposes approximately five acres more or less
of Maple City Park and convey the same to the Hornell City School District
for educational purposes; provided, however, that the real property to be
conveyed shall in the local law or ordinance be described by a metes and
bounds description and the local law or ordinance shall be subject to the
provisions of a permissive referendum contained in § 23 of the General City
Law.
§ A335-2. When effective.
This Article shall take effect immediately.
141. Editor's Note: This Sub-Part K was derived from Chapter 704 of the Laws of 1961 of the
Legislature of the State of New York.
§ A335-1 PARKLANDS § A335-2
A335:657
Chapter A340
STATE ARTERIALS
§ A340-1. Designation.
The following are state arterial highways:
§ A340-2. When effective.
This act shall take effect immediately.
Chapter A345
URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Urban Renewal Agency — See Ch. 80.
§ A345-1. Establishment; membership; powers and duties;
organization.
A municipal urban renewal agency, to be known as the "Hornell Urban
Renewal Agency," is hereby established for the accomplishment of any
or all of the purposes specified in Articles 15 and 15-A of the General
Municipal Law of New York State and in accordance with Article 18 of the
Constitution of the State of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate
and politic, be perpetual in duration and consist of not less than three and
not more than five members, including the Mayor. The additional members
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the concurring approval of the City
Common Council. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter
conferred by Article 15-A of said General Municipal Law upon municipal
renewal agencies. It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and
subject to the provisions of Article 15-A of said General Municipal Law, and
the agency, its members, officers and employees and activities shall in all
respects be governed by the provisions of such article.
Beginning at a point on the southerly city line, in the vicinity of State
Highway 5,212, thence northerly on or along Canisteo Street and
continuing northerly on a new location, as determined by the
Commissioner of Transportation, to the north city line, in the vicinity of
State Highway 5,130. The approximate length is 2.1 miles.
A.
Beginning at the westerly city line, State Highway 5,342, thence
southeasterly along West Main Street and Main Street to an
intersection with the arterial route described in the above paragraph.
The approximate length is six-tenths (0.6) mile.
B.
§ A335-2 HORNELL CODE § A345-2
A340:658
§ A345-2. When effective.
This act shall take effect immediately.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption Date
or Enactment
Number Subject Disposition
3-12-1991 Foreclosure of tax lien by action in
rem
Ch. 280, Art. IV
4-8-1991 Garbage/recyclables surcharge Ch. 160, Art. III
5-28-1991 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
5-28-1991 Records retention Ch. 235, Art. II
8-26-1991 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-12-1991 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
12-9-1991 Procurement policy Ch. 65
2-25-1992 Fees amendment New legislation
pending; see Ch.
142
5-26-1992 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
5-26-1992 Building certificates of occupancy Ch. 120
5-26-1992 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 115
L.L. No. 1-1992 Charter amendment § C-86
8-24-1992 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 2-1992 Garbage; unpaid fees and charges Ch. 160, Art. IV
9-14-1992 Amendment to guidelines for
disposal of properties
NCM
L.L. No. 3-1992 Senior citizens tax exemption Ch. 280, Art. V
L.L. No. 4-1992 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
12-28-1992 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
12-28-1992 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
2-9-1993 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
4-28-1993 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 285
L.L. No. 1-1993 1993 Annexation Ch. A320, Art. IV
§ A345-2 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY § DL-1
A345:659
Adoption Date
or Enactment
Number Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-1994 Senior citizens tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 280, Art. V
L.L. No. 2-1994 Board of Plumbing Overseers
amendment
Ch. 228
L.L. No. 3-1994 Business Improvement Districts Ch. 27, Art. I
L.L. No. 4-1994 Charter amendment § C-95
L.L. No. 1-1995 1995 Annexation Ch. 320, Art. V
L.L. No. 2-1995 Zoning amendment Ch. 315
L.L. No. 3-1995 Tax Exemption for Capital
Improvements
Ch. 280, Art. VI
L.L. No. 1-1996 Planning Board Ch. 63
L.L. No. 2-1996 Hornell Business Improvement
District
Ch. 27, Art. II
L.L. No. 3-1996 Property maintenance Ch. 168
L.L. No. 1-1997 Abandoned and unsafe buildings Ch. 122
L.L. No. 2-1997 Residency requirements Ch. 74
L.L. No. 1-1998 Adult entertainment Ch. 87
10-14-1998 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
10-14-1998 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
10-14-1998 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-9-1998 Transient merchants amendment Ch. 215, Art. II
L.L. No. 1-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 2-1999 Tattooing Ch. 278
4-26-1999 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 135
4-26-1999 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
4-26-1999 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 3-1999 Charter amendment § C-18
6-14-1999 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
8-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
10-12-1999 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-22-1999 Licensing of contractors
amendment
Ch. 128
11-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
1-24-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
§ DL-1 HORNELL CODE § DL-1
A345:660
Adoption Date
or Enactment
Number Subject Disposition
9-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
9-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
9-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
9-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 1-2000 Zoning Ch. 315
L.L. No. 2-2000 Empire Zone Ch. 43
6-25-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
7-23-2001 Trees Ch. 288
8-27-2001 Building certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 120
8-27-2001 Building certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 120
L.L. No. 1-2001 Tax exemption for living quarters
for parents and grandparents
Ch. 280, Art. VII
11-12-2001 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 2-2001 Empire Zone map amendment NCM; See Ch. 43
L.L. No. 1-2002 Charter amendment: Deputy
Mayor
§ C-19
L.L. No. 2-2002 Retirement incentive program NCM
L.L. No. 3-2002 Abolish Civil Service Commission Defeated at
referendum
L.L. No. 4-2002 Empire Zone map amendment NCM; See Ch. 43
4-8-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
4-8-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
4-8-2002 Dogs amendment Ch. 135, Art. II
6-24-2002 Dogs amendment Ch. 135, Art. II
10-14-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
10-14-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
10-28-2002 Garbage disposal and collection
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. I
2-10-2003 Registration of dangerous dogs Ch. 135, Art. V
2-10-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
7-28-2003 Planning Board amendment Ch. 63
11-17-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-17-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-17-2003 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
§ DL-1 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY § DL-1
A345:661
Adoption Date
or Enactment
Number Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2003 Empire Zone map amendment NCM; See Ch. 43
12-22-2003 911 Map Ch. 33
L.L. No. 1-2004 Annexation Ch. A320, Art. VI
L.L. No. 2-2004 Senior citizens tax exemption Ch. 280, Art. V
5-10-2004 911 map amendment NCM
8-23-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
10-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
2-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
2-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
2-17-2005 Park pavilion use fee NCM
5-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
6-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
6-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
7-25-2005 Residential occupancy permits Ch. 120
9-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 1-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 315
L.L. No. 2-2005 Annexation Ch. A320, Art. VII
12-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
12-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
1-23-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
2-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
7-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 1-2007 Fire prevention and building
construction
Ch. 148
5-29-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
5-29-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
10-22-2007 Garbage collection and disposal
amendment
Ch. 160
L.L. No. 2-2007 Empire Zone map amendment NCM; See Ch. 43
L.L. No. 3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 315
L.L. No. 1-2008 Empire Zone map amendment NCM; See Ch. 43
L.L. No. 2-2008 2008 annexation Ch. A320, Art. VIII
L.L. No. 3-2008 Renewal of cable television
franchise agreement
NCM
L.L. No. 4-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 315
§ DL-1 HORNELL CODE § DL-1
A345:662
Adoption Date
or Enactment
Number Subject Disposition
7-28-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 5-2008 Taxation: alternative veterans
exemption limits
Ch. 280, Art. VIII
L.L. No. 6-2008 Taxation: Cold War veterans
exemption
Ch. 280, Art. IX
10-27-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
10-27-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
2-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
4-27-2009 Skateboards and scooters Ch. 258
6-30-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
7-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 1-2010 Retirement incentive program NCM
11-15-2010 Nuisance buildings Ch. 201, Art. I
11-15-2010 Storage of vehicles and parts
amendment
Ch. 296
L.L. No. 2-2010 Dogs amendment Ch. 135, Art. II
6-27-2011 Salary of City Chamberlain NCM
10-24-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-14-2011 Abatement of nuisances rules and
regulations
Ch. 201, Art. II
L.L. No. 1-2012 2012 tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No. 2-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-25-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
9-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
9-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
10-22-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 3-2012 Tax abatement for rehabilitated
commercial and mixed-use
properties
Ch. 280, Art. X
12-17-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
2-4-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
2-25-2013 Water Department Rules and
Regulations
Ch. 306
L.L. No. 1-2013 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No. 2-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY § DL-1
A345:663
Adoption Date
or Enactment
Number Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 3-2013 Tattooing repealer; zoning
amendment
Chs. 278 (reference
only); 315
6-24-2013 Dogs and other animals: cat
control and nuisance
Ch. 135, Art. VI
6-24-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
7-22-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-18-2013 Housing standards: residential
premises amendment
Ch. 178, Part 1
11-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-18-2013 Peace and good order amendment Ch. 210
L.L. No. 1-2014 Tax levy limit override NCM
3-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
3-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 2-2014 Franchise agreement NCM
10-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
L.L. No. 1-2015 Annexation NCM
L.L. No. 2-2015 Charter amendment § C-18
L.L. No. 1-2016 Annexation NCM
L.L. No. 2-2016 Tax levy limit override NCM
L.L. No. 3-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8-15-2016 Procurement policy amendment Ch. 65
10-17-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
8-21-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-20-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
11-20-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
12-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 300
12-18-2017 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 168
L.L. No. 1-2017 Tax Map Amendment NCM
L.L. No. 2-2017 Tax Map Amendment NCM
L.L. No. 3-2017 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
L.L. No. 4-2017 Community Choice Aggregation
Program
Ch. 126
L.L. No. 5-2017 Taxation: Cold War Veterans
Exemption Amendment
Ch. 280, Art. IX
3-19-2018 Residency Requirements
Amendment
Ch. 74
§ DL-1 HORNELL CODE § DL-1
A345:664
Adoption Date
or Enactment
Number Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 1-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
L.L. No. 2-2018 Annexation NCM
L.L. No. 3-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 315
L.L. No. 4-2018 Charter Amendment § C-13
10-15-2018 Vehicles and Parts, Storage of
Amendment
Ch. 296
10-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 300
10-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 300
§ DL-1 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY § DL-1
A345:665

ZONING
315 Attachment 1
Schedule I
Residential Districts
Area, Yard and Height Regulations
Minimum Yard Dimensions
District
Dwelling
Type
Minimum
Lot
Area per
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Minimum
Width
of Lot
(feet)
Front
Yard
Depth (feet)
Side
Yard
Width
(feet)
Rear
Yard
Depth*
(feet)
Maximum
Height of
Main
Building
(stories)
R-1 1-family 11,250 75 30 10 30 3
R-2 1-family 7,500 49 25 6 25 3
R-2 2-family 3,500 49 25 6 25 3
R-3 1-family 7,500 49 25 5 20 3
R-3 2-family 3,500 49 25 5 20 3
R-3 Townhouse 2,500 100 -- -- -- 3
R-3 Apartment 1,500 100 -- -- -- --
NOTES:
 * Rear yard depth shall be 25% of the lot depth or the depth shown in this schedule, whichever is greater.
315 Attachment 1:1 03 - 01 - 2006