Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 295, together with an Appendix, shall
be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson,"
hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson" to any other local law, ordinance or resolution
appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate
chapter title, chapter number, article number or section number appearing
in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally
amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson,
and it is the intention of said Board that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this
Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson in force on the date of the adoption of this
local law and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in
force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective
date of this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson prior to the
effective date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for
the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which
may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating,
straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, park or other public place within the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson or other instruments or
evidence of the village's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for municipal employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the village.
N. Local Law No. 11-1983, regarding the Housing Standards Code of the
village.
§ 1-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and shall remain there
for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this
local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified
by the Village Clerk of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson by impressing
thereon the Seal of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, and such certified
copy shall remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law,
coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson" or any new local laws or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Board of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
O. Legislation regarding the controlling fire prevention standards for the
village.
P. Any local law adopted subsethis chapteruent to 6-18-1999.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson rethis
chapteruired to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the
public. All changes in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted
by the Board of Trustees subsethis chapteruent to the enactment of this
local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part
of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by
temporary attachment of copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions
until such changes, local laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to
said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Village Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of
a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson or who alters or tampers with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any
other provision of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, no
changes in the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances
and resolutions had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
§ 1-8 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, such local law to be entitled
"General Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this
local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
C. Nomenclature. In Chapter 295, Zoning, references to the "Building
Code" or "Building Construction Code" are updated to read "Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code."
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the
following wording: "amended (added) 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999." A complete
description of all changes is on file in the village offices.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

ARTICLE II
Penalties
[Adopted 2-5-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
§ 1-14. Penalties for offenses against Code provisions.
Except where specifically provided elsewhere, any person who violates any
provision of this Code or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine of not more than $250
or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or
remedy an infraction.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9

ARTICLE III
Definitions and Word Usage
[Adopted 2-5-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
§ 1-15. Terms defined; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter and the Code adopted hereby, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees of
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, corporation, association,
society or group.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, New York.
B. When the content in which words are used in this chapter and Code
indicate that such is the intent, words in the singular shall include the
plural, and vice versa, and pronouns in the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter gender, and vice versa.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:11
Chapter 4
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 4-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEARANCE TICKET — A written notice issued and subscribed by a public
servant authorized by law to issue the same, directing a designated person
to appear in a designated local criminal court at a designated future time
charging him or her with the commission of a designated offense. A notice
conforming to such definition constitutes an appearance ticket, regardless
of whether it is referred to in some other provision of law as a summons or
by any other name or title.
§ 4-2. Authority to issue. [Amended 5-20-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
The following persons are hereby authorized and empowered to issue and
serve appearance tickets, provided that the issuance thereof is made
pursuant to their statutory authority and otherwise consistent with the
terms and provisions of this chapter:
§ 4-3. Applicability.
A. Village Manager.
B. Building Inspector.
C. Parking enforcement officer(s).
D. Superintendent of Public Works.
E. Fire Inspector.
F. Hastings-on-Hudson police officer(s).
A. The following laws may be enforced by the issuance of appearance
tickets: all state, county and/or village:
(1) Electrical Code(s).
(2) Building Code(s).
(3) Housing Code(s).
(4) Zoning Code(s).
(5) Fire Code(s).
(6) Plumbing Code(s).
(7) Village Code(s).
§ 1-15 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 4-3
1:12
§ 4-4. Information to be included.
Every appearance ticket that is issued, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, shall include the following:
Chapter 7
ASSESSMENTS, REAL PROPERTY TAX
§ 7-1. Legislative intent.
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
is to implement § 1402(3) of the Real Property Tax Law providing for
the voluntary termination of the Village's status as an assessing unit, as
provided in the Village Law and the Real Property Tax Law. It is also the
intent of this chapter to abolish the position of Assessor and to terminate
any and all responsibility as provided by law for the review of the
assessments of real property located within the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
§ 7-2. Termination of Village as assessing unit.
On the effective date of this chapter, the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson shall
cease to be an assessing unit.
§ 7-3. Position of Assessor abolished.
The position of Assessor of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is hereby
abolished.
§ 7-4. Board of Assessment Review abolished.
The Board of Assessment Review in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is
hereby abolished.
B. All subjects that are regulated by Village of Hastings-on-Hudson local
laws and/or ordinances may be enforced by the issuance of appearance
tickets.
A. Name and address of party(ies) to whom the ticket is issued, when
known.
B. Citation of law(s) and the appropriate section(s) allegedly violated.
C. Place and date of the alleged violation(s).
D. Place, date and time that party(ies) is (are) required to appear in court.
E. Date of issuance of appearance ticket(s).
F. Title and signature of the issuing officer(s).
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5
1:13
§ 7-5. Taxes to be levied.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, taxes in the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson shall be levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment
roll of the Town of Greenburgh, with the taxable status dates of such Town
controlling for Village purposes.
Chapter 14
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 14-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide legal and financial protection
for those individuals serving the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson from losses
which may be brought against them in their individual capacity for actions
taken while in the performance of their official duties and responsibilities.
In enacting this chapter, the Board of Trustees finds that the State of New
York has enacted similar provisions for the legal and financial security
of its officers and employees and further finds that such security is also
required for local personnel. By enactment of this chapter, the Board of
Trustees does not intend to limit or otherwise abrogate any existing right
or responsibility of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson or its employees
with regard to indemnification or legal defense. It is solely the intent of
this chapter to provide maximum coverage for local employees, such as is
presently provided for state employees, so as to continue to attract qualified
individuals to local government service.
§ 14-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment or
employment in the service of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, whether
or not compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in
a municipally sponsored volunteer program, but shall include a former
employee, his or her estate or judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 14-3. Village to provide defense.
A. Conditions. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of
§ 14-5 of this chapter, the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson shall provide
for the defense of the employee in any civil and criminal action or
proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any alleged act or
omission of a federal, state or local rule or regulation which occurred or
is alleged in the complaint to have occurred while the employee was
acting within the scope of his or her public employment or duties, or
which is brought to enforce a provision of the laws of the United States,
including but not limited to 42 U.S.C. § 1981 or 1983.
§ 7-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 14-3
14:14
§ 14-4. Responsibilities of village.
B. Representation by Village Attorney; private counsel.
(1) Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section,
the employee shall be entitled to be represented by the Village
Attorney; provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his or her choice in any civil
judicial proceeding whenever the Village Attorney determines,
based upon his or her investigation and review of the facts and
circumstances of the case, that representation by the Village
Attorney would be inappropriate or whenever a court of competent
jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or by special proceeding,
determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the employee
is entitled to be represented by private counsel of his or her choice.
The Village Attorney shall notify the employee, in writing, of such
determination that the employee is entitled to be represented by
private counsel of his or her choice.
(2) The Village Attorney may require, as a condition to payment of the
fees and expenses of such representation, that appropriate groups
of such employees be represented by the same counsel. If the
employee or group of employees is entitled to representation by
private counsel under the provisions of this section, the Village
Attorney shall so certify to the Village Board. Reasonable attorney's
fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the village to such
private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the civil
action or proceeding, subject to certification that the employee is
entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of this
section by the head of the department, commission, division or
agency in which such employee is employed and upon the audit and
warrant of the Village Treasurer. Any dispute with respect to
representation of multiple employees by a single counsel or the
amount of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of attorney's
fees shall be resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a
special proceeding.
C. Duty of Village Attorney. Where the employee delivers process and a
request for a defense to the Village Attorney as required by § 14-5 of
this chapter, the Attorney shall take the necessary steps, including the
retention of private counsel under the terms and conditions provided in
Subsection B of this section, on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of
a default judgment pending resolution of any question pertaining to the
obligation to provide for a defense.
A. Indemnification of employees. The village shall indemnify and save
harmless its employees in the amount of any judgment obtained against
such employees in any state or federal court, or in the amount of any
settlement of a claim, provided that the act or omission from which such
judgment or settlement arose occurred while the employee was acting
within the scope of his or her public employment or duties; the duty to
§ 14-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 14-4
14:15
§ 14-5. Cooperation of employee.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this chapter
shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Village Attorney or his or her
assistant, at his or her office, by the employee of the original or a copy of
any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five
days after he or she is served with such document; and the full cooperation
of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding and in defense
of any action or proceeding against the state based upon the same act
or omission, and in the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be
deemed a request by the employee that the village provide for his or her
defense pursuant to this chapter.
§ 14-6. Rights of other parties.
The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision
of the Workmen's Compensation Law.
indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this subsection shall not
arise where the injury or damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing
or recklessness on the part of the employee.
B. Settlement. An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to
be submitted to the Board of Trustees any proposed settlement which
may be subject to indemnification by the village and, if not inconsistent
with the provisions of this section, the Mayor shall certify such
settlement, and submit such settlement and certification to the Village
Attorney. The Attorney shall review such proposed settlement as to
form and amount and shall give his or her approval if, in his or her
judgment, the settlement is in the best interest of the village. Nothing in
this subsection shall be construed to authorize the village to indemnify
or save harmless an employee with respect to a settlement not so
reviewed and approved by the Village Attorney.
C. Payment of final judgment or settlement. Upon entry of a final judgment
against the employee or upon the settlement of the claim, the employee
shall cause to be served a copy of such judgment or settlement,
personally or by certified or registered mail or any other method of
delivery providing proof of delivery within 30 days of the date of entry
or settlement, upon the Mayor; and, if not inconsistent with the
provisions of this section, such judgment or settlement shall be certified
for payment by the Mayor. If the Attorney concurs in such certification,
the judgment or settlement shall be paid upon the audit and warrant of
the Village Treasurer. [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
§ 14-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 14-7
14:16
§ 14-7. Insurance policies.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 14-8. Pending litigation.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted, whether
or not the actions or commissions complained of occurred prior to or
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.
§ 14-9. Immunity.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of
this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the village, or any right to defense and/or
indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
Chapter 18
ETHICS
§ 14-7 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 14-9
14:17

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 18-1. Declaration of policy.
§ 18-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated or unless the context otherwise requires, when
used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEAR and APPEAR BEFORE — Communicating in any form, including,
without limitation, personally, through another person, by letter or by
telephone.
CUSTOMER or CLIENT —
A. The purposes of this chapter are:
(1) To establish high standards of ethical conduct for officers and
employees of the Village;
(2) To afford officers and employees of the Village clear guidance on
such standards;
(3) To promote public confidence in the integrity of the governance
and administration of the Village and its agencies and
administrative offices;
(4) By requiring public disclosure of financial interests that may
influence or be perceived to influence the actions of Village officers
and employees, to facilitate consideration of potential ethical
problems before they arise, minimize unwarranted suspicion and
enhance the accountability of government to the people; and
(5) To provide for the fair and effective administration of this chapter.
B. This chapter is enacted pursuant to § 806 of the General Municipal Law
of the State of New York and § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law and
is not intended to authorize any conduct prohibited by Article 18 of the
General Municipal Law. This chapter also supplements other provisions
of law regulating ethics in local government, such as § 107 of the Civil
Service Law of the State of New York.
Any person to whom a Village officer or employee has supplied goods
or services during the previous 24 months having, in the aggregate, a
value greater than $1,000; or
A.
Any person to whom a Village officer's or employee's outside employer
or business has supplied goods or services during the previous 24
months having, in the aggregate, a value greater than $1,000 but only
if the officer or employee knows or has reason to know the outside
employer or business supplied the goods or services.
B.
§ 18-1 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-2
14:19
ETHICS BOARD — The Ethics Board of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
established pursuant to § 18-17 of this chapter.
GIFT and FINANCIAL BENEFIT — Includes any money, service, license,
permit, contract, authorization, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality or
any promise thereof, or any other gratuity or promise thereof or anything
of value. A financial transaction may be a financial benefit but shall not be
a gift unless it is on terms not available to the general public. "Gift" and
"financial benefit" do not include campaign contributions authorized by law.
MINISTERIAL ACT — An action performed in a prescribed manner without
the exercise of judgment or discretion as to the propriety of the act.
OUTSIDE EMPLOYER OR BUSINESS —
PERSON — Includes both individuals and entities.
RELATIVE — A spouse, child, stepchild, brother, sister or parent of the
Village officer or employee, or a person claimed as a dependent on the
Village officer's or employee's latest individual state income tax return.
SUBORDINATE — Of a Village officer or employee, shall mean another
Village officer or employee over whose activities he or she has direction,
supervision or control, except those who serve in positions that are in the
exempt classification under § 41 of the Civil Service Law of the State of New
York or in the unclassified service under Subdivisions (a) through (f) of § 35
of that law.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, but shall not include the
Village Court.
VILLAGE OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — Any officer or employee of the
Village, whether paid or unpaid, and includes, without limitation, the Village
Attorney and all members of any office, board, body, advisory board, council,
commission, agency, department, district, administration, division, bureau
or committee of the Village. "Village officer or employee" shall not include:
"Outside employer or business" shall mean:
Any activity, other than service to the Village, from which the
Village officer or employee receives compensation for services
rendered or goods sold or produced.
(1)
Any entity, other than the Village, of which the Village officer
or employee is a member, officer, director or employee and from
which he or she receives compensation for services rendered or
goods sold or produced.
(2)
Any entity in which the Village officer or employee has an
ownership interest, except a corporation of which the Village
officer or employee owns less than 5% of the outstanding stock.
(3)
A.
For purposes of this definition, "compensation" shall not include
reimbursement for necessary expenses, including travel expenses.
B.
A. A judge, justice, officer or employee of the unified court system; or
§ 18-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 18-2
14:20
A volunteer firefighter or civil defense volunteer, except a fire chief or
assistant fire chief.
B.
§ 18-2 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-2
14:21

ARTICLE II
Substantive Provisions
§ 18-3. Provisions of Code of Ethics.
A. Provisions applicable to all Village officers or employees.
(1) General prohibition. A Village officer or employee shall not use his
or her official position or office, or take or fail to take any action, in
a manner which he or she knows or has reason to know may result
in a personal financial benefit for any of the following persons:
(a) The Village officer or employee;
(b) His or her outside employer or business;
(c) His or her business associate(s);
(d) A member of his or her household;
(e) A customer or client;
(f) A relative;
(g) A person from whom the officer or employee has received
election campaign contributions of more than $500 in the
aggregate during the past 12 months; or
(h) A person from whom the officer or employee has received a gift
valued at $75 or more within the previous 12 months.
(2) Recusal. A Village officer or employee shall promptly recuse
himself or herself from acting on a matter before the Village when
acting on the matter, or failing to act on the matter, may financially
benefit any of the persons listed in Subsection A of this section.
(3) Gifts. A Village officer or employee shall not solicit anything of
value from any person who has received or sought a financial
benefit from the Village, nor accept anything of value from any
person who the Village officer or employee knows or has reason to
know has received or sought a financial benefit from the Village
within the previous 24 months.
(4) Appearances. A Village officer or employee shall not appear before
the board, committee, agency, council or commission of which (s)he
is a member, except on his or her own behalf or on behalf of the
Village.
(5) Representation. A Village officer or employee shall not represent or
provide legal assistance to any other person in any matter that
person has before the board, committee, agency, council or
commission of which the Village officer or employee is a member,
nor shall (s)he represent or provide legal assistance to any other
person in any matter against the interests of the Village.
§ 18-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-3
14:23
§ 18-4. Transactional disclosure.
(6) Confidential information. A Village officer or employee and former
Village officers and employees shall not disclose any confidential
information or use it to further anyone's personal, business or
political interest.
(7) Political solicitation. A Village officer or employee shall not
knowingly request or knowingly authorize anyone else to request
any subordinate of the officer or employee to participate in an
election campaign or contribute to a political committee.
(8) Avoidance of conflicts. A Village officer or employee shall not
knowingly acquire, solicit, negotiate for or accept any interest,
employment or other thing of value that would put him or her in
violation of this Code of Ethics.
(9) Inducement of others. A Village officer or employee shall not induce
or aid another officer or employee of the Village to violate any of
the provisions of this Code of Ethics.
B. Provisions applicable to members of the Board of Trustees, Zoning
Board of Appeals and Planning Board and to paid Village employees. In
addition to the provisions of Subsection A:
(1) Representation. A member of the Board of Trustees, Zoning Board
of Appeals or Planning Board, or a paid Village employee, shall not
represent or provide legal assistance to any other person in any
matter that person has before the Village or represent or provide
legal assistance to any other person in any matter against the
interests of the Village.
(2) Appearances. A member of the Board of Trustees, Zoning Board of
Appeals or Planning Board, or a paid Village employee, shall not
appear before any agency of the Village, except on his or her own
behalf or on behalf of the Village.
(3) Political office. A member of the Board of Trustees, Zoning Board of
Appeals or Planning Board, or a paid Village employee, shall not
serve as a chairperson, district leader or officer for any partisan
political party that engages in political campaigning or
electioneering in the Village.
(4) Revolving door. A member of the Board of Trustees, Zoning Board
of Appeals or Planning Board, or a paid Village employee, shall not
appear or practice before the Village, except on his or her own
behalf, or receive compensation for working on any matter before
the Village, for a period of one year after the termination of his or
her Village service or employment; however, the bar shall be
permanent as to particular matters on which the Village officer or
employee personally worked while in Village service.
§ 18-3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 18-4
14:24
§ 18-5. Independent contractors.
Independent contractors of the Village shall comply with all the provisions
of Subsection A of § 18-3 and with § 18-4.
§ 18-6. Exclusions from Code of Ethics and from transactional
disclosure.
The provisions of §§ 18-3 and 18-4 of this chapter shall not prohibit, or
require recusal or transactional disclosure as a result of:
A. Whenever a Village officer or employee is required to recuse himself or
herself under the Code of Ethics set forth in § 18-3 of this chapter, he or
she shall:
(1) Immediately refrain from participating further in the matter;
(2) Promptly inform his or her superior, if any; and
(3) Promptly file with the Village Clerk a signed statement disclosing
the nature and extent of the prohibited action or, if a member of a
board, shall state that information upon the public record of the
board.
B. An officer or employee shall not be required to file a disclosure
statement pursuant to this section if he or she, with respect to the same
matter, has filed with the Village Board of Trustees a disclosure
statement complying with requirements of § 18-8 of this chapter.
A. A ministerial act.
B. Gifts:
(1) Received by the Village officer or employee from his or her parent,
spouse or child;
(2) Having an aggregate value of $75 or less during any twelve-month
period; or
(3) Accepted on behalf of the Village and transferred to the Village.
C. Gifts or benefits having a value of $50 or less that are received by a
Village officer or employee listed in § 11 of the Domestic Relations Law
of the State of New York for the solemnization of a marriage by that
officer or employee at a place other than his or her normal public place
of business or at a time other than his or her normal hours of business.
D. Awards from charitable organizations.
E. Receipt of Village services or benefits, or use of Village facilities, that
are generally available on the same terms and conditions to residents or
a class of residents in the Village.
§ 18-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-6
14:25
§ 18-7. Inducement of violations of Code of Ethics.
No person, whether or not a Village officer or employee, shall induce
or attempt to induce a Village officer or employee to violate any of the
provisions of § 18-3 or 18-4 of this chapter.
§ 18-8. Interests in contracts with Village.
§ 18-9. Appearances by outside employers and businesses of Village
officers and employees.
F. Representation of constituents by elected officials without
compensation in the proper discharge of their official duties.
G. Village officers or employees appearing or practicing before the Village
or receiving compensation for working on a matter before the Village
after termination of their Village service or employment where they
performed only ministerial acts while working for the Village.
A. Prohibited interests. No Village officer or employee shall have an
interest in a contract with the Village, or an interest in a bank or trust
company, that is prohibited by § 801 of the General Municipal Law of
the State of New York. Any contract willfully entered into by or with the
Village in which there is an interest prohibited by that section shall be
null, void and wholly unenforceable, to the extent provided by § 804 of
that law.
B. Disclosable interests. Any Village officer or employee who has, will have
or later acquires an interest in any actual or proposed contract with the
Village shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of that interest in
accordance with § 803 of the General Municipal Law. The Village Clerk
shall cause a copy of that disclosure to be filed promptly with the Ethics
Board.
C. Violations. Any Village officer or employee who willfully and knowingly
violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
to the extent provided by § 805 of the General Municipal Law.
A. Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, the outside employer
or business of a Village officer or employee shall not appear before the
particular agency in which the Village officer or employee serves or by
which he or she is employed.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, the outside employer
or business of a Village officer or employee shall not appear before any
other Village agency if the Village officer or employee has the authority
to appoint any officer, employee or member of the agency or to review,
approve, audit or authorize any budget, bill, payment or claim of the
agency.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the outside
employer or business of a Village officer or employee from:
§ 18-6 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 18-9
14:26
§ 18-10. Annual disclosure.
(1) Appearing on its own behalf, or on behalf of the Village, before a
Village agency;
(2) Seeking or obtaining a ministerial act; or
(3) Receiving a Village service or benefit, or using a Village facility,
that is generally available to the public.
A. Officers and employees required to file. Officers and employees holding
the following job titles or positions shall be required to file a signed
annual disclosure statement: [Amended 3-3-2020 by L.L. No.
2-2020]
(1) Officers and employees who are elected.
(2) The heads of any department or division of Village government and
persons authorized to act on their behalf.
(3) Officers and employees who hold policymaking positions, including
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning Board, and
the Architectural Review Board.
(4) Officers and employees whose job descriptions or actual duties
involve the negotiation, authorization or approval of:
(a) Contracts, leases, franchises, revocable consents, concessions,
variances, special permits or licenses;
(b) The purchase, sale, rental or lease of real property or services,
or a contract therefor;
(c) The obtaining of grants of money or loans; or
(d) The adoption or repeal of any rule or regulation having the
force and effect of law.
B. Time and place for filing. Annual disclosure statements shall be filed
with the Village Manager:
(1) Within 120 days after the effective date of this section;
(2) Within 30 days after becoming subject to the requirements of
Subsection A of this section; and
(3) No later than May 15 of each year thereafter.
C. Changes in disclosed information. Within 30 days after a change in the
information contained in his or her most recently filed annual
disclosure statement, an officer or employee shall file a signed
amendment to the statement indicating the change.
D. Contents of annual disclosure statement. The annual disclosure
statement shall disclose:
§ 18-9 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-10
14:27
§ 18-11. Applicant disclosure for requests to refrain from action.
(1) The location of any real property within the Village, or within one
mile of the boundary of the Village, in which the officer or
employee, or his or her relative or member of his or her household,
has a financial interest.
(2) With respect to each outside employer or business of the Village
officer or employee:
(a) Its name (if any).
(b) The nature of its business.
(c) Whether it is self employment, a sole proprietorship or an
entity and, if an entity, what type of entity.
(d) The Village officer's or employee's relationship to it, such as
owner, partner, officer, director, member, employee or
shareholder.
(3) With respect to each of the Village officer's or employee's relatives
or members of his/her household who has an employer or business
located in the Village or does business with the Village, the
information required by Subsection D(2) of this section.
E. Good faith efforts. Failure to disclose the information required by
Subsection D of this section with respect to a Village officer's or
employee's spouse or other relative shall not constitute a violation of
that subdivision if the officer or employee has made a good faith effort
to obtain the information and if he or she also sets forth those efforts in
his or her disclosure statement.
A. Where a person requests the Village or a Village officer or employee to
take or refrain from taking any action (other than a ministerial act) that
may result in a financial benefit both to the requestor and to either any
officer or employee of the Village or one of the other persons listed in
Subsection A(1) of § 18-3 of this chapter, the requestor shall disclose
the names of any such persons, to the extent known to the requestor at
the time of the request.
B. If the request is made in writing, the disclosure shall accompany the
request. If the request is oral and made at a meeting of a public body,
the disclosure shall be set forth in the public record of the body. If the
request is oral and not made at a meeting of a public body, the
disclosure shall be set forth in a writing filed with the Village Clerk.
C. A person shall not be required to file a disclosure statement pursuant to
this section if he or she, with respect to the same matter, has filed a
disclosure statement complying with requirements of § 18-12 of this
chapter.
§ 18-10 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 18-12
14:28
§ 18-12. Disclosure of applicants for land use applications.
§ 18-13. Void contracts.
Any contract or agreement entered into by or with the Village that results
in or from a violation of any provision of § 18-3, 18-4 or 18-9 of this
chapter shall be void unless ratified by the Village Board of Trustees. Such
ratification shall not affect the imposition of any criminal or civil penalties
pursuant to this chapter or any other provision of law.
§ 18-14. Penalties for offenses.
A. Disclosure. Every application, petition or request submitted for a
variance, amendment, change of zoning, approval of a plat, exemption
from a plat or Official Map, license or permit pursuant to the provisions
of any ordinance, local law, rule or regulation constituting the zoning
and planning regulations of the Village shall state the information
required, to the extent required, by § 809 of the General Municipal Law
of the State of New York.
B. Violations. Any person who willfully and knowingly violates the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, to the extent
provided by § 809 of the General Municipal Law.
A. Disciplinary action. Any Village officer or employee or independent
contractor who engages in any action that violates any provision of this
chapter may be warned or reprimanded or suspended or removed from
office or employment, or be subject to any other sanction authorized by
law or collective bargaining agreement, by the appointing authority or
person or body authorized by law to impose such sanctions. A warning,
reprimand, suspension, removal or other authorized sanction may be
imposed in addition to any other penalty contained in this chapter or in
any other provision of law.
B. Civil fine. Any Village officer or employee who violates any provision of
this chapter may be subject to a civil fine of up to $1,500 for each
violation. A civil fine may be imposed in addition to any other penalty
contained in any other provision of law or in this chapter. A civil fine
may not be imposed for a violation of § 18-8 of this chapter.
§ 18-12 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-14
14:29

ARTICLE III
Administrative Provisions
§ 18-15. Designation of officers and employees required to file
annual disclosure statements.
Within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, and during the month
of March each year thereafter, the Village Manager shall:
§ 18-16. Maintenance of disclosure statements.
§ 18-17. Establishment of Ethics Board; qualifications;
appointment; term of office. [Amended 3-16-2010 by L.L. No.
3-2010]
A. Cause to be filed with the Ethics Board a list of the names and offices or
positions of all Village officers and employees required to file annual
disclosure statements pursuant to § 18-10 of this chapter; and
B. Notify all such officers and employees of their obligation to file an
annual disclosure statement.
A. The Village Manager shall transmit promptly to the Ethics Board each
transactional and applicant disclosure statement filed pursuant to
§§ 18-4, 18-8, 18-11 and 18-12 of this chapter.
B. The Ethics Board shall index and maintain on file for at least seven
years all disclosure statements filed with the Board pursuant to §§ 18-4,
18-8, 18-10, 18-11 and 18-12.
A. There is hereby established an Ethics Board consisting of five members.
B. No more than one member of the Ethics Board may be an appointed
officer or employee of the Village.
C. No Ethics Board member shall hold office in a political party or be
employed or act as a lobbyist or hold elective office in the Village.
D. Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter, and no later than
December 31 each year thereafter, the Village Manager shall appoint
the members of the Ethics Board.
E. The term of office of Ethics Board members shall be three years and
shall run from January 1 through December 31, except that, of the
members first appointed, one member shall serve until December 31 of
the year in which the Board is established, two shall serve until the
second December 31, and two shall serve until the third December 31.
F. An Ethics Board member shall serve until his or her successor has been
appointed.
§ 18-15 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-17
14:31
§ 18-18. Vacancy on Ethics Board.
When a vacancy occurs in the membership of the Ethics Board, the vacancy
shall, within 60 days, be filled for the unexpired portion of the term in the
same manner as the original appointment. Any person appointed to fill a
vacancy on the Ethics Board shall meet the qualifications set forth in § 18-17
of this chapter.
§ 18-19. Removal of Ethics Board members.
An Ethics Board member may be removed from office by the Village
Manager, after written notice and opportunity for reply. Grounds for
removal shall be failure to meet the qualifications set forth in § 18-17 of this
chapter, substantial neglect of duty, gross misconduct in office, inability to
discharge the powers or duties of office or violation of this chapter.
§ 18-20. Ethics Board meetings.
At its first meeting each year, the Ethics Board shall elect a Chair from
among its members. A majority of the Board shall be required for the Board
to take any action. The Chair or a majority of the Board may call a meeting
of the Board.
§ 18-21. Jurisdiction, powers and duties of Ethics Board.
§ 18-22. Review of lists and disclosure statements.
G. The members of the Ethics Board shall not receive compensation but
may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties.
A. The Ethics Board may act only with respect to officers and employees of
the Village.
B. The termination of a municipal officer's or employee's term of office or
employment with the Village shall not affect the jurisdiction of the
Ethics Board with respect to the requirements imposed on him or her
by this chapter.
C. In addition to the powers and duties enumerated in §§ 18-22 through
18-28 of this chapter, the Ethics Board shall have the following powers
and duties:
(1) To prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations governing its
own internal organization and procedures in a manner consistent
with this chapter; and
(2) To prepare an annual report and recommend changes to this
chapter.
A. The Ethics Board shall review:
§ 18-17 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 18-22
14:32
§ 18-23. Investigations.
§ 18-24. Hearings; assessment of penalties; injunctive relief.
(1) The lists of officers and employees, prepared pursuant to § 18-15 of
this chapter, to determine whether the lists are complete and
accurate. The Board shall add the name of any other officer or
employee who the Board determines should appear on the list
pursuant to § 18-10.
(2) All annual disclosure statements to determine whether any person
required to file such a statement has failed to file it, has filed a
deficient statement or has filed a statement that reveals a possible
or potential violation of this chapter.
(3) All transactional disclosure statements.2
B. If the Ethics Board determines that an annual disclosure statement or a
transactional disclosure statement is deficient or reveals a possible or
potential violation of this chapter, the Board shall notify the person, in
writing, of the deficiency or possible or potential violation and of the
penalties for failure to comply with this chapter.
A. Upon receipt of a sworn complaint by any person alleging a violation of
this chapter, or upon determining on its own initiative that a violation of
this chapter may exist, the Ethics Board shall have the power and duty
to conduct any investigation necessary to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. In conducting any such investigation, the Ethics Board
may administer oaths or affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel their
attendance and require the production of any books or records which it
may deem relevant and material.
B. The Ethics Board shall state, in writing, the disposition of every sworn
complaint it receives and of every investigation it conducts and shall set
forth the reasons for the disposition. All such statements and all sworn
complaints shall be indexed and maintained on file by the Board.
C. Any person filing a sworn complaint with the Ethics Board shall be
notified, in writing, of the disposition of the complaint.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the Ethics Board to
conduct an investigation of itself or of any of its members or staff. If the
Ethics Board receives a complaint alleging that the Board or any of its
members or staff has violated any provision of this chapter or any other
law, the Board shall promptly transmit to the Village Board of Trustees
a copy of the complaint.
A. Disciplinary action. In its discretion, after a hearing providing for due
process procedural mechanisms and subject to any applicable
2. Editor's Note: All such lists and statements shall be indexed and maintained on file by the
Ethics Board.
§ 18-22 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-24
14:33
§ 18-25. Waivers.
§ 18-26. Advisory opinions.
provisions of law and collective bargaining agreements, the Ethics
Board may recommend appropriate disciplinary action pursuant to
Subsection A of § 18-14 of this chapter. The recommendation of the
Ethics Board shall be made to the appointing authority or person or
body authorized by law to impose such sanctions. The Board shall
conduct and complete the hearing with reasonable promptness, unless
in its discretion the Board refers the matter to the authority or person
or body authorized by law to impose disciplinary action or unless the
Board refers the matter to the appropriate prosecutor. If such a referral
is made, the Board may adjourn the matter pending determination by
the authority, person, body or prosecutor.
B. Civil fine. In its discretion and after a hearing providing for due process
procedural mechanisms, the Ethics Board, pursuant to Subsection B of
§ 18-14 of this chapter, may assess a civil fine, not to exceed $1,500 for
each violation, upon any municipal officer or employee found by the
Board to have violated this chapter. The Board shall conduct and
complete the hearing with reasonable promptness. The civil fine shall
be payable to the Village.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the Ethics Board to
take any action with respect to any alleged violation of this chapter or of
any other law by the Ethics Board or by any member or staff member of
the Ethics Board.
A. Upon written application and upon a showing of compelling need by the
applicant, the Ethics Board may in exceptional circumstances grant the
applicant a waiver of any of the provisions of § 18-3A(1) through (8),
18-3B(1) through (4), 18-4, 18-9, 18-10 or 18-11 of this chapter;
provided, however, that no such waiver shall permit conduct otherwise
prohibited by Article 18 of the General Municipal Law of the State of
New York.
B. Waivers shall be in writing and shall state the grounds upon which they
are granted. Within 10 days after granting a waiver, the Ethics Board
shall publish a notice setting forth the name of the person requesting
the waiver and a general description of the nature of the waiver in the
official newspaper designated by the Village for the publication of local
laws, notices and other matters required by law to be published. All
applications, decisions and other records and proceedings relating to
waivers shall be indexed and maintained on file by the Ethics Board.
A. Upon the written request of any Village officer or employee, the Ethics
Board may render a written advisory opinion with respect to the
interpretation or application of this chapter or of Article 18 of the
General Municipal Law of the State of New York. Any other person may
similarly request an advisory opinion but only with respect to whether
§ 18-24 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 18-26
14:34
§ 18-27. Public inspection of records; public access to meetings.
§ 18-28. Distribution and posting.
§ 18-29. Effect on other provisions.
his or her own action might violate a provision of this chapter or Article
18.
B. Advisory opinions and requests for advisory opinions shall be indexed
and maintained on file by the Ethics Board.
A. The only records of the Ethics Board that shall be available for public
inspection are those whose disclosure is required by Article 6 of the
Public Officers Law of the State of New York or by some other state or
federal law or regulation.
B. No meeting or proceeding of the Ethics Board concerning misconduct,
nonfeasance or neglect in office by a Village officer or employee shall be
open to the public, except upon the request of the officer or employee or
as required by the provisions of Article 7 of the Public Officers Law or
by some other state or federal law or regulation.
A. Within 90 days after the effective date of this section, and thereafter as
appropriate, the Ethics Board shall transmit to the Village Board of
Trustees, in a form suitable for posting, copies of those provisions of
this chapter which the Ethics Board deems necessary for posting in the
Village. Within 10 days after receipt of those copies, the Village
Manager shall cause the copies to be posted conspicuously in every
public building under the jurisdiction of the Village.
B. Within 90 days after the effective date of this section, and thereafter as
appropriate, the Ethics Board shall transmit to the Village Manager, in a
form suitable for distribution, copies of those provisions of this chapter
which the Ethics Board deems necessary for distribution to the officers
and employees of the municipality. Within 10 days after receipt of those
copies, the Village Manager shall cause the copies to be distributed to
every officer and employee of the Village, and made readily available to
the public. Every Village officer or employee elected or appointed
thereafter shall be furnished a copy of those provisions within 10 days
after entering upon the duties of his or her position.
C. Failure of the Village to comply with the provisions of this section or
failure of any Village officer or employee to receive a copy of the
provisions of this chapter shall have no effect on the duty of compliance
with this chapter or on the enforcement of its provisions.
A. No existing right or remedy shall be lost, impaired or affected by reason
of this chapter.
§ 18-26 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-29
14:35
B. To the extent this chapter is inconsistent with the provisions of § 808 of
the General Municipal Law, this chapter shall supersede those
provisions.
C. If any provision of this chapter is held by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, that decision shall not affect the validity and
effectiveness of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 18-29 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 18-29
14:36
Chapter 22
FEES
§ 22-1. Legislative intent.
It appearing that the procedure for amending fee schedules for the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson by the enactment of local laws is both time
consuming and economically unfeasible, the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
enacts the following chapter to allow for the efficient, orderly and prompt
adjustment of all village fees by resolution, while providing at all times for
public comment and participation.
§ 22-2. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "Fees," and it shall affect all present
and future local laws, boards, commissions and public agencies within the
jurisdictional limits of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 22-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
FEE — Any lawful charge pursuant to the General Code of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson, including but not limited to all admission charges,
membership fees, dues, permit and special permit fees, license fees or any
charge or disbursement required by a duly constituted board, commission
or committee of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
PENALTY — Any monetary assessment imposed as a result of a failure to
comply with any local law, rule or regulation within the jurisdiction of the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 22-4. Adjustment of fees; exclusions.
All fees imposed by the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson may, from time to
time, be adjusted to reflect either an increase or decrease upon a public
resolution duly enacted by the Board. Specifically excluded are any
penalties, as the term is defined in this chapter.
§ 22-5. Public hearing.
Prior to the consideration of a resolution to increase or decrease fees
as provided in § 22-4 of this chapter, the Village Clerk shall cause to be
published a public notice pursuant to the Village Law of the State of
New York for a public hearing to consider the proposed fee schedule
amendments. No fees may be adjusted by the Board absent a public
hearing, with residents and taxpayers provided the opportunity to be heard.
§ 18-29 FEES § 22-5
22:37
A copy of the public notice shall be forwarded to all boards, commissions,
committees and department heads.
§ 22-6. Record of fees.
Upon enactment of a resolution pursuant to § 22-4 of this chapter, said
resolution shall be filed with the Village Clerk, with copies forwarded to all
boards, commissions, committees and department heads of the village. It
shall be the responsibility of the Village Clerk to maintain an official record
of all village fees and the changes thereto.
Chapter 25
GREENWAY COMPACT PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 25-1. Adoption of Westchester County Greenway Compact Plan.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 44-0119 of the Environmental Conservation
Law of the State of New York, the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson hereby
adopts the statement of policies, principles and guides detailed in The
Greenprint for a Sustainable Future…the Westchester Way, the Westchester
County Greenway Compact Plan, by which the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson becomes a participating community in the Greenway Compact.
§ 25-2. Amendments.
Proposals to amend the Compact Plan may from time to time be made by the
Hudson River Valley Greenway Communities Council (hereinafter referred
to as "Greenway Council") in response to requests from participating
communities. Within 90 days of receipt of any such proposal from the
Greenway Council, the Village of Hastings-on- Hudson shall determine by
resolution whether to accept or to reject such proposed amendment. Any
proposed amendment so accepted shall be considered an amendment of
the Compact Plan as adopted by the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson. Any
proposed amendment rejected by the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson will not
be considered to be an amendment of the Greenway Plan for the Village
of Hastings-on- Hudson, and notice of such rejection shall promptly be
provided to the Greenway Council.
§ 25-3. Land use laws to be consistent.
It is stated policy of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson that, to the extent
the Village amends its current, or enacts new, land use laws and
regulations, such new or amended laws and regulations, where appropriate,
should be designed to be consistent with the Compact Plan.
§ 22-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 25-4
25:38
§ 25-4. Home rule of authority.
Nothing in this chapter adopting the Compact Plan, or in becoming a
participating community in the Compact Plan is intended, or shall be
construed:
Chapter 32
LOCAL LAWS, PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR
§ 32-1. Public hearings required.
Before voting upon the proposed enactment of a local law, the Board of
Trustees shall fix a day, within 30 days after the presentation of a local
law to it, for a public hearing thereon, and, presented to it, shall cause a
notice of the time and place of such hearing to be given. Such public notice
shall be given by the Village Clerk by causing the same to be published
once in the official newspaper at least three days prior to the day fixed
for such hearing. In case there is at any time no official newspaper, the
Board of Trustees shall designate the manner of giving such public notice.
Such notice shall also contain the title of the proposed local law and a brief
explanatory statement thereof prepared by the Manager and approved by
the Village Attorney.
§ 32-2. Time, place and attendance of hearing.
The Board of Trustees shall attend at the time and place appointed for such
hearing, which shall be within the Village and reasonable of access and
at a reasonable hour, and shall afford an opportunity for a public hearing
concerning such proposed local law.
§ 32-3. Proof of publication of notice to be filed.
Proof of publication of such notice of public hearing shall be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk.
Chapter 36
MANAGER
A. To limit the home rule authority of the Village under state law to make
local land use and zoning decisions;
B. To authorize any other entity to supersede the Village's land use laws
and regulations or to impose any requirements on the Village; or
C. To prevent the Village, in its sole discretion, from adopting a local law at
a later date for the purpose of withdrawing from the Greenway
Compact or Westchester County Greenway Compact Plan.
§ 25-4 MANAGER § 36-1
36:39
§ 36-1. Office created.
The office of Village Manager of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is hereby
created.
§ 36-2. Appointment; term of office; residency.
The Village Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees
and he shall serve at the pleasure of the Board. The Manager shall be
appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative
qualifications. He need not be a resident of the village at the time of his
appointment and he may reside outside of the village during the term of his
office only with the approval of the Board.
§ 36-3. Removal from office.
The Mayor and Board of Trustees may remove the Village Manager at any
time in the manner provided in this section:
A. By a majority vote of its members, the Board of Trustees shall adopt a
preliminary resolution stating the reasons for the removal of the Village
Manager. A copy of such resolution shall be delivered promptly to the
Manager, either personally or by registered mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the Manager's residence. The preliminary
resolution shall not become effective until 30 days following the date at
which such resolution was passed.
(1) Within five days following personal delivery or within eight days
following the date a copy of such resolution was posted in an
official depository under the exclusive care and custody of the
United States Post Office Department within the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson, the Manager may serve upon the Mayor, any
Trustee or the Village Clerk a notice, in writing, setting forth his
reply and requesting a public hearing. Such public hearing shall be
held not earlier than 20 days nor later than 30 days after the
service of such request. The Village Clerk shall cause a notice of
such public hearing to appear in the official village newspaper prior
to the date of such hearing. Either the Board of Trustees or the
Village Manager may request that minutes be taken at such public
hearing. At any time after such public hearing, if one is requested,
and after full consideration, the Board of Trustees may, by majority
vote, adopt a final resolution of removal.
(2) Following the adoption of a preliminary resolution of removal, the
Board of Trustees shall have the right to suspend the Manager for a
period of not more than 45 days. Unless such suspension shall be
for misconduct in office or for the conviction of a crime under a
penal law, the Manager shall receive full pay during the period of
such suspension and pending removal by final resolution.
§ 36-1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 36-3
36:40
§ 36-4. Salary.
During the term of this office he shall be paid such salary as shall be fixed
by the Board. The salary of the incumbent shall not be reduced during the
fiscal year.
§ 36-5. Powers and duties.
B. The final resolution of the Board of Trustees shall not be reviewable by
or appealable to any court, governmental agency or quasi-judicial or
administrative agency or commission of any kind.
A. The Village Manager shall be the chief administrative and operative
officer of the village. He shall have all the powers, duties and
responsibilities heretofore vested in the Village Clerk and Budget
Officer as set forth in the Village Laws of the State of New York. The
Mayor and Board of Trustees may appoint him to head one or more
departments and he shall be responsible to the Mayor and Board of
Trustees for the proper administration of all affairs of the village.
B. The Manager's authority shall not extend to the appointment or to the
performance of the duties of the Police Justice, or Acting Police Justice,
the Chief of Police, the Police Fire Surgeon, Village Attorney, Special
Counsel, Zoning Board of Appeals, Board of Fire Commissioners or
Board of Police Commissioners.
C. The Manager's authority shall extend to the appointment, with the
advice and consent of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, and to the
performance of the duties of the Assessor or Assessors, Board of
Plumbing Examiners, Board of Electrical Examiners, Planning Board,
Recreation Commission, Safety Council and Building Board, and all
other independent policy advisory boards and commissions now or
hereinafter established which are not otherwise specifically excluded
herein. The Manager shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of all
such boards and commissions, which shall report directly to the
Manager.
D. In addition to the foregoing, the Manager shall have the power and be
required to:
(1) Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend
or remove any paid employees of the village except as herein
otherwise specifically provided, or except as otherwise provided by
law or personnel rules and regulations adopted by the village. Such
appointment and removal power shall be subject to the rules of the
Civil Service Commission, where applicable, and within the general
limitations of the annual budget. He shall appoint, suspend or
dismiss the Building Inspector and the head of the Public Works
Department, but only after conferring with the Board of Trustees.
He may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his
§ 36-3 MANAGER § 36-5
36:41
direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to
subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency.
(2) Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Mayor and Board
of Trustees in accordance with the requirements of the applicable
laws of the State of New York, and be responsible for its proper
administration after adoption.
(3) Advise the Mayor and the Board of Trustees at all times as to the
financial condition of the village and its future financial needs and
submit to the Mayor and Board of Trustees such detailed financial
reports of the condition of the village, together with
recommendations as they from time to time require.
(4) Recommend to the Mayor and the Board of Trustees adoption of
such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the
health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement
of administrative services.
(5) Attend all meetings of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, meetings
of all boards and commissions, and such other meetings as the
Mayor and Board of Trustees shall direct, and he may take part in
the discussion of any matter coming before such boards and
commissions. He shall be given notice of all regular and special
meetings of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees.
(6) Subject to the limitations of the annual budget, purchase or
approve the purchase of materials and equipment, except when
advertising for bids is required by law.
(7) Under the direction of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, supervise
the enforcement within the village of all the laws of the state and
the ordinances of the village and the rules, bylaws and resolutions
of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees.
(8) Investigate the affairs of the village or any department or division
thereof; investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning
the administration of the government of the village, and see that all
franchises, permits and privileges granted by the village are
faithfully observed.
(9) Perform such additional duties as shall be assigned to him by the
Mayor and the Board of Trustees.
(10) Conduct a continued study of all functions and activities of the
village for the purpose of devising ways and means of attaining
greater efficiency and economy.
E. In addition to the foregoing, the Manager shall be responsible for the
maintenance, protection and conservation of all village parks.
§ 36-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 36-6
36:42
§ 36-6. Chain of command; appeals; hearings.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Mayor and the Board of Trustees and
its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the
Village Manager. In the event that a village employee wishes the propriety
or fairness of a decision of the Village Manager, as applicable to his
individual case, to be reviewed, he may appeal to the Mayor and Board
of Trustees. A request for such hearing shall be made, in writing, within
10 days of the action in question. The hearing shall be held at an official
meeting of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees at such time and place as
they may designate.
§ 36-7. Manager to furnish surety bond.
The Village Manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the
Mayor and the Board of Trustees, said bond to be conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by
the village.
§ 36-8. Vacancy in office.
Whenever the office of Village Manager shall become vacant for any reason
whatsoever, all of the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Manager, as
set forth in this chapter, shall be exercised by the Mayor and the Board of
Trustees pending the appointment of a successor.
§ 36-9. Conflict with other provisions.
All existing ordinances or local laws of the village prescribing the duties of
heads of departments shall remain in full force and effect except insofar as
they conflict with the provisions of this chapter, in which case the provisions
of this chapter shall govern; and all ordinances or parts of ordinances and
all resolutions and parts of resolutions heretofore adopted or passed by the
Mayor and the Board of Trustees of this village conflicting or inconsistent
with this chapter, or any part thereof, are hereby annulled or repealed.
§ 36-10. Powers and duties of other officers unchanged.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed as abolishing,
transferring or curtailing any powers or duties of the Board of Trustees or
of the Mayor, Treasurer or Clerk, as prescribed by the Village Law or other
applicable laws of the state.
Chapter 45
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 36-6 PLANNING BOARD § 36-10
45:43

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 6-21-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 45-1. Statement of policy.
It is the policy of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson to provide for a
Planning Board with the scope and authority to adequately protect and
provide for the reasonable development of all tracts of land within the
geographical confines of its village. The means to accomplish this orderly,
efficient and economical development of land is through the effective
appointment and utilization of its Village Planning Board. Pursuant to
§ 7-718 of the Village Law of the State of New York and the provisions of the
Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York, the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson elects to increase the number of members of its Village Planning
Board to a total of seven persons.
§ 45-2. Membership; terms.
The Planning Board shall consist of seven members. The first appointment
of members thereto shall be for terms so fixed that at least one will expire at
the end of each official year commencing at the end of the current such year
and continuing in succeeding years until the entire original appointments
run out. At the expiration of each original appointment, the succeeding
members shall be appointed for terms of five years. No term shall exceed
five years. The members of such Board in office at the time this chapter
takes effect shall continue in office until the end of the term for which they
were appointed and their successors have been appointed as provided in
the section and have qualified. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of the term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
term.
§ 45-1 PLANNING BOARD § 45-2
45:45

ARTICLE II
Alternate Members
[Adopted 10-3-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000]
§ 45-3. Short title and applicability.
This article may be cited as the "Alternate Planning Board Members Act."
This article shall apply to the appointment, terms, functions and powers of
alternate members appointed to serve on the Planning Board in the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 45-4. Declaration of policy.
It is sometimes difficult to maintain a quorum on the Planning Board
because members are ill, on extended vacation or find they have a conflict of
interest situation on a specific matter before such Board. In such instances,
official business cannot be conducted, which may delay or impede
adherence to required time lines. The use of alternate members in such
instances is hereby authorized pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 45-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATE MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Village Manager
to serve on the Village Planning Board when a regular member is unable
to participate on an application or matter before the respective Board, as
provided herein.
MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Village Board to serve on the
Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of the local law or ordinance
which first established such Planning Board.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson as established by the Village Board of Trustees, by local law or
ordinance, pursuant to the provisions of § 7-718 of the Village Law.
§ 45-6. Authorization; appointment; term; applicability of state law.
A. The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
hereby enacts this article to provide a process for appointing alternate
members to its Planning Board. These individuals would serve when
members are absent or unable to participate on an application or
matter before the respective Board.
B. Alternate members of the Planning Board shall be appointed by the
Village Manager, or other duly authorized appointing authority, for a
term of five years.
C. The Chairperson of the Planning Board may designate an alternate to
substitute for a member when such member is unable to participate on
§ 45-3 PLANNING BOARD § 45-6
45:47
§ 45-7. Supersession of Village Law.
This article is hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of § 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law and § 10 of the Statute of Local Governments.
It is the intent of the Village Board of Trustees, pursuant to § 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law, to supersede the provisions of § 7-718 of the
Village Law relating to the appointment of members to village planning
boards.
an application or matter before the Board. When so designated, the
alternate member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of
such member of the Board. Such designation shall be entered into the
minutes of the initial Planning Board meeting at which the substitution
is made.
D. All provisions of state law relating to Planning Board member eligibility,
vacancy in office, removal, capability of office and service on other
boards, as well as any provisions of a local law/local ordinance relating
to training, continuing education, compensation and attendance, shall
also apply to alternate members.
§ 45-6 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 45-7
45:48
Chapter 48
POLICE
§ 45-7 PLANNING BOARD § 45-7
45:49

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)3
§ 48-1. through § 48-2. (Reserved)
3. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Residency Requirements, adopted 10-16-1961, was repealed
6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 9-2008.
§ 48-1 PLANNING BOARD § 48-1
45:51

ARTICLE II
Mutual Assistance
[Adopted 7-1-1968 by L.L. No. 1-1968]
§ 48-3. Powers delegated to Chief of Police.
The powers granted to the chief executive officer of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson pursuant to § 209-m of the General Municipal Law of the State of
New York relating to the requesting and granting of police assistance from
and to other local governments are hereby delegated to the Chief of Police,
in the absence of the chief executive officer of the village.
§ 48-4. Definitions.
As used herein, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — Includes any police officer in command of the Police
Department of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson during the absence,
illness or disability of the Chief of Police or who is authorized by the
rules and regulations of the Police Department of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson to exercise the powers of the Chief of Police in emergency
situations.
§ 48-3 PLANNING BOARD § 48-4
45:53
Chapter 50
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 50-1. Purpose.
The Board of Trustees finds that, due to the relatively small population of
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, it is not always possible to fill certain
appointive offices in Village government requiring municipal, administrative
or financial expertise with Village residents who are duly qualified to hold
such positions. The Board further finds that it is authorized to appoint
qualified residents of Westchester County outside of the Village to said
offices pursuant to § 3-300 of the Village Law.
§ 50-2. Requirements established.
Notwithstanding any other general or special law, no person shall be
eligible to be an appointed officer of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
unless such person is a resident of the Village or a resident of Westchester
County at the time of such appointment. The residency of the Village
Manager shall remain subject to § 36-2 of the Village Code.
Chapter 54
SALARIES
§ 54-1. Salaries of Trustees and Mayor.
The salary of each of the members of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson shall be fixed, from time to time, at an amount not to
exceed the amount set forth in the annual budget.
§ 54-2. Salaries of other officials.
The salaries of all other Village officials and employees, not determined by
contractual obligation, shall be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
Chapter 57
SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS
§ 57-1. Authority to hire guards.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is hereby
authorized to hire such numbers of school crossing guards as it shall deem
necessary to direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic during such times as
school is in session.
§ 48-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 57-2
57:54
§ 57-2. Placing, training and direction.
The placing, training and direction of the said school crossing guards shall
be at all times under the direction and control of the Chief of Police of the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 57-3. Furnished uniforms.
In the interests of public safety, all school crossing guards so employed
shall, while engaged in their activities, be suitably dressed in a distinctive
official uniform which shall be furnished and paid for by the village. Said
uniform shall remain at all times the property of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson and shall be returned to the village upon the completion of the
employment of the school crossing guard.
Chapter 63
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicabs and taxicab drivers — See Ch. 262. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 282.
§ 63-1. Establishment; administration; hours. [Amended 2-5-2019
by L.L. No. 2-2019]
The Village Justice of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is hereby
authorized and directed to establish a Traffic Violations Bureau to assist
his court in the disposition of offenses in relation to traffic violations. Such
Bureau shall be in the charge of such person or persons and shall be open
at such hours as said Village Justice may designate.
§ 63-2. Authority and function.
A. Said Traffic Violations Bureau is authorized to dispose of violations of
traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, when such offenses shall
not constitute the crime of speeding or reckless driving or the
commission of a misdemeanor or felony, by permitting a person charged
with an offense within the limitations herein stated to answer, within a
specified time, at the Traffic Violations Bureau, either in person or by
written power of attorney, by paying a prescribed fine and, in writing,
waiving a hearing in court, pleading guilty to the charge and
authorizing the person in charge of the Bureau to make such plea and
pay such fine in court. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of
attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the
violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
B. If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer as
hereinbefore prescribed within a designated time, the Bureau shall
§ 57-2 SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS § 63-2
57:55
§ 63-3. Designation of fines to be paid. [Amended 9-2-1969;
4-17-1972; 4-19-1976 by L.L. No. 3-1976; 11-18-1980 by L.L. No.
8-1980; 11-16-1981 by L.L. No. 13-1981; 7-14-1987 by L.L. No.
3-1987; 5-7-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991; 2-6-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001;
7-19-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
Fines shall be as follows:
Type of Violation Fine
Meter violation $20
Parked over lines $20
Backed into meter $20
Overtime parking $20
No parking (bus, taxi, crosswalk) $20
No parking (street cleaning) $25
No parking (other, corner, etc.) $20
All-night parking 3:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
$20
Alternate parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
$20
Fire zone or hydrant $110
Blocking driveway $25
Parked on sidewalk $20
Parked left side to curb $20
Parked more than 12 inches from curb $20
Parked on bridge $20
Other parking $20
Handicapped parking $110
Alternate parking $25
Expired registration $25
Expired inspection $25
No prepaid parking permit $25
cause a complaint to be entered against him forthwith and a warrant
to be issued for his arrest and appearance before the court. Any person
who has been guilty of three or more violations within the preceding
three months shall not be permitted to appear to answer to a
subsequent violation at the Traffic Violations Bureau but must appear in
court at a time specified by the Bureau. Such Traffic Violations Bureau
shall not be authorized to deprive a person of his right to counsel nor to
prevent him from exercising his right to appear in court to answer to,
explain or defend any charge of violation of any traffic law, ordinance,
rule or regulation.
§ 63-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 63-3
57:56
Type of Violation Fine
No Village parking sticker $25
Back wheels to curb $20
§ 63-4. Failure to comply. [Added 6-21-1983 by L.L. No. 7-1983;
amended 5-7-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991]
Fines shall be double if they remain unpaid for a period of 10 days after
issuance.
§ 63-5. Additional penalty. [Added 4-4-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
In addition to any other penalties which may be imposed, there shall be a
penalty of $5 levied for every thirty-day period of neglect in the payment of
each summons from the date of issuance.
§ 63-6. Records to be kept; duties.
The Traffic Violations Bureau as herein authorized shall keep a record of
all violations of which each person has been guilty, whether such guilt was
established in court or in the Bureau, and also a record of all fines collected
and the disposition thereof. It shall also perform such other or additional
duties and keep such other or additional records as shall be prescribed by
the court and/or Board of Trustees of said village.
Chapter 66
TREASURER
§ 66-1. Appointment and removal.
The Treasurer of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson shall be appointed by
the Board of Trustees to hold office at the pleasure of such Board and be
removed by such Board at any time.
§ 66-2. Effect on Village Law.
This chapter shall change and supersede the provisions of § 43 of the Village
Law of the State of New York, being Chapter 64 of the Laws of 1909,4 as
amended and now in force, to the extent of defining and limiting the term of
office of the Treasurer of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
Chapter 76
(RESERVED)
Chapter 79
4. Editor's Note: See now § 3-301 of the Village Law.
§ 63-3 TREASURER § 66-2
66:57
(RESERVED)
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 83
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dance halls — See Ch. 121.
Exposure of females — See Ch. 212, Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 83-1. Statement of policy.
§ 83-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, periodicals,
A. The Board of Trustees hereby finds that adult entertainment uses of
property, by their very nature, have serious objectionable
characteristics that can have a significant impact on the neighborhood
and community in which they are located. The Board of Trustees further
finds that:
(1) The uncontrolled proliferation of such uses would be inconsistent
with the nature of the village as a primarily residential, familyoriented
community.
(2) Such uses can contribute to the blighting or downgrading of
neighborhoods in which they are located as a result of their related
potential for an increase in crime and the undermining of the
economic, moral and social welfare of the community.
(3) Such uses can adversely impact the general health, safety and
economic well-being of the entire community and, in particular, the
children of the community.
(4) The location of such uses in areas where children reside or may
regularly assemble is of great concern to the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
B. Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter to prevent a concentration of
these uses in any one area and to specifically reduce their potential
accessibility to children.
§ 66-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 83-2
66:58
recordings, films, videotapes, cassettes or other viewing materials which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to sexual activities or sexual anatomical areas and
which establishment excludes minors by reason of age.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — An establishment that presents
topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators,
exotic dancers or other similar entertainers, and excludes minors by reason
of age.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — Any use constituting an adult bookstore,
adult motion-picture theater, adult entertainment cabaret or massage
establishment, as those terms are defined herein.
ADULT MOTEL — A motel that is open to the public generally and makes
available to its patrons in their rooms films, slide shows or videotapes
which, if presented in a public movie theater, would exclude minors by
reasons of age.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An establishment presenting
material distinguished or characterized by primary emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities or sexual anatomical
areas for observation by patrons, and which establishment excludes minors
by reason of age.
MASSAGE — A method of treating the external part of the human body
by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating with the hand or any
instrument.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment where massages are
administered, excluding hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, offices
of health care practitioners duly licensed by the State of New York and
barbershops or beauty salons in which massages are administered to the
scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulder. This definition shall also not
include any volunteer fire department or volunteer rescue squad or any
nonprofit organization operating a community center or other such
educational, cultural, recreational or athletic facilities.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN — Any individual who administers a massage to
another individual at a massage establishment. This definition shall not
include any health care practitioner duly licensed by the State of New York.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any act of masturbation, fellatio, sadomasochism,
sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed
genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person is female, breast.
§ 83-3. Special use permit required.
A. No adult entertainment use shall be permitted except upon the issuance
of a special use permit by the Board of Trustees including any
conditions as the Trustees may determine are appropriate in
connection therewith.
§ 83-2 TREASURER § 83-3
66:59
§ 83-4. Standards for special use permit.
The following standards shall control the location and operation of adult
entertainment uses:
Chapter 86
B. Applications for a special use permit under this chapter shall comply
with and be governed by the requirements of §§ 295-86 through 295-97
of Chapter 295, Zoning, in addition to the standards listed in § 83-4 of
this chapter.
A. No more than one adult entertainment use shall be permitted on any
lot, and no such use shall be permitted within 750 feet of any other such
use.
B. No adult entertainment use shall be permitted in any building used in
whole or in part for residential purposes.
C. No adult entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot that is located
within 750 feet of any lot used for residential purposes in a residential
district.
D. No adult entertainment use shall be permitted on any lot that is located
within 750 feet of any lot on which is located a school, place of worship,
counseling or psychiatric treatment facility, community center, day-care
center, public park, playing field or other area in which large numbers
of minors regularly congregate.
E. No adult entertainment use shall be permitted within 750 feet of a train
station or any school bus stop.
F. Adult entertainment uses shall comply with all other requirements of
the Code of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, as well as all applicable
town, county, state and federal laws and regulations.
G. All building openings, including doorways, windows, etc., shall be
located, covered or screened in such manner as to prevent a view into
the adult entertainment use from any public street, sidewalk or parking
area.
H. As a condition to the issuance of a special use permit for any such adult
entertainment use, there shall be a restriction that no person under the
age of 18 years shall be permitted into or on the premises.
I. As a further condition of the approval of any adult entertainment use,
there shall be no outdoor display or advertising of any kind, other than
one business identification sign complying with all signage
requirements set forth in Chapter 295, Zoning.5
5. Editor's Note: Former § 83-5, Effect on existing uses, which immediately followed, was
repealed 1-22-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019.
§ 83-3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 83-4
66:60
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police — See Ch. 48. Fire prevention and life safety — See Ch. 143.
§ 86-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and controls of various
types of intrusion, holdup, fire alarm and other emergency signals from
alarm devices that require Police Department and Fire Department
responses for investigation, action and safeguarding of property at the
location of an event which is reported by a signal transmitted by telephone,
leased wire, radio or in any other way relayed to the Police Department or
Fire Department.
§ 86-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM SYSTEM OR DEVICE — Any mechanism, equipment or device that
is designed to operate, automatically or manually, to transmit an audible or
visible signal, message or warning to a third-party monitoring business to
which the Police Department or Fire Department is expected to respond.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal actuated through an alarm system or device to
which the Police Department or Fire Department responds which is not the
result of a holdup, robbery or other crime, fire or other emergency.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Fire Department of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 86-3. False alarms prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to intentionally or negligently cause
a false alarm to be made, and any person who intentionally or negligently
causes such false alarm shall be subject to the penalty provision of this
chapter.
§ 86-4. Charges for false alarm.
A. Any owner or lessee of property having an alarm system or device on
his or its premises on the effective date of this chapter shall pay to the
Village Clerk, upon notice, a charge for each and every false alarm to
which the Police Department or Fire Department responds in each year
as follows:
§ 83-4 TREASURER § 86-4
66:61
§ 86-5. Appeals.
Any owner or lessee who is charged for a false alarm may contest such
charge by writing to the Village Manager within 15 days of notice of the
charge and stating the basis for the appeal. The Village Manager shall hold
a hearing on the appeal. The Village Manager's decision of the appeal shall
be final.
§ 86-6. Automatic shutoff required; penalty.
§ 86-7. Installation and maintenance.
The owner, lessee or user shall be responsible for the maintenance and
service of their or its alarm device equipment and shall be responsible for
all malfunctions of their or its equipment.
(1) First and second false alarm each calendar year: no charge, but
with warning;
(2) Third false alarm, a charge of $125;
(3) Fourth false alarm, a charge of $250; and
(4) All additional false alarms, a charge of $500 shall be made.
B. Failure to pay any such false alarm charges within 60 days of the
issuance of a notice shall subject such owner, lessee or user to the
penalty provision of this chapter.
C. The Police Department shall cause to be kept an up-to-date and
accurate log of all false alarms occurring in the Village and shall report
same on a regular basis to the Village Clerk.
A. Requirement of shutoff system. No person shall install or maintain in
any building, structure or establishment in the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson an external audible alarm of any type which does not also
contain an automatic shutoff system or feature automatically shutting
off the source of power to the alarm after it has sounded for a period of
no longer than 15 minutes.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates this section shall be deemed a disorderly
person and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500. Each day on
which an alarm remains in nonconformity with this section shall be
deemed a separate violation.
(2) The owner and the occupant or lessee of any building, structure
and establishment shall each be responsible for the conformity with
this section of any alarm located on or in premises owned or
occupied by him.
§ 86-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 86-8
66:62
§ 86-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who does not pay any charge or fee
established in this chapter or who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of an amount which shall not be in excess of $500
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during which a violation occurs or is committed, and such violation
may constitute disorderly conduct, in which event such person shall be a
disorderly person.
Chapter 88
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 209.
§ 88-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
PARK or PARKS — Includes all dedicated public parks, playgrounds, athletic
fields, recreation centers, open spaces, natural and underdeveloped areas
and other areas used for park, conservation and recreation purposes and
beautification projects, including all buildings, structures, equipment and
appurtenances, as well as entrances and approaches thereto, and roads and
parking places located in such park or parks and such other rights and
appurtenances as the village may have or utilize for such park purposes,
whether the same are under the care and control of the village by reason
of ownership, lease or use or otherwise and whether the same are under
the care and control of the Union Free School District No. 4 or any other
municipal corporation, provided only that the same be used for park and
recreation or conservation purposes.
PUBLIC PLACES — Includes all streets, highways and thoroughfares and
the sidewalks or curbsides adjacent thereto and all real property owned,
operated or maintained by the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson or any other
municipal corporation and any appurtenances thereto.
§ 88-2. Alcoholic beverages in parks.
No person shall carry, deliver, consume, transport, sell, serve or in any way
deal with any beer, wine, spirit or alcoholic beverages in any park or parks
in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson except pursuant to a license issued by
the Village Manager.
§ 86-8 TREASURER § 88-3
66:63
§ 88-3. Alcoholic beverages in public places.
No person shall carry, deliver or transport any beer, wine, spirit or alcoholic
beverage in any public place except in a closed container, and no person
shall serve or consume any beer, wine, spirit or alcoholic beverage in any
public place in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson except pursuant to a
license issued by the Village Manager.
§ 88-4. Issuance of license; fee. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999; 5-5-2020 by L.L. No. 5-2020
At the request of the Parks and Recreation Department, the Village
Manager may issue a license authorizing the sale or other distribution and
consumption of alcoholic beverages in any park or parks or public place in
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson upon payment of a fee to be determined
by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.6
§ 88-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-5-2020 by L.L. No.
5-2020]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
§ 88-6. Enforcement. [Added 5-5-2020 by L.L. No. 5-2020
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the police officers of the
Hastings-on-Hudson Police Department.
Chapter 91
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 91-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Includes but is not limited to the type of coinoperated
machine or that device used for a commercial purpose and
commonly known as "bagatelle," "baseball," "football," "pinball," "video,"
"electronic" or "computer," and any and all other coin-operated rides,
attractions and games not otherwise prohibited by the laws of this state.
It shall also include any coin-operated amusement device. This definition,
however, shall exclude any device the possession or use of which is
prohibited by law. Further, specifically excluded are those coin-operated
devices known as "jukeboxes."
OWNER — The individual who places or by under whose direction an
amusement device is placed within the village, whether or not legal title to
such machine or device is in such individual.
6. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 88-3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 91-1
91:64
PERSON — One or more individuals, a partnership, company, corporation,
association or society and any officer, agent, servant or employee of the
foregoing who shall license, lease, rent, sell, install or otherwise dispose of
or display, keep, maintain, use or exhibit in the village amusement devices
or who shall be in responsible charge of premises as defined in this section.
PREMISES — Any parcel of land, building, structure, vehicle or any other
property or part thereof.
§ 91-2. License required.
No amusement device shall be kept, maintained, used, exhibited or
operated in or upon any premises within the village unless the owner
thereof and the person upon whose premises or in whose possession and
control the amusement device shall be kept, maintained, used, exhibited or
operated shall first procure a license therefor.
§ 91-3. Application; required information.
A verified application for the license required by § 91-2 shall be made in
duplicate by the persons required to obtain such license to the Village Clerk
upon blanks to be furnished by the Village Clerk, giving the name and
address of the applicant; the name and address of each officer and director
of a corporate applicant; the name and address of the manufacturer of the
amusement device; the manufacturer's number, if any; a complete detailed
description of the amusement device, including all of the mechanical
features thereof and the method of its operation; the location by street
and number of the premises where the amusement device is sought to be
kept, maintained, used, exhibited or operated; the nature and use of such
premises; the number of such amusement devices already licensed upon
the same premises; and such further information as the Village Clerk or
the Village Manager may require for the administration of this chapter. The
application shall also contain a complete statement indicating whether or
not any previous application has been made for a license under this chapter
and whether any license under this chapter has been received, refused,
suspended or revoked, with the circumstances thereof.
§ 91-4. Term, fee and transfer of license.7
A. Each license required by this chapter shall expire on the last day of May
next following the date of its issuance, unless revoked prior thereto.
The license fee for each person owning one or more amusement devices
within the village shall be determined by the Village Board by resolution
and set in the fee schedule.8
B. Such license shall be procured for each amusement device and shall not
be transferable, except that the owner of such amusement device may
substitute in the same premises for which such amusement device has
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
8. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 91-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 91-4
91:65
§ 91-5. Revocation of license.
§ 91-6. Prior conviction of felony.
No license required by this chapter shall be issued to any person who
shall have been previously convicted of any felony. If the applicant is a
corporation, no license shall be issued to such corporation if any officer or
been licensed another amusement device upon the payment to the
Village Clerk of a fee to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule. Upon the payment of such fee,
there shall be endorsed upon the license issued the information as to
such substituted amusement device as required in this section. Such
endorsement shall be signed by the Village Clerk. The person upon
whose premises or in whose possession and control such amusement
device is kept, maintained, used, exhibited or operated may move such
amusement device to a different location upon obtaining from the
Village Clerk an endorsement upon his license showing the new
location to which such amusement is to be moved and upon the
payment of a fee to the Village Clerk to be determined by the Village
Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
A. Any license granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Village
Manager upon recommendation by the Chief of Police for any of the
following:
(1) The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation of any
government, officer, agency or department governing or applicable
to the maintenance or conduct of the premises upon which such
amusement device is located.
(3) The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation governing or
applicable to the maintenance, possession, use or operation of the
licensed device.
(4) The felony conviction of either the holder of a license or an officer
or director of the holder of a license.
(5) Otherwise for just cause.
B. This section shall in no way limit or impair the power otherwise vested
in the Board of Trustees, Village Manager or Chief of Police by law to
revoke such license.
C. Upon notice of revocation of his license for an amusement device, a
person so aggrieved may, within seven days of notice, file a written
statement with supporting documentation with the office of the Village
Manager in appeal of such revocation. After review by the Village
Manager, if said license is not restored, further review is available
pursuant to the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York.
§ 91-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 91-6
91:66
director of such corporation shall have been previously convicted of any
felony.
§ 91-7. Name and address of owner to be displayed.
Each license under this chapter shall have displayed thereon the name and
address of the owner thereof.
§ 91-8. Locations restricted.
Amusement devices may only be located within bars and/or restaurants, as
defined and/or licensed by the New York State Liquor Authority.
§ 91-9. Unlawful operation.
No amusement device licensed under this chapter shall be operated or
devoted or permitted to be operated, devoted or used for any purpose
prohibited by law.
§ 91-10. Number restricted.
No more than three amusement devices shall be kept, maintained, used,
exhibited or operated in any one place or premises, except as in existence
prior to the effective date of this chapter.
§ 91-11. Operation during school hours.
The holder of a license under this chapter or any person in responsible
charge of the premises upon which such licensed amusement device is
located shall not allow school students to operate said amusement devices
prior to 3:00 p.m. on school days, unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
§ 91-12. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 94
ANIMALS
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $250, and all licenses of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson held by such person shall be automatically
revoked.
B. Each day's maintenance, exhibition or use of any amusement device in
violation of the foregoing subsection shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 91-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 91-12
91:67

ARTICLE I
Dogs and Domestic Animals
[Adopted 11-20-1979 by L.L. No. 4-1979]
§ 94-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-20-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — A dog or domestic animal which is not within a fence or tied
on a line, either of which must be sufficient to restrain said dog or animal.
DOG — Any male, female or neutered domestic canine, regardless of age.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any domestic animal as defined by the New York
State Agriculture and Markets Law.
OWNER — Any person who owns, harbors or has the care, custody or
control of a dog or domestic animal, whether said dog or animal is licensed
or unlicensed.
§ 94-2. Restrictions. [Amended 5-20-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
A. No owner or possessor of a dog or domestic animal shall permit such
dog or animal to be at large in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson except
as provided in Subsection B.
B. The owner, possessor or custodian of a dog shall control and restrain
such dog by a chain or leash not exceeding eight feet in length, except
when such dog is on residential premises with knowledge and
permission of the owner of the premises, or when such dog is on
nonresidential premises during hours when such property is closed to
the public with the knowledge and permission of the owner of the
premises.
C. No owner or possessor of a dog or domestic animal shall suffer or
permit it to soil, defile or commit any nuisance on any common fare,
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where the
public congregates or walks or upon any lawn, shrubbery or tree on any
private property not belonging to the owner or custodian of said dog or
animal; provided, however, that for the purpose of this section of this
article, the above-mentioned restrictions shall not apply to that portion
of the street lying between the curblines which shall be used to curb a
dog.
D. No owner or possessor shall permit the premises, structure or
enclosures in which a dog or domestic animal is kept to be so unclean or
unsanitary as to create a public nuisance.
E. No owner or possessor of a dog or domestic animal shall permit such
dog or animal to be at large and to chase or attack any person
peacefully conducting himself in any place where such person may
§ 94-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-2
91:69
§ 94-3. Removal of fecal matter. [Amended 5-20-1980 by L.L. No.
3-1980]
Notwithstanding any contrary provision of law, rule or regulation, it shall be
the duty of each owner of a dog or domestic animal to remove any feces left
by his or her dog or domestic animal on any sidewalk, gutter, street, park,
playground, recreational area, private property not belonging to the owner
of the dog or domestic animal, municipally owned property or other public
area.
§ 94-4. (Reserved)9
§ 94-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-20-1980 by L.L. No.
3-1980]
Any person who shall be convicted of violating any section of this article
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each
and every offense.10
lawfully be or to chase or attack any dog, cat or domestic animal while
such animal is in any place where it may lawfully be.
F. No person shall cause or permit one or more dogs or domestic animals
owned, controlled or possessed by him or her to enter or remain upon
premises owned by another without license or privilege to do so.
9. Editor's Note: Former § 94-4, Licensing and fees, as amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999, was repealed 1-22-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019.
10.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Dog Warden, adopted 5-20-1980 by L.L. No. 2-1980,
consisting of §§ 94-6 and 94-7, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 12-2008.
§ 94-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 94-5
91:70
Chapter 101
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 45.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 76.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 104.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 106.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 143.
Housing standards — See Ch. 166.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 94-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 94-5
91:71

ARTICLE I
Building Board and Building Inspector
[Adopted 7-7-1942]
§ 101-1. Creation and composition of Building Board.
There shall be a Building Board consisting of five members as follows:
§ 101-2. Officers; appointment of members; terms.
The Building Board shall elect its own Chairman and Secretary from its
members and shall keep minutes of all its meetings. The two citizen
members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority
of the Board of Trustees. If there is no occupant of any one of the other
three positions on the Building Board at any time, the Mayor shall appoint
a substitute, who shall hold office until an occupant of the named position
shall be regularly appointed. Appointees to the Building Board by the Mayor
shall serve for a term of one official year.
§ 101-3. Office of Building Inspector.
There shall be a Building Inspector, who may also be Sanitary and Zoning
Inspector.
§ 101-4. Duties of Building Board.11 [Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L.
No. 5-2011]
§ 101-5. Duties of Building Inspector. [Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L.
No. 5-2011]
The duties of the Building Inspector shall be to make the necessary
inspections for the granting of all certificates of occupancy and for the
approval of all alteration of any building in the Village. He shall inspect
A. Chairman of the Planning Board.
B. Chief of the Fire Department.
C. Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Two citizens of the Village.
A. The Building Board shall be responsible for enforcing Chapter 106,
Buildings, Unsafe, of the Village Code, including docketing unsafe
buildings.
B. The Building Board shall have the authority to revoke building permits
as provided in § 295-101 of the Village Code.
11.Editor's Note: Former § 101-4, Appointment; term of office, was repealed 5-20-2008 by L.L.
No. 5-2008. This Local Law also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 101-5 and
101-6 as §§ 101-4 and 101-5, respectively.
§ 101-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 101-5
91:73
all new construction on which any inspection is now required or may be
required by ordinance hereafter enacted. He shall have authority to issue
notice of violation of any Village code or ordinance; also to issue a stop
order. In the event of the builder's noncompliance with the stop order, he
shall have authority to issue a summons to the offender. He shall perform
such other duties as prescribed by the Board of Trustees.
§ 101-6. Complaints. [Added 5-20-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008]
The Building Inspector or Fire Inspector shall review and investigate
complaints that allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities
that fail to comply with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, the State Energy Conservation Construction Code, the
Zoning Chapter (Chapter 295) of this Code, the Fire Prevention and Life
Safety Chapter (Chapter 143) of this Code, or any other local law or
regulation adopted for administration and enforcement of those codes and
chapters. The process for responding to a complaint shall include such of
the following steps as the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector deems to be
appropriate:
§ 101-7. (Reserved)12
§ 101-8. Conflict of interest. [Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L. No.
5-2011]
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection.
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 101-9,
Violations; penalties for offenses.
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order.
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. In all cases where the Building Inspector is financially interested in a
building being constructed or reconstructed, he shall not inspect
officially or issue permits or certificates.
B. In any such case the Board of Trustees shall appoint a substitute to
perform the normal function of the Building Inspector with relation to
the particular building specified.
12.Editor’s Note: Former § 101-7, Appeals, was repealed 5-17-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011.
§ 101-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 101-9
91:74
§ 101-9. Violations; penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 5-2008]
A. Compliance orders. The Building Inspector and Fire Inspector are
authorized to order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or
activity found to exist in, on or about any building, structure, or
premises in violation of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, the State Energy Conservation Construction Code,
or any chapter of the Hastings-on-Hudson Code of which the Building
Inspector or Fire Inspector is charged with the enforcement. Upon
finding that any such condition or activity exists, the Building Inspector
or Fire Inspector shall issue a compliance order. The Compliance Order
shall be in writing; be dated and signed by the Building Inspector or
Fire Inspector; specify the condition or activity that violates the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or the Hastings-on-Hudson Code;
specify the provision or provisions of the codes that is/are violated by
the specified condition or activity; specify the period of time which the
Building Inspector or Fire Inspector deems to be reasonably necessary
for achieving compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within the
specified period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to
compel compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved
within the specified period of time. The Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector shall cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be
served on the owner of the affected property personally or by registered
or certified mail or any other method of delivery providing proof of
delivery. The Building Inspector or Fire Inspector shall be permitted,
but not required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be
served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor,
construction superintendent, or their agents, or any other person
taking part or assisting in work being performed at the affected
property personally or by registered or certified mail or any other
method of delivery providing proof of delivery; provided, however, that
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Building Inspector, Fire Inspector and their
designees are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code, or any chapter of the
Hastings-on-Hudson Code of which the Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector is charged with the enforcement.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, the State Energy Conservation
Construction Code, or any chapter of the Hastings-on-Hudson Code of
which the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector is charged with the
enforcement, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
§ 101-9 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 101-9
91:75
§ 101-10. Right of entry; inspections.
The Building Inspector, in the discharge of his duties, shall have the
authority to enter any building or structure or premises at any reasonable
hour. All work of construction shall be subject to inspection at all times.
The Building Inspector may require the contractor or builder to give notice
when the work for which a building permit has been issued is to be begun.
He may also require notice to be given to him at the completion of such
stages of the construction as he may specify.
issued by the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector pursuant to any
provision of this Code shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more
than $200 for each day or part thereof during which such violation
continues. The civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be
recoverable in an action instituted in the name of the Village.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of or to enforce any provision of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code, or any chapter of the
Hastings-on-Hudson Code of which the Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector is charged with the enforcement, or any term or condition of
any building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Building
Inspector or Fire Inspector pursuant to any provision of this Code. No
action or proceeding described in this subsection shall be commenced
without the appropriate authorization from the Board of Trustees of the
Village.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
any other chapter of this Code, or in any other applicable law. Any
remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any time,
whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other
remedy or penalty specified in this section, in any other chapter of this
Code, or in any other applicable law.
§ 101-9 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 101-10
91:76
ARTICLE II
Adoption of State Code
[A resolution accepting the State Building Construction Code and
making it applicable to the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson was
adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson 8-11-1953. The current title of the state code is the "State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code."]
AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 101-10
91:77

ARTICLE III
Architectural Review
[Adopted 11-5-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
§ 101-11. Findings; purpose.
§ 101-12. Creation of review board; membership; organization;
terms of office; meetings.
A. The Board of Trustees hereby finds that appropriate design and good
quality materials for the exteriors of buildings, signs and other
structures favorably affects the desirability of the immediate area and
neighboring areas and, by so doing, enhances the benefits of occupancy
and value of real property in such areas; improves conditions affecting
the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the community;
promotes appropriate land use; and creates a favorable relationship
between the taxable value of real property and the cost of municipal
services required.
B. It is therefore the purpose of this article to prevent the harmful effects
of inappropriate design and poor quality materials for the exteriors of
buildings, signs and other structures erected in the village, and thus to
conserve the value of real property; to encourage appropriate land use;
and to promote and protect the health, safety, comfort and general
welfare of the community.
A. There is hereby created an Architectural Review Board, which shall
serve in an advisory capacity to the Building Inspector and Planning
Board and, upon request, shall consult with the Board of Trustees, the
Zoning Board of Appeals and other Village boards and commissions. In
addition, the Architectural Review Board shall have the authority to
approve changes to any facade or roof in the Central Commercial (CC)
District that do not require building permits, as provided in § 295-76 of
this Code. [Amended 11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
B. The Architectural Review Board shall consist of five members, who shall
serve without compensation and shall be residents of the Village. All
members of the Board shall be specifically qualified by reason of
training in architecture, architectural engineering, interior design,
community planning, landscape architecture or other relevant business
or professional experience to judge the effects of a proposed building
upon the desirability, property values and development of surrounding
areas; and at least one and preferably three members of such Board
shall be registered architects of the State of New York.
C. The Village Board shall appoint an alternate member of the
Architectural Review Board to serve for a period of three years. The
alternate member shall substitute for a member of the Architectural
Review Board in the absence of a member or in the event that a member
is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest. All provisions of
§ 101-11 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 101-12
91:79
§ 101-13. Review of building permit applications.
this chapter relating to Architectural Review Board members'
eligibility, vacancy in office, and removal shall also apply to the
alternate member. [Added 11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 10-201013]
D. Members of the Architectural Review Board shall be appointed by the
Village Board.
E. The term of office of each member shall be three years; except that
initial appointments shall be two members with terms of three years,
two members with terms of two years and one member with a term of
one year.
F. The Village Board shall have the power to remove any member for
cause after public hearing.
G. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose
position becomes vacant.
H. The Mayor shall designate a member of the Architectural Review Board
to serve as Chairman for a term of one year.
I. Meetings of the Architectural Review Board shall be held monthly and/
or at such times as the Chairman of the Board may determine for the
purpose of reviewing any application for permit referred to it. Three
members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and
other official actions.
A. The Building Inspector shall promptly refer to the Board any
application for a permit for the construction, reconstruction or
alteration of any building, sign or other structure, but not for interior
work that would not be visible from the street and not for detached
single-family residential structures except those which are developed
as part of a subdivision. The application shall be accompanied by such
drawings and material samples as may be required to clearly indicate
the design intent. [Amended 12-17-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996;
11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
B. The Architectural Review Board shall advise the Building Inspector
within 30 days of its receipt of the application, drawings and material
samples. The Building Inspector may attend meetings of the
Architectural Review Board in order to be fully informed of its
deliberations and recommendations.
13.Editor’s Note: This local law also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C
through H as Subsections D through I, respectively.
§ 101-12 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 101-13
91:80
C. If an application for permit requires action by the Planning Board, the
Architectural Review Board shall consult with and advise the Planning
Board regarding said application prior to such action by the Planning
Board.
D. In advising the Building Inspector and Planning Board, the
Architectural Review Board shall consider the following:
(1) Adjacent use of excessively similar or excessively dissimilar
facades or structures arranged without respect to natural features
of terrain or other existing structures.
(2) Appropriateness of a structure or land development in relation to
any other structure or land development existing or for which a
permit has been issued, or to any other structure or land
development included in the same application in respect to one or
more of the following features:
(a) Cubic contents.
(b) Gross floor area.
(c) Height of building or height of roof.
(3) Appropriateness of other significant design features, such as
material or quality of architectural design, roof structures,
chimneys, exposed mechanical equipment and service and storage
enclosures, signs, landscaping, retaining walls, fences, lighting
posts and standards.
E. A finding of inappropriateness shall state not only that such
inappropriateness exists, but also that such finding is not based on
personal preference as to taste or architectural style, and further that
the inappropriateness is of such a nature as to be expected to provoke
beyond reasonable doubt one or more of the following harmful effects:
(1) Impairment of conditions affecting the health, safety, comfort or
general welfare of inhabitants of the immediate area or
neighboring areas.
(2) Impairment of the benefits of occupancy or value of improved or
unimproved real property in the immediate area or neighboring
areas.
(3) Conflict with most appropriate use of land in the immediate area or
neighboring areas.
(4) Creation of an adverse relationship between the taxable value of
real property and the cost of municipal services required to be
provided therefor.
F. Except by mutual agreement of the applicant and the Architectural
Review Board, the Board must render a decision on an application
§ 101-13 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 101-13
91:81
referred to it under § 295-76 within two meetings after a completed
application is submitted. In the event the Board fails to render a
decision on an application within such time frame, or within such
extended period agreed to by mutual consent, approval shall be deemed
to have been given. [Amended 11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
§ 101-13 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 101-13
91:82
Chapter 104
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
§ 104-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to require the clear display of house
numbers from public streets for all properties that contain principal
buildings within the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson in order to assist the
general public or the authorities in identifying any property in case of an
emergency, as well as for the welfare of the general public in conducting its
normal affairs.
§ 104-2. Scope; display of numbers required.
This chapter shall apply to all properties within the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson that contain a principal building thereon, whether or not said
building is occupied. Such premises shall bear and display at least one
set of house numbers, which shall be assigned by the Building Inspector.
Buildings facing two or more public roadways shall be required to display
auxiliary numbers, if necessary, to pass the visibility test (as hereinafter
set forth) when viewed from those points in the center line of the public
roadway opposite those points where regularly used pedestrian or vehicular
passageways enter the public roadway.
§ 104-3. Display specifications.
In order to comply with this chapter, house numbers shall be Arabic in
design, shall have a minimum height of three inches and shall be mounted
in a secure fashion to the building's front wall or to a porch or other fixed
appurtenance in front of the building in the general vicinity of the main
entryway or main path of travel which leads to the main entrance from a
public street, or otherwise separately mounted in an approved manner upon
the face of a wall or upon a post in the front yard of the premises. Auxiliary
numbers shall be mounted at a height between four feet and 10 feet above
the adjacent grade or exterior landing directly beneath but never higher
than 15 feet above the adjoining grade. They shall be sufficiently legible
as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing, size and uniformity of
integers so that the numbers may be read with ease during the daylight
hours by a person possessing at least 20/40 vision as he views the numbers
from the center line of the facing street and at an elevation of five feet above
the finished surface thereof. The numbers shall be so placed that trees,
shrubs or other obstructions do not block the line of the numbers from the
center of the street to any appreciable degree.
§ 101-13 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 104-4
104:83
§ 104-4. Existing numbers.
Existing numbers used or premises which essentially comply with numbers
officially assigned by the Building Inspector, at least to the extent that such
number or numbers are in logical sequence with the number or numbers
assigned to properties on either side which are located on the same side of
the street, shall be considered as bearing the correct number or numbers
for the purposes of this chapter. Existing installations which essentially
meet the requirements and/or spirit of these regulations, including numbers
presently on or attached to a mailbox, may be granted approval by the
Building Inspector without further alteration.
§ 104-5. Failure to comply; assessment of costs.
The absence of house numbers or the insecure fastening or absence of
any integer thereof, or the use of any number out of logical sequence for
the street toward which it faces, or the failure of a number to meet the
elevation requirement or the visibility requirements shall be considered as
a violation of this chapter. Failure on the part of the property owner to
comply with the provisions of this chapter within a period of 15 days from
the date of issuance of a notice of violation shall be sufficient cause for the
Village Building Inspector to proceed with carrying out the provisions of
this chapter and assess any costs incurred to the property owner concerned,
with a minimum charge of $20 for each property in violation.
§ 104-6. Building Inspector to be final authority.
The final authority for determining and assigning the number or numbers to
be used upon any particular property shall be the Building Inspector of the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
Chapter 106
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101. Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
§ 106-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
PERSON — When used in this chapter, shall mean and include one or
more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations, joint-stock companies, societies and all other entities capable
of being sued.
§ 104-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 106-2
106:84
§ 106-2. Removal or repair of buildings.
Any building or part of a building, staging or other structure that, from
any cause, may now be or shall at any time hereafter become dangerous or
unsafe, shall be taken down and removed or made safe and secure.
§ 106-3. Record and notice of unsafe building.
Immediately upon receipt of a report by the Building Inspector or Fire
Chief that a building or part of a building, staging or structure is unsafe
or dangerous, the Building Board shall cause the same to be entered upon
a docket of unsafe buildings, and the owner or some one of the owners,
executors, administrators, agents, lessees or any other person who may
have a vested or contingent interest in the same shall be served with
a printed or written notice containing a description of the premises or
structures deemed unsafe or dangerous, a statement of the particulars
in which the building or structure is unsafe or dangerous, and an order
requiring the same to be made safe and secure or removed as may be
deemed necessary by the Building Board. Such notice shall require the
person thus served immediately to certify to the Building Board his assent
or refusal to secure or remove the same.
§ 106-4. Voluntary abatement.
If the person served with a notice specified in § 106-3 shall immediately
certify his assent to securing or removal of said unsafe or dangerous
building, premises or structure, he shall be allowed 24 hours, after the
service of such notice, within which to commence the securing or removal
of the same as expeditiously as can be done.
§ 106-5. Disregard of notice; survey.
A. Notice of survey. Upon the refusal or neglect of the person served with
the notice, for which provision is made in §§ 106-3 and 106-4 of this
chapter, to comply with any of the requirements thereof a further notice
shall be served upon him, in the manner heretofore prescribed,
notifying him that a survey of the premises named in said notice will be
made at the time and place therein named, which time shall not be less
than 24 hours nor more than three days from the time of the service of
said notice, by three competent persons, of whom one person shall be
the Building Inspector, another shall be an architect appointed by the
Building Board and the third shall be a practical building engineer or
architect appointed by the person thus notified; that in case the person
served with such notice shall neglect or refuse to appoint such surveyor,
the other two surveyors shall make the survey, and in case the premises
referred to therein shall be reported dangerous under such survey, said
report will be placed before the Supreme Court, as indicated in the
notice, and that a trial upon the allegations and the statements
contained in said report, being the report of said surveyors, more or
less than are contained in said notice of survey, will be had before said
§ 106-2 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 106-5
106:85
§ 106-6. Judicial review of survey.
Court at a time therein and place therein named, to determine whether
said unsafe or dangerous building or premises shall be repaired and
secured or taken down and removed, and that a report of said survey,
reduced to writing, shall constitute the issue to be placed before the
Court of trial.
B. Posting report of survey. A copy of the report of the survey shall be
posted on the building the subject thereof by the persons holding the
survey, immediately on their signing such report.
C. Compensation of surveyor. The architect appointed by the Building
Board as hereinbefore provided, who may act on any survey called in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the third surveyor,
who may have been called in the case of disagreement provided for in
this chapter, shall each be entitled to and receive the sum of $25, to be
paid by the village. A cause of action is hereby created for the benefit of
the village against the owner of said building, staging or structure and
of the lot or parcel of land on which the same is situated, for the amount
so paid, with interest at the rate of 6%. The amount so collected shall be
paid over to the Village Manager in reimbursement of the amount paid
by him as aforesaid.
A. Institution of proceeding. Whenever the report of any such survey, had
as aforesaid, shall recite that the building, premises or structure thus
surveyed is unsafe or dangerous, the Corporation Counsel shall, at the
time specified in the notice, place such notice and report before the
justice holding said court or a referee, whose decision or report in the
matter shall be final, unless a jury trial is demanded, in which case the
verdict of such jury shall be final.
B. Postponement of trial. If for any reason the issue shall not be tried at
the specified time in said notice, or to which the trial may be adjourned,
the same may be brought to trial at any time thereafter by the Building
Board without a new survey, upon not less than three days' notice of
trial to the person upon whom the original notice was served or to his
attorney. Such notice to trial may be served in the same manner as said
original notice.
C. Precept to abate. Upon the rendition of a verdict or decision of the
Court or referee, if said verdict or decision shall find said building,
premises or structure to be unsafe or dangerous, the justice trying the
case or to whom the report of the referee trying said case shall be
presented shall immediately issue a precept directed to the Building
Board reciting said verdict or decision and commanding it forthwith to
repair and secure, take down or remove, as the case may be, the unsafe
or dangerous building or part thereof, staging, structure or other
premises that shall have been named in said report, in accordance with
such verdict or decision.
§ 106-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 106-7
106:86
§ 106-7. Repair or removal under precept.
§ 106-8. Work done by village employees.
A. Execution of precept. Upon receiving a precept under the provisions of
the preceding section, the Building Board referred to therein shall
immediately proceed to execute the same, as therein directed, and may
employ such labor and assistance and furnish such materials as may be
necessary for that purpose, provided nevertheless that, immediately
upon the issuing of said precept, the owner of said building or part
thereof, staging or structure or premises, or any party interested
therein, upon application to the Building Board, shall, upon the
payment of all costs and expenses incurred up to that time by the
village, be allowed to perform the requirements of the precept at his
own proper cost and expense if the same shall be done immediately and
in accordance with the requirements of said precept. The Building
Board shall have authority to modify the requirements of any precept
upon application to him therefor, in writing, by the owner of said
building or part thereof, staging or structure, or his representative,
when it shall be satisfied that such change shall secure equally well the
safety of such building or part thereof, staging or structure.
B. Interference prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether
interested or not in the property affected, to interfere with, obstruct or
hinder the Building Board and its representative or any person who,
acting under the authority conferred on him by such Board, is
performing the work directed by a precept issued out of any court as in
this chapter provided, or ordered by the Building Board in accordance
with such precept under the provisions of this chapter.
A. Temporary safeguards for dangerous buildings. In case there shall be,
in the opinion of the Building Board, actual and immediate danger of
the falling of any building or part thereof so as to endanger life or
property, it shall cause the necessary work to be done to render said
building or part thereof temporarily safe until the proper proceedings
provided for unsafe buildings by this chapter are instituted.
B. Vacating buildings; closing streets and sidewalks. The Building Board is
hereby authorized and empowered in such cases, and also where any
building or part thereof has fallen and life is endangered by the
occupation thereof, to vacate the same forthwith, and the Building
Board may, when necessary for the public safety, temporarily close
sidewalks, streets, building structures and places adjacent to such
building or part thereof, and prohibit the same from being used. The
Chief of Police, when called upon by the Building Board to cooperate,
shall enforce such orders or requirements.
C. Laborers and materials. For the purpose of this section, the Building
Board shall employ such laborers and materials as may be necessary to
perform said work as speedily as possible.
§ 106-7 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 106-9
106:87
§ 106-9. Costs and expenses; lien.
Chapter 110
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION (ENERGY) PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Green Building Code — See Ch. 160.
§ 110-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
A. All costs and expenses, together with interest thereon at the rate of 6%,
incurred in connection with the proceedings as provided by this
chapter, including the cost incurred to repair and secure, take down or
remove, as the case may be, the unsafe or dangerous building or part
thereof, staging, structure or other premises, shall be a charge against
the property on which said building or structure is located.
B. The Building Board shall submit to the Village Manager an accounting
of the expenses thereby incurred, and the Village Manager shall, upon
receipt of said accounting, render a bill for said expenses, together with
interest thereon at the rate of 6%, to the owner of said property.
C. In case the owner of the property shall fail, within a reasonable time, to
pay to the village the amount of said bill, the Board of Trustees shall
cause to be entered upon the next succeeding tax roll prepared for the
village an assessment against such property equal to the amount of said
bill, which assessment shall become due at the same time and shall be
collected in the same manner as the real estate taxes for the village,
and shall be a lien against the property until paid.
A. It is the policy of both the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and the State
of New York to reduce costs and provide cost certainty for the purpose
of economic development, to promote deeper penetration of energy
efficiency and renewable energy resources, such as wind and solar, and
wider deployment of distributed energy resources as well as to examine
the retail energy markets and increase participation of and benefits for
residential and small commercial customers in those markets. Among
the policies and models that may offer benefits in New York is
community choice aggregation (CCA), which allows local governments
to determine the default supplier of electricity and natural gas on
behalf of its residential and small commercial customers.
B. The purpose of this CCA Program is to allow participating local
governments, including the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, to procure
energy supply service for their residential and small commercial
customers, who will have the opportunity to opt out of the procurement,
while maintaining transmission and distribution service from the
§ 106-9 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 110-1
106:88
§ 110-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context otherwise requires, the terms in this chapter shall have
the meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service
Commission's Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as
indicated below:
BUNDLED CUSTOMERS — Residential and small commercial customers of
electricity or natural gas ("fuels") who are purchasing the fuels from the
distribution utility.
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM OR CCA PROGRAM —
A municipal energy procurement program, which replaces the incumbent
utility as the default supplier for all bundled customers within the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
existing distribution utility. This chapter establishes a program that
will allow the Village to put out for bid the total amount of natural
gas and/or electricity being purchased by local residential and small
commercial customers. Bundled customers will have the opportunity to
have more control to lower their overall energy costs, to spur clean
energy innovation and investment, to improve customer choice and
value, and to protect the environment, thereby, fulfilling the purposes
of this chapter and fulfilling an important public purpose.
C. The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is authorized to implement this
Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program pursuant to § 10,
Subdivision 1(ii)(a)(12), of the New York Municipal Home Rule Law and
State of New York Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0564,
Petition of Sustainable Westchester for Expedited Approval for the
Implementation of a Pilot Community Choice Aggregation Program
within the County of Westchester, Order Granting Petition in Part
(issued February 26, 2015), as may be amended, including subsequent
orders of the Public Service Commission issued in connection with or
related to Case No. 14-M-0564 (collectively, the "Order"). "Order" shall
also mean orders of the Public Service Commission related to State of
New York Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding
on Motion of the Commission to Enable Community Choice Aggregation
Programs (issued December 15, 2104) to the extent that orders related
to Case No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson not otherwise permitted pursuant to orders related to Case No.
14-M-0564; provided, however, that in the event of any conflict between
orders from Case No. 14-M-0564 and orders from Case No 14-M-0224,
orders from Case No 14-M-0564 shall govern the CCA Program.
D. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Community
Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program Law of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson."
§ 110-1 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 110-2
106:89
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — Owner or controller of the means of distribution
of the natural gas or electricity that is regulated by the Public Service
Commission.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION — New York State Public Service
Commission.
SMALL COMMERCIAL — Nonresidential customers as permitted by the
Order.
SUPPLIERS — Energy service companies (ESCOs) that procure electric
power and natural gas for bundled customers in connection with this
chapter, or alternatively, generators of electricity and natural gas or other
entities who procure and resell electricity or natural gas.
SUSTAINABLE WESTCHESTER — A not-for-profit organization comprised
of member municipalities in Westchester County, New York.
§ 110-3. Establishment of Community Choice Aggregation (Energy)
Program.
§ 110-4. Procedures for eligibility; customer data sharing.
A. A Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program is hereby
established by the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, whereby the Village
shall work together with Sustainable Westchester to implement the
CCA Program to the full extent permitted by the Order, as set forth
more fully herein. The Village's role under the CCA Program involves
the aggregating of the electric and/or natural gas supply of its residents
and the entering into a contract with one or more suppliers for supply
and services. Under the CCA Program, the operation and ownership of
the utility service shall remain with the distribution utility.
B. The Village's participation in a CCA Program constitutes neither the
purchase of a public utility system, nor the furnishing of utility service.
The Village will not take over any part of the electric or gas
transmission or distribution system and will not furnish any type of
utility service but will instead negotiate with suppliers on behalf of
participating residential and small commercial customers.
C. In order to implement the CCA Program, the Village will adopt one or
more resolutions that outline the process of and conditions for
participation in the CCA Program, including but not limited to signing a
contract for a compliant bid with one or more suppliers, all as
consistent with the local law and the Order.
D. The Public Service Commission supervises retail markets and
participants in these markets through legislative and regulatory
authority and the Uniform Business Practices, which includes rules
relating to the eligibility of participating ESCOs, the operation by which
ESCOs provide energy services, and the terms on which customers may
be enrolled with ESCOs.
§ 110-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 110-4
106:90
§ 110-5. Choice of energy supplier; opt-out notice and Procedure.
A. As permitted by the Order, the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson may
request from the distribution utilities aggregated customer information
by fuel type and service classification on a rolling basis.
B. Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson, shall issue one or more requests for proposals to suppliers to
provide energy to participants and may then award a contract in
accordance with the CCA Program.
C. Sustainable Westchester or the Village, if the Village so chooses, will
then request individual customer data from the distribution utility in
accordance with the CCA Program.
D. Sustainable Westchester or the Village, if the Village so chooses, and
the selected supplier will then notify bundled customers of the contract
terms and their opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program at no cost.
E. In accordance with and for purposes of the Order, the existing
distribution utility, Consolidated Edison Company of New York, Inc., will
provide to Sustainable Westchester aggregate and customer-specific
data (including usage data, capacity tag obligations, account numbers,
and service addresses) of all bundled customers in the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
F. Sustainable Westchester and the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson will
protect customer information as required by law, subject to the Order
and the limitations of the New York State Freedom of Information Law.
A. The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson or in conjunction with the ESCO will
notify its residential and small commercial customers, by letter notice,
of the Village's decision to establish the CCA Program, of the contract
terms with an ESCO, and of the opportunity to opt out of the CCA
Program.
B. The letter notice will be sent to each customer at the address provided
by the distribution utility and explain the CCA Program and the
material provisions of the ESCO contract, identify the methods by
which the customer can opt out of the CCA Program, and provide
information on how the customer can access additional information
about the CCA Program.
C. The opt-out period shall be 20 days.
D. CCA Program bundled customers, upon enrollment, will receive a
welcome letter that will explain the customers' options for canceling
the enrollment if they believe they were enrolled incorrectly or
otherwise decide to withdraw from the CCA Program in favor of another
supplier. The welcome letter also will explain that residential customers
are entitled to the added protection of the mandated three-day
§ 110-4 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 110-5
106:91
§ 110-6. Verification and reporting.
Sustainable Westchester shall be responsible for filing an annual report with
the Public Service Commission, which identifies the number of customers
enrolled in the CCA Program by municipality and customer class, the
number of customers who returned to utility service or service with another
supplier during the reporting period, and the average cost of commodity
supply by month for the reporting period.
Chapter 112
CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 131.
Housing standards — See Ch. 166.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
rescission period as detailed in Section 5(B)(3) of the Uniform Business
Practices.
§ 110-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 110-6
112:92
Part 1
[Adopted 7-6C-C1H98-11 DBiystLr.iLc.t No. 6-1981]
ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 112-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees has inspected Parcels 76, 76A and 76B of § 10
("parcels") of the Village Tax Map and has reviewed topographic surveys
showing proposed developments of said parcels under a clustered
subdivision plan and a conventional subdivision plan. The Board of Trustees
has determined that the property contains an especially desirable
abundance of cultivated stands of tall pine trees, hemlocks and other
healthy and venerable trees and open land areas, some of which are
attractive and visible to the general public along Broadway and from the
Aqueduct. The Board of Trustees further finds that the views, terrain and
elevations are such that a clustered housing development is likely to be
less visible from surrounding areas than a conventional one-family home
development.
§ 112-2. Intent.
The Board of Trustees finds that the creation of a clustered housing district
confined to the parcels will result in a substantially diminished impact upon
the community or change in the general appearance of the village and
neighboring properties and is less likely to be seen by persons passing
by or on Broadway and will substantially promote the conservation and
enhancement of natural beauty and resources on land not topographically
suitable for the construction of a conventional one-family home subdivision.
§ 112-1 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-2
112:93

ARTICLE II
Creation; General Provisions
§ 112-3. Establishment.
A conservation or clustered housing district, "CCH," is hereby created by
amending the Village Zoning Map to create such a district to be known
as "CCH-1" on the Zoning Map, which district shall be confined to Parcels
76, 76A and 76B of § 10 of the Village Tax Map, ("parcels"). Such parcels
may be developed pursuant to a site plan subject to this Part 1 and to the
requirements of the district of which they were previously designated on
the Village Tax Map.
§ 112-4. Permitted dwelling units.
On such site, notwithstanding front, rear and side yard restrictions
otherwise contained in Chapter 295, Zoning, and subject to the conditions
set forth in this Part 1 and in § 7-738 of the Village Law of the State of New
York, dwelling units may be in attached, semidetached, detached, grouped
or clustered form.
§ 112-5. Grouping of houses.
The design of such a site plan shall provide for the grouping or clustering
of houses so that each cluster is set off from the others and from adjacent
property by intervening open space with the intention of permanently
preserving the undeveloped land and of permanently preserving as much
of the existing foliage as possible, particularly around the perimeter of the
site.
§ 112-6. Preservation of open space.
CCH District subdivisions shall result in the preservation of open space
areas having meaningful scenic, ecological, environmental and/or
recreational characteristics, with such access, shape, size and location as
determined to be appropriate by the Planning Board and acceptable to
the Board of Trustees to satisfy the intended purpose. The permanent
preservation of such open space areas shall be legally assured in
accordance with the provisions of this Part 1 by the filing of appropriate
covenants, deed restrictions, easements or other agreements in recordable
form acceptable to the Village Attorney to accomplish the restriction of any
and all subsequent residential or other development and/or the modification
of the minimum density or other requirements of this Part 1.
§ 112-3 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-6
112:95

ARTICLE III
Standards for Dwelling Units
§ 112-7. Density.
The total number of individual family dwelling units shall not exceed the
number permitted by the minimum lot size and density requirements
contained in the current Village Zoning Map for the district or districts in
which the site is located. Each structure shall comply with the lot area and
building standards of the district or districts in which it is originally located
and with all other requirements of this Part 1, except with respect to front,
rear and side yard restrictions, and houses may be clustered or attached
or semidetached. The side, front and rear yard setbacks of attached or
semiattached dwelling units shall also comply with the standards of the
district or districts in which the site is located, except as expressly modified
by the Board of Trustees when approving the site plan, but if the dwellings
are detached, such setbacks may be reduced by not more than 50%.
§ 112-8. Horizontal construction prohibited.
Construction of dwelling units in a horizontal design, i.e., one over the other,
shall not be permitted.
§ 112-9. Height.
No building shall have a height of more than 2 1/2 stories above grade or
35 feet, whichever is less.
§ 112-10. Number of units.
No more than six dwelling units may be attached, grouped or clustered in
any one cluster of dwellings, unless expressly permitted by the Board of
Trustees, but in no event shall the number exceed eight.
§ 112-11. Bedrooms; minimum floor area.
No more than 25% of the dwelling units may contain more than two
bedrooms, and no dwelling unit shall contain more than three bedrooms.
The minimum livable floor area per dwelling shall be 1,600 square feet.
§ 112-12. Boundaries.
No structure shall be erected within 60 feet of the property line along a
public street. No structure shall be erected within 50 feet of any property
line; except, however, where a private dwelling unit or any abutting parcel,
no structure shall be erected within 85 feet of any such existing private
dwelling unit. The word "structure" shall include any accessory use under
Chapter 295, Zoning.
§ 112-7 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-13
112:97
§ 112-13. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses within a CCH District shall be the same as those
otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, except
that single-family attached or semidetached dwelling units shall also be
permitted in such districts.
§ 112-14. Development standards and controls.
Except as otherwise specified herein, all development standards and
controls normally applicable to other residential subdivisions shall also be
applicable to CCH subdivisions:
§ 112-15. Storage.
All self-propelled maintenance equipment, including accessories, shall be
stored in enclosed structures only, which structures shall conform in
architectural theme to the residential buildings of the development.
§ 112-16. Visual privacy.
Visual privacy shall be preserved for residents through the proper design
of rear yards and/or patio spaces. Proper screening through the use of
vegetation, fencing and partially or fully enclosed patios shall be provided.
§ 112-17. Audio privacy.
Audio privacy shall be maintained by requiring proper standards for solid
party walls that will satisfactorily limit sound transmission between
adjoining dwelling units.
A. Determination of density. The number of building lots permitted in a
CCH subdivision shall in no case exceed the number which could be
permitted, in the Planning Board's judgment, if the land were
subdivided into lots conforming to all normally applicable requirements
of Chapter 295, Zoning, the Westchester County Health Department
Regulations and all other applicable requirements. The basis for this
determination by the Planning Board shall be a conventional
preliminary subdivision plot for the subject property, plus such other
information as may be required by said Board.
B. Type and arrangement of buildings. The type of residential dwelling
units permitted within a CCH subdivision shall be, at the discretion of
the Planning Board and subject to the conditions set forth herein, in
detached, semidetached and/or attached buildings. The minimum
distance between any two clustered structures shall be equal to at least
the height of the tallest of such cluster structures.
C. Roads. The Planning Board may modify usual requirements for widths
of roads within the district, provided that adequate provision is made
for fire and emergency equipment.
§ 112-13 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-18
112:98
§ 112-18. Antenna systems.
A central television antenna system shall be provided for each group of
attached dwelling units.
§ 112-19. Utilities.
The applicant for approval of a site plan shall provide all necessary water
and sewer facilities, fire hydrants, storm drainage, highway access, paved
service streets, parking and loading facilities and off-street lighting, making
reasonable provision for utility service connections with adjoining
properties in other ownerships. Wherever possible, all utility lines shall be
underground.
§ 112-20. Parking and garages.
Fully enclosed private garages for passenger automobiles for the exclusive
use of residents of such a development and their guests shall be provided at
a ratio of not less than one garage for every dwelling unit. There shall also
be provided for passenger automobiles for the exclusive use of residents
of such a development and their guests not less than nor more than 1 1/
2 additional parking spaces for each dwelling unit, either fully enclosed or
fully open. Carports or partially enclosed garages are prohibited.
§ 112-21. Further subdivision restricted.
Individual private lots, if any, or individual dwelling units under single
ownership (under one deed, whether in the name of one person, husband
and wife and/or child or children as joint tenants or tenants in common, or
any corporation, trust or other entity existing for the benefit of a family unit)
shall not be further subdivided after final subdivision approval.
§ 112-22. Open space.
A minimum of 30% of the land area shall be maintained for open space,
which area shall not include interior roadways, parking areas, private
recreation areas, private open spaces and private courts which abut and
service any building.
§ 112-23. Private park or green area.
The perimeter shall maintain a private park or green area except for such
road or roads giving access to the development.
§ 112-24. Minimum land area for development.
The minimum land area for development shall be not less than six acres nor
more than 10 acres.
§ 112-18 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-25
112:99
§ 112-25. Access to dwellings.
Access into all single-family detached dwellings, single-family attached
dwellings, detached group or cluster form shall be at ground level.
§ 112-26. Signs.
Professional and other signs indicating the name of the cluster housing
residential development, traffic directional and other signs shall be
approved by the Planning Board.
§ 112-27. Site standards.
§ 112-28. Lot standards.
Each lot and building thereon shall comply with the lot area, yard and
building standards of the underlying district, except as otherwise modified
herein.
§ 112-29. Major culs-de-sac.
Major culs-de-sac with widened turnarounds shall be designated by the
Planning Board and shall be required to have fifty-foot rights-of-way with
30 feet of pavement leading to turnaround areas with a forty-foot radius,
having a pavement radius of 30 feet. Other culs-de-sac, or street access,
shall be as approved by the Planning Board and shown on the development
plan.
§ 112-30. Irregularly shaped lots on culs-de-sac.
A. For a subdivision of single-family dwellings containing five or more lots,
the land upon which such dwellings are to be constructed shall have an
area of not less than six acres.
B. The site shall have street frontage upon a major collector street to
service such development.
A. In an irregularly shaped lot fronting on a cul-de-sac (or a curved
roadway):
(1) The frontage line of the lot shall be defined as a line which is a
minimum of 100 feet in width and parallel to a line drawn
tangential to the cul-de-sac.
(2) The minimum required lot area (10,000 square feet in an R-10
District) must be located behind the front line defined in
Subsection A(1) above.
(3) The minimum front yard setback (30 feet) shall be measured from
the property line on the cul-de-sac.
§ 112-25 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-30
112:100
§ 112-31. Minimum lot dimensions.
The minimum lot frontage, width, depth and yard setback requirements
for each clustered grouping within a clustered residential district shall be
the same as required in the underlying zone district, except that where a
building lot within a conservation subdivision abuts an existing residential
lot complying with conventional lot dimensional standards, any front, side
or rear yards adjoining such property shall comply with the normally
applicable setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
§ 112-32. Compliance with other regulations required.
In addition to the requirements of this article, each site plan submitted
hereunder shall also comply with all requirements of Article XII, Site Plan
Approval, and Article XIII, Subdivision Regulations, of Chapter 295, Zoning,
except to the extent that either is superseded by this article.
B. An irregularly shaped lot fronting on a cul-de-sac (or a curved roadway)
shall be deemed a buildable lot only if it meets the requirements
provided in Subsection A above.
C. In determining maximum density, an irregularly shaped lot may be
included in the calculation if it has not less than 45 linear feet measured
along the circumference of the cul-de-sac (or curved roadway).
D. All other yard and other requirements of this Part 1 and Chapter 295,
Zoning, of the village shall pertain.
§ 112-30 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-32
112:101

ARTICLE IV
Ownership of Open Space
§ 112-33. Conserved land areas to be defined in site plan;
development restricted.
As a condition of final approval, the open space or undeveloped land area
("conserved land areas"), whether landscaped or not, shall be clearly
defined on any site plan to be submitted under this article as permanent
open space and may never be further developed beyond the density
determined pursuant to § 112-14A hereof.
§ 112-34. Deed or lease to mandate maintenance; recording and
approval procedure.
Every deed to or lease of a dwelling unit constructed pursuant to this article
shall contain a covenant or provision mandating that all open space or
outdoor recreation shall be maintained by the owners or lessees of such
dwelling units. It shall be a condition to the final approval of any such
site plan that each such deed or lease will be recorded at the Westchester
County Clerk's office within 10 days after its execution and the form of
such consent or provision must be approved by the Village Attorney prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 112-35. Division of ownership; property owners' association.
A. The ownership of conserved land areas shall be divided among all
owners of building lots within the conservation subdivision, except
where all or an appropriate portion of the conserved land areas are
deeded to a recognized conservation organization dedicated to the
preservation of open space and such dedication is acceptable to the
conservation organization and to the Planning Board and the Board of
Trustees in order to provide that all residents in a clustered residential
development shall have access at all times onto land in the development
on which no structures are erected, except for any private lots in single
ownership with individual dwelling units, and except that the roads or
other open lands in the development may, with the approval of the
Planning Board and the Board of Trustees, be dedicated to the village.
Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the subdivider shall
execute and file with the Planning Board such documents as, in the
opinion of the Village Attorney, will be sufficient to create a property
owners' association responsible for the continued ownership, use and
maintenance of all conserved land areas in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) Membership in the association must be mandatory for each
property owner within the subdivision and for any successive
property owners.
(2) All restrictions on the ownership, use and maintenance of
conserved land areas must be permanent.
§ 112-33 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-35
112:103
§ 112-36. Permitted uses.
Conserved land areas shall be preserved in their natural state, and the
use of such areas shall be limited to appropriate conservation, open space
and recreation purposes as determined by the Planning Board subject
to the limitations in § 112-22. A portion of the conserved land area(s)
may be designated "active recreation area" on the subdivision plat, in
a location approved by the Planning Board. Such active recreation area
shall not exceed 5% of the total area of the proposed subdivision. Within
such area, structures and facilities for active recreation purposes, including
playground equipment, swimming pools, tennis courts and so forth, may be
constructed and operated for the use of the property owners in the CCH
subdivision and their guests. Where determined appropriate, the Planning
Board may specify a phased construction schedule for such structures and
facilities. Enlargement of such structures and facilities not shown on the
filed plat shall be subject to approval of the Planning Board.
§ 112-37. Access.
It is the specific intention to maximize the open space available for use
and access to the residents of the cluster development. All residents in
a clustered residential development shall have access at all times onto
and use of land in the development on which no structures are erected.
Privately owned lots which were not included in determining the maximum
density of a clustered development may be excluded from the provisions of
this section. Roads or other open lands in the development may, upon the
(3) The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local
taxes and the maintenance of the conserved land areas, including
any active recreation areas and related facilities.
(4) Each lot owner within the subdivision shall be made responsible for
paying his proportionate share of the association's costs, and the
assessment levied by the association shall become a lien on the
property if not paid.
(5) The association shall have the power to adjust assessments to meet
changing needs.
B. In the event that the maintenance, preservation and/or use of the
conserved land area(s) ceases to be in compliance with any of the above
requirements or any other requirements specified by the Planning
Board when approving the subdivision plat, the village shall be granted
the right to take all necessary action to assure such compliance and to
assess against the association and/or each individual property owner
within the subdivision all costs incurred by the village for such
purposes.
C. The establishment of such an association shall be required prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 112-35 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-37
112:104
recommendation of the Planning Board and express approval of the Board
of Trustees, be dedicated to the village or other public authority.
§ 112-37 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-37
112:105

ARTICLE V
Approval Procedures
§ 112-38. Municipal authority.
The municipal authority designated to act under this Part 1 shall be the
Village Board of Trustees, except insofar as specific duties are designated
herein as Planning Board responsibilities.
§ 112-39. Presentation of application and fee.
Six copies of the application for approval of a site plan for grouped or
clustered housing shall be presented to the Village Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount or amounts set forth in §§ 112-51 and
112-52 hereof.
§ 112-40. Information required by application.
A. Such application shall be on a form provided by the Village Clerk and
shall set forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The location of the land proposed to be developed;
(3) The nature of the applicant's interest in the land, together with
copies of a deed establishing title to the site in fee simple or a
contract in which the applicant will acquire such title upon closing;
(4) The density of land use to be allocated to various parts of the site;
(5) The location and size of any common open space;
(6) The form of organization proposed to own and maintain any
common open space;
(7) The use, height, bulk, location and general design of buildings and
other structures, interior lot lines, if any, the number of dwelling
units in each building and general floor plans for each dwelling
unit;
(8) The names of the owners of the adjoining properties in a radius of
500 feet from each property line of the clustered housing district;
(9) The proposed provision for disposition of stormwater and sanitary
sewage;
(10) The substance of any covenants, grants, easements or any other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the land or buildings,
including easements for public utilities;
(11) The proposed provision for parking;
(12) Locations and widths of proposed streets and ways;
§ 112-38 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-40
112:107
§ 112-41. Planning Board review.
§ 112-42. Tentative approval.
(13) Modifications from the existing laws and ordinances governing
streets or ways or land use being required;
(14) The projected schedule for development and the approximate times
when final approvals would be requested; and
(15) A statement of why the public interest would be served by the
proposed development. Said statements shall be supported by a
report setting forth the manner in which the proposed development
would satisfy the objectives stated in § 112-1 of this Part 1.
B. The location of the proposed clustered residential development shall be
submitted on a preliminary plot plan prepared at a scale of not less than
50 feet to the inch. In addition, the application shall include a
preliminary plot plan at a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch
showing the traditional subdivision plot for a conventional subdivision
conforming to all of the requirements of the underlying zone.
A. Upon receipt, the application shall, within 10 days, be referred by the
Village Clerk to the Village Planning Board for initial review. The
applicant shall present evidence to the Planning Board as to:
(1) The objectives and purposes to be served.
(2) Satisfactory application of planning and design standards.
(3) The estimated cost of development and economic responsibility and
feasibility.
(4) The projected schedule for development.
(5) Conformity to the Comprehensive or Master Plan of the village.
B. To this end, factual evidence and expert opinion shall be submitted by
the applicant in the form of such necessary maps, charts, plans, reports,
models and other tangible materials, and in the form of testimony by
experts, such as professional planners, architects, engineers, lawyers,
realtors and economists, if requested by the Planning Board, so as to
state clearly and completely the full nature and extent of the proposal.
A. Within 60 days of its receipt of the application, the Planning Board
shall:
(1) Recommend the granting of tentative approval of the site plans as
submitted;
(2) Recommend the granting of tentative approval, subject to specific
modifications of the site plan as submitted; or
(3) Recommend denial of tentative approval of the site plan.
§ 112-40 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-42
112:108
§ 112-43. Public hearing.
Within 60 days after the filing of the Planning Board's report concerning
tentative approval, a public hearing on said report and its recommendations
shall be held by the Board of Trustees.
§ 112-44. Board of Architectural Review.
In reviewing the application before it, the Board of Trustees shall have
all of the power of a Board of Architectural Review in determining the
suitability of the proposed design and material and shall have the right to
require that said design and materials used be modified so as to be more
consistent with and harmonious to the general surrounding community and
its environment.
§ 112-45. Final approval; hearing; permits.
B. In recommending the granting or denial of tentative approval, the
Planning Board shall set forth, in writing, findings as to why the site
plan would or would not be in the public interest; in what respects the
plan is or is not consistent with the declaration of zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
and the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest; the manner in which the site plan does or does not make
adequate provisions for public services, including adequate control of
vehicular traffic; and whether the plans further the amenities of light
and air protection and panoramic views, and recreational light and
other environmental objectives. The Planning Board may, in
recommending the granting of tentative approval, permit the applicant
to develop said property in two phases, provided that each such section
shall contain 50% of the entire approved plan. The Planning Board may
also recommend additional conditions as it may deem necessary to
ensure the orderly development of the entire parcel in accordance with
this Part 1.
A. If the Board of Trustees grants tentative approval of the plan, with or
without conditions, there shall be set forth in the written resolution the
time within which an application for final approval of the plan shall be
filed or, in the case of a plan which provides for development over a
period of years, the periods of time within which applications for final
approval of each part thereof shall be filed. The tentative approval shall
be valid for a period not to exceed 12 months unless an application for
final approval shall have been filed within that period. Following
tentative approval of the site plan and prior to filing an application for
final approval, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Board for
review the design development documents as defined by the American
Institute of Architects, consisting of drawings and other documents
sufficient to fix and describe the size and character of the proposed
project as to structural, mechanical and electrical systems, material
and such other essentials as the Planning Board may require.
§ 112-42 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-45
112:109
§ 112-46. Petition for review.
At any time following final approval of a site plan, including the issuance of
permits for any part thereof, the applicant may petition for review in detail
of the previously approved plan stating his reasons therefor. Such reasons
may be based upon such considerations as, but not limited to, changing
social or economic conditions, suggested improvements to layout or design
B. The application for final approval shall be made to the Board of
Trustees and, upon receipt, shall be referred to the Planning Board for
its final review. Such application shall include all necessary drawings,
specifications and such covenants, easements, conditions,
modifications and performance bonds as were required at the time of
tentative approval. The application for final approval shall contain a
certification by the applicant that the proposed development conforms
to all of the provisions of this Part 1, Chapter 295, Zoning (except as
modified by this Part 1), the Westchester County Health Department
Regulations and Planning Department Regulations, and all other
applicable laws, rules and requirements.
C. Planning Board recommendations.
(1) Within 60 days of referral of the application to the Planning Board
for final approval, the Planning Board shall:
(a) Recommend the granting of final approval of the site plan as
submitted;
(b) Recommend the granting of final approval subject to specific
modifications to the site plan as submitted; or
(c) Recommend denial of final approval, but only in instances in
which the final plan is not in substantial compliance with the
terms and conditions of the tentative approval.
(2) Said recommendations shall be in writing and shall clearly set forth
the findings upon which the Planning Board's decision was based.
D. Within 60 days after the filing of the Planning Board's report
concerning final approval of said report and its recommendations, a
public hearing shall be held by the Board of Trustees to consider such a
report and recommendations.
E. Upon final approval at or after such public hearing by the Board of
Trustees, the Building Inspector shall issue all necessary permits in
accordance therewith. Prior to such approval no permit of any kind for
construction shall be issued.
F. In the event that the applicant fails to begin construction within 12
months from the date of final approval by the Board of Trustees, said
approval shall be deemed null and void, unless said time period is
extended by the Board of Trustees upon good cause shown.
§ 112-45 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-46
112:110
features, or unforeseen difficulties or advantages, such as site conditions,
state or federal projects or statutory changes, which may mutually affect
the interests of the applicant and the village. The Board of Trustees, upon
finding that such petition and reasons are valid, in its sole discretion, may
reconsider the site plan as finally approved, but in such event shall follow
in full all procedures and conditions above required for initial applications.
Each such petition for review shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the
amount or amounts set forth in §§ 112-51 and 112-52 hereof.
§ 112-47. Improvements; performance guaranties.
As a condition of final approval, the applicant shall agree to install all
site improvements, and the Village Board of Trustees shall require the
posting of adequate performance guaranties to insure the installation of all
such improvements. Such performance guaranties shall be in an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of all such improvements, as estimated by the
Planning Board, and should include an agreed-upon date for the completion
of said improvements and shall be in a form satisfactory to the Village
Attorney. Said performance guaranties may be in the form of a performance
bond which shall be issued by a bonding or surety company approved
by the Planning Board and should include an agreed-upon date for the
completion of said improvements. Said performance guaranties may be for
a period of time to be determined by the Planning Board. The amount of
the performance guaranties shall be reduced by the Planning Board when
portions of the required improvements have been completed.
§ 112-48. Independent consultants; fees to be paid by applicant.
In order to assure that the processing of any application submitted
hereunder progresses in accordance with the requirements of this article,
the Planning Board may retain independent architectural or engineering
consultants whose reasonable fees and expenses shall be paid by the
applicant.
§ 112-49. Variances.
Contrary provisions of the Village Code notwithstanding, the Board of
Trustees shall have the exclusive authority to grant variances in or
modifications to the provisions and requirements of this Part 1, except that
no variance shall be granted which will result in an increase in density or
an increase in height.
§ 112-50. Notice of hearing. [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
Wherever a public hearing is required, the applicant shall give notice to all
property owners within a radius of 500 feet of each boundary line of the
parcel or parcels by certified mail, return receipt requested or any other
method of delivery providing proof of delivery, or by personal service (with
affidavit of service) not less than 15 days prior to the date of such public
hearing.
§ 112-46 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-51
112:111
§ 112-51. General application and fee requirements. [Amended
9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
Each submission of a site plan pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be accompanied by a properly completed application form in six copies and
a filing fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in
the fee schedule.14
§ 112-52. Revision procedures; application and fee. [Amended
9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
In any case where an applicant seeks a revision of or an amendment to a site
plan which has been approved, the revised or amended site plan shall be
accompanied by a properly completed application form and a filing fee to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
§ 112-53. Notice of hearing to be given to certain governmental
units. [Amended 11-2-1981 by L.L. No. 9-1981]
At least 10 days prior to the date of any public hearing provided for in this
Part 1, the applicant shall give written notice to all governmental units and
agencies as may be required by law. Such units and agencies shall have the
right to appear and be heard.
§ 112-54. Notice of hearing to be given to County Planning Board.
In addition, at least 10 days prior to any public hearing provided for in
this Part 1, the applicant shall also give notice to the Westchester County
Planning Board, which shall have the right to appear and be heard. If
the County Planning Board disapproves the proposal on which the hearing
is held or recommends changes or modifications thereof, the Board of
Trustees shall not act contrary to such disapproval or recommendation
except by adoption of a resolution by the Board of Trustees, which action
shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the laws providing for the
review of acts of such municipal agencies, commenced within 30 days of
its adoption, pursuant to Title D of the Westchester County Administrative
Code, § 451.
14.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 112-51 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-54
112:112
Part 2
[Adopted 7-2C3C-1H9-826 DBisytLri.cLt. No. 6-1986]
ARTICLE VI
Purpose
§ 112-55. Findings.
The Board of Trustees has inspected Parcels 13, 25 and 28 of Sheet 1
and Lot 3, Block 601, of Sheet 1 ("parcels") of the Village Tax Map and
has reviewed topographic surveys showing proposed developments of said
parcels under a clustered subdivision plan and a conventional subdivision
plan. The Board of Trustees has determined that the parcels form a unique
shape with a long, narrow, private access, that the parcels contain and
abut open land areas, including the Old Croton Aqueduct and county open
space property (Lenore Preserve), and that the parcels abut a residential
institution (Graham-Windham School) and an apartment house. The Board
of Trustees further finds that the views, terrain and elevations are such that
a clustered housing development is likely to be less visible from surrounding
areas than a conventional one-family home development.
§ 112-56. Intent.
The Board of Trustees finds that the creation of a clustered housing district
confined to the parcels will result in a substantially diminished impact upon
the community or change in the general appearance of the village and
neighboring properties and is less likely to be seen by persons passing
by or on Broadway, and will substantially promote the conservation and
enhancement of natural beauty and resources on land not topographically
suitable for the construction of a conventional one-family home subdivision.
§ 112-55 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-56
112:113

ARTICLE VII
Creation; General Provisions
§ 112-57. Establishment. [Amended 10-4-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988;
3-7-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
A conservation or clustered housing district, "CCH-2," is hereby created by
amending the Village Zoning Map to create such a district to be known as
"CCH-2" on the Zoning Map, which district shall be confined to Parcels 13,
25 and 28 of Sheet 1 and Lot 3, Block 601, of Sheet 1 of the Village Tax Map
("parcels"). Such parcels may be developed pursuant to a site plan dated
November 23, 1987, subject to this Part 2 and to the requirements of the
district of which they were previously designated on the Village Tax Map.
§ 112-58. Permitted dwelling units.
On such site, notwithstanding front, rear and side yard restrictions
otherwise contained in Chapter 295, Zoning, and subject to the conditions
set forth in this Part 2 and in § 7-738 of the Village Law of the State of New
York, dwelling units may be in attached, semidetached, detached, grouped
or clustered form.
§ 112-59. Grouping of houses.
The design of such a site plan shall provide for the grouping or clustering
of houses so that each cluster is set off from the others and from adjacent
property by intervening open space with the intention of permanently
preserving the undeveloped land and of permanently preserving as much
of the existing foliage as possible, particularly around the perimeter of the
site.
§ 112-60. Preservation of open space.
CCH-2 District subdivisions shall result in the preservation of open space
areas having meaningful scenic, ecological, environmental and/or
recreational characteristics and in the creation of recreational facilities,
with access, shape, size and location as determined to be appropriate by
the Planning Board and acceptable to the Board of Trustees to satisfy the
intended purpose. The permanent preservation of such open space areas
shall be legally assured in accordance with the provisions of this Part
2 by the filing of appropriate covenants, deed restrictions, easements or
other agreements in recordable form acceptable to the Village Attorney to
accomplish the restriction of any and all subsequent residential or other
development and/or the modifications of the minimum density or other
requirements of this Part 2.
§ 112-57 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-60
112:115

ARTICLE VIII
Standards for Dwelling Units
§ 112-61. Density.
The total number of individual family dwelling units shall not exceed the
number permitted by the minimum lot size and density requirements
contained in the current Village Zoning Map for the district or districts in
which the site is located. Each structure shall comply with the lot area and
building standards of the district or districts in which it is originally located
and with all other requirements of this Part 2, except with respect to front,
rear and side yard restrictions, and houses may be clustered or attached
or semidetached. The side, front and rear yard setbacks of attached or
semiattached dwelling units shall also comply with the standards of the
district or districts in which the site is located, except as expressly modified
by the Board of Trustees when approving the site plan, but if the dwellings
are detached, such setbacks may be reduced by not more than 50%.
§ 112-62. Vertical construction prohibited.
Construction of separate dwelling units in a vertical design (that is, one
separate dwelling unit over another separate dwelling unit) shall not be
permitted.
§ 112-63. Height.
No building shall have a height of more than 2 1/2 stories above grade or
35 feet, whichever is less.
§ 112-64. Number of units.
No more than five dwelling units may be attached, grouped or clustered
in any one cluster of dwellings, unless expressly permitted by the Board of
Trustees, but in no event shall the number exceed six.
§ 112-65. Boundaries.
No structure shall be erected within 30 feet of the property line. No
structure shall be erected within 50 feet of any city boundary line. The word
"structure" shall include any accessory use under Chapter 295, Zoning.
§ 112-66. Permitted uses. [Amended 10-4-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988;
3-7-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
The permitted uses within a CCH-2 District shall be the same as those
otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, except
that single-family attached or semidetached dwelling units shall also be
permitted in such districts.
§ 112-61 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-67
112:117
§ 112-67. Development standards and controls.
Except as otherwise specified herein, all development standards and
controls normally applicable to other residential subdivisions shall also be
applicable to CCH-2 subdivisions:
§ 112-68. Storage.
All self-propelled maintenance equipment, including accessories, shall be
stored in enclosed structures only, which structures shall conform in
architectural theme to the residential buildings of the development.
§ 112-69. Visual privacy.
Visual privacy shall be preserved for residents through the proper design
of rear yards and/or patio spaces. Proper screening through the use of
vegetation, fencing and partially or fully enclosed patios shall be provided.
§ 112-70. Audio privacy.
Audio privacy shall be maintained by requiring proper standards for solid
party walls that will satisfactorily limit sound transmission between
adjoining dwelling units.
A. Determination of density. The number of building lots permitted in a
CCH-2 subdivision shall in no case exceed the number which could be
permitted, in the Planning Board's judgment, if the land were
subdivided into lots conforming to all normally applicable requirements
of Chapter 295, Zoning, the Westchester County Health Department
Regulations and all other applicable requirements. The basis for this
determination by the Planning Board shall be a conventional
preliminary subdivision plot for the subject property, plus such other
information as may be required by said Board.
B. Type and arrangement of buildings. The type of residential dwelling
units permitted within a CCH-2 subdivision shall be, at the discretion of
the Planning Board and subject to the conditions set forth herein, in
detached, semidetached and/or attached buildings. The minimum
distance between any two clustered structures shall be equal to at least
the height of the tallest of such cluster structures.
C. Roads. The Planning Board may modify usual requirements for widths
of roads within the district, provided that adequate provision is made
for fire and emergency equipment.15
15.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Dwelling unit ownership, which immediately followed
this subsection and was added 10-4-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988, was deleted 3-7-1989 by L.L.
No. 2-1989.
§ 112-67 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-71
112:118
§ 112-71. Antenna systems.
A central television antenna system shall be provided for each group of
attached dwelling units.
§ 112-72. Utilities.
The applicant for approval of a site plan shall provide all necessary water
and sewer facilities, fire hydrants, storm drainage, highway access, paved
service streets, parking and loading facilities and off-street lighting, making
reasonable provision for utility service connections with adjoining
properties in other ownerships. Wherever possible, all utility lines shall be
underground.
§ 112-73. Parking and garages.
Fully enclosed private garages for passenger automobiles for the exclusive
use of residents of such a development and their guests shall be provided at
a ratio of not less than one garage for every dwelling unit. There shall also
be provided for passenger automobiles for the exclusive use of residents of
such a development and their guests not less than one nor more than two
additional parking spaces for each dwelling unit, either fully enclosed or
fully open. Carports or partially enclosed garages are prohibited.
§ 112-74. Further subdivision restricted.
Individual private lots, if any, or individual dwelling units under single
ownership (that is, under one deed, whether in the name of one person,
husband and wife and/or child or children as joint tenants or tenants in
common, or any corporation, trust or other entity existing for the benefit
of a family unit) shall not be further subdivided after final subdivision
approval.
§ 112-75. Open space.
A minimum of 30% of the land area shall be maintained for open space,
which area shall not include interior roadways, parking areas or private
courts that abut and service any building.
§ 112-76. Minimum land area for development.
The minimum land area for development shall be not less than four acres.
§ 112-77. Access to dwellings.
Access into all single-family detached dwellings, single-family attached
dwellings, detached group or cluster form shall be at ground level.
§ 112-71 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-78
112:119
§ 112-78. Signs.
Professional and other signs indicating the name of the cluster housing
residential development and traffic directional and other signs shall be
approved by the Planning Board.
§ 112-79. Lot standards.
Each lot and building thereon shall comply with the lot area, yard and
building standards of the underlying district, except as otherwise modified
herein.
§ 112-80. Culs-de-sac and roadways.
All culs-de-sac, turnarounds, roadways and street access shall be reviewed
and approved by the Village Engineer and the Planning Board and shall be
shown on the development plan.
§ 112-81. Minimum lot dimensions.
The minimum lot frontage, width, depth and yard setback requirements
for each clustered grouping within a clustered residential district shall be
the same as required in the underlying zone district, except that where a
building lot within a conservation subdivision abuts an existing residential
lot that complies with conventional lot dimensional standards, any front,
side or rear yards adjoining such property shall comply with the normally
applicable setback requirements of the zoning district in which that
property is located.
§ 112-82. Compliance with other regulations required.
In addition to the requirements of this article, each site plan submitted
hereunder shall also comply with all requirements of Article XII, Site Plan
Approval, and Article XIII, Subdivision Regulations, of Chapter 295, Zoning,
except to the extent that either is superseded by this article.
§ 112-78 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-82
112:120
ARTICLE IX
Ownership of Open Space
§ 112-83. Conserved land areas to be defined in site plan;
development restricted.
As a condition of final approval, the open space or undeveloped land area
("conserved land areas"), whether landscaped or not, shall be clearly
defined on any site plan to be submitted under this article as permanent
open space and may never be further developed beyond the density
determined pursuant to § 112-67A hereof.
§ 112-84. Deed or lease to mandate maintenance; recording and
approval procedure.
Every deed to or lease of a dwelling unit constructed pursuant to this article
shall contain a covenant or provision mandating that all open space or
outdoor recreation areas shall be maintained by the owners or lessees of
such dwelling units. It shall be a condition to the final approval of any such
site plan that each such deed or lease will be recorded at the Westchester
County Clerk's office within 10 days after its execution and the form of
such consent or provision must be approved by the Village Attorney prior to
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
§ 112-85. Division of ownership; property owners' association.
A. In order to provide that all residents in a clustered residential
development shall have access at all times onto land in the development
on which no structures are erected, the ownership of conserved land
areas shall be divided among all owners of building lots within the
conservation subdivision, except where all or an appropriate portion of
the conserved land areas are deeded to a recognized conservation
organization committed to the preservation of open space and such
dedication is acceptable to the conservation organization and to the
Planning Board and the Board of Trustees, and except for any private
lots in single ownership with individual dwelling units, and except that
the roads or other open lands in the development may, with the
approval of the Planning Board and the Board of Trustees, be dedicated
to the village. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the
subdivider shall execute and file with the Planning Board such
documents as, in the opinion of the Village Attorney, will be sufficient to
create a property owners' association responsible for the continued
ownership, use and maintenance of all conserved land areas, in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Membership in the association must be mandatory for each
property owner within the subdivision and for any successive
property owners.
(2) All restrictions on the ownership, use and maintenance of
conserved land areas must be permanent.
§ 112-83 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-85
112:121
§ 112-86. Permitted uses.
Conserved land areas shall be preserved in their natural state, and the
use of such areas shall be limited to appropriate conservation, open space
and recreation purposes, as determined by the Planning Board subject to
the limitations in § 112-75. A portion of the conserved land area(s) may be
designated "active recreation area" on the subdivision plat, in a location
approved by the Planning Board. Such active recreation area shall not
exceed 10% of the total area of the proposed subdivision. Within such
area, structures and facilities for active recreation purposes, including
playground equipment, swimming pools, tennis courts and so forth, may be
constructed and operated for the use of the property owners in the CCH-2
subdivision and their guests. Where determined appropriate, the Planning
Board may specify a phased construction schedule for such structures and
facilities. Enlargement of such structures and facilities not shown on the
filed plat shall be subject to approval of the Planning Board.
§ 112-87. Access.
It is the specific intention to maximize the open space available for use
and access by the residents of the cluster development. All residents in
a clustered residential development shall have access at all times onto
and use of land in the development on which no structures are erected.
Privately owned lots which were not included in determining the maximum
density of a clustered development may be excluded from the provisions
of this section. Roads or other open lands in the development may, upon
(3) The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local
taxes and the maintenance of the conserved land areas, including
any active recreation areas and related facilities.
(4) Each lot owner within the subdivision shall be made responsible for
paying his proportionate share of the association's costs, and the
assessment levied by the association shall become a lien on the
property if not paid.
(5) The association shall have the power to adjust assessments to meet
changing needs.
B. In the event that the maintenance, preservation and/or use of the
conserved land area(s) ceases to be in compliance with any of the above
requirements or any other requirements specified by the Planning
Board when approving the subdivision plat, the village shall be granted
the right to take all necessary action to assure such compliance and to
assess against the association and/or each individual property owner
within the subdivision all costs incurred by the village for such
purposes.
C. The establishment of such an association shall be required prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 112-85 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-87
112:122
the recommendation of the Planning Board and the express approval of the
Board of Trustees, be dedicated to the village or other public authority.
§ 112-87 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-87
112:123

ARTICLE X
Approval Procedures
§ 112-88. Municipal authority.
The municipal authority designated to act under this Part 2 shall be the
Village Board of Trustees, except insofar as specific duties are designated
herein as Planning Board responsibilities.
§ 112-89. Presentation of application and fee.
Six copies of the application for approval of a site plan for grouped or
clustered housing shall be presented to the Village Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount or amounts set forth in §§ 112-102 and
112-103 hereof.
§ 112-90. Information required by application.
A. Such application shall be on a form provided by the Village Clerk and
shall set forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The location of the land proposed to be developed;
(3) The nature of the applicant's interest in the land, together with the
copies of a deed establishing title to the site in fee simple or a
contract in which the applicant will acquire such title upon closing;
(4) The density of land use to be allocated to various parts of the site;
(5) The location and size of any common open space;
(6) The form of organization proposed to own and maintain any
common open space;
(7) The use, height, bulk, location and general design of buildings and
other structures, interior lot lines, if any, the number of dwelling
units in each building and general floor plans for each dwelling
unit;
(8) The names of the owners of the adjoining properties in a radius of
500 feet from each property line of the clustered housing district;
(9) The proposed provision for disposition of stormwater and sanitary
sewage;
(10) The substance of any covenants, grants, easements or any other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the land or buildings,
including easements for public utilities;
(11) The proposed provision for parking;
(12) Locations and widths of proposed streets and ways;
§ 112-88 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-90
112:125
§ 112-91. Planning Board review.
§ 112-92. Planning Board tentative approval or denial.
(13) Modifications from the existing laws and ordinances governing
streets or ways or land use being required;
(14) The projected schedule for development and the approximate times
when final approvals would be requested; and
(15) A statement of why the public interest would be served by the
proposed development. Said statements shall be supported by a
report setting forth the manner in which the proposed development
would satisfy the objective stated in § 112-55 of this Part 2.
B. The location of the proposed clustered residential development shall be
submitted on a preliminary plot plan prepared at a scale of not less than
50 feet to the inch. In addition, the application shall include a
preliminary plot plan at a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch
showing the traditional subdivision plot for a conventional subdivision
conforming to all of the requirements of the underlying zone.
A. Upon receipt, the application shall, within 10 days, be referred by the
Village Clerk to the Village Planning Board for initial review. The
applicant shall present evidence to the Planning Board as to:
(1) Objectives and purposes to be served.
(2) Satisfactory application of planning and design standards.
(3) Estimated cost of development and economic responsibility and
feasibility.
(4) The projected schedule for development.
(5) Conformity to the Comprehensive or Master Plan of the village.
(6) Conformity to the State Environmental Quality Review Act.16
B. To this end, factual evidence and expert opinion shall be submitted by
the applicant in the form of such necessary maps, charts, plans, reports,
models and other tangible materials, and in the form of testimony by
experts, such as professional planners, architects, engineers, lawyers,
realtors and economists, if requested by the Planning Board, so as to
state clearly and completely the full nature and extent of the proposal.
The Planning Board may recommend to the Board of Trustees the
imposition of additional review fees to be paid by the applicant to
permit adequate review by consultants or experts for the Planning
Board and in the interest of the village.
16.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law Article 8.
§ 112-90 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-92
112:126
§ 112-93. Board of Trustees tentative approval or denial.
Within 60 days after the filing of the Planning Board's report, a public
hearing on said report and its recommendations shall be held by the Board
of Trustees. Within 60 days after the close of said hearing, the Village Board
shall:
§ 112-94. Board of Architectural Review.
In reviewing the application before it, the Board of Trustees shall request
the Board of Architectural Review to submit its opinions on the suitability
of the proposed design and material. The Board of Trustees shall have
the right to require that said design and materials used be modified so
A. Within 60 days after its receipt of the application, the Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing thereon. Within 60 days after the
termination of such hearing, the Planning Board shall file a written
report with the Board of Trustees, which report shall:
(1) Recommend the granting of tentative approval of the site plan as
submitted;
(2) Recommend the granting of tentative approval, subject to specific
conditions or modifications of the site plan as submitted; or
(3) Recommend denial of tentative approval of the site plan.
B. In recommending the granting or denial of tentative approval, the
Planning Board shall set forth, in writing, findings as to why the site
plan would or would not be in the public interest; in what respects the
plan is or is not consistent with the declaration of zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
and the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest; the manner in which the site plan does or does not make
adequate provisions for public services, including adequate control of
vehicular traffic; and whether the plans further the amenities of light
and air protection and panoramic views and recreational light and other
environmental objectives. The Planning Board may, in recommending
the granting of tentative approval, permit the applicant to develop said
property in two phases, provided that each such section shall contain
50% of the entire approved plan. The Planning Board may also
recommend additional conditions as it may deem necessary to ensure
the orderly development of the entire parcel in accordance with this
Part 2.
A. Grant tentative approval of the site plan as submitted;
B. Grant tentative approval of the site plan subject to stated modifications
and/or conditions; or
C. Deny tentative approval of the site plan.
§ 112-92 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-94
112:127
as to be more consistent with and harmonious to the general surrounding
community and its environment.
§ 112-95. Final approval; hearing; permits.
A. If the Board of Trustees grants tentative approval of the plan, with or
without conditions and/or modifications, there shall be set forth in the
written resolution the time within which an application for final
approval of the plan shall be filed or, in the case of a plan which
provides for development over a period of years, the periods of time
within which applications for final approval of each part thereof shall be
filed. The tentative approval shall be valid for a period not to exceed 12
months, unless an application for final approval shall have been filed
within that period. Following tentative approval of the site plan and
prior to filing an application for final approval, the applicant shall
submit to the Planning Board for review the design development
documents as defined by the American Institute of Architects,
consisting of drawings and other documents sufficient to fix and
describe the size and character of the proposed project as to structural,
mechanical and electrical systems, material and such other essentials
as the Planning Board may require.
B. In granting tentative approval or tentative approval with modifications
and/or conditions, the Board of Trustees shall find that the site plan:
(1) Is consistent with the declaration of policy as stated in this Part 2;
(2) Makes adequate provision for light, air, circulation and separation
between buildings or groups of buildings and for public services,
including adequate control of vehicular traffic;
(3) Furthers the protection and enhancement of natural beauty,
including the reasonable protection of views, and recreational and
other environmental objectives; and
(4) Is in the public interest.
C. The application for final approval shall be made to the Board of
Trustees and, upon receipt, shall be referred to the Planning Board for
its final review. Such application shall include all necessary drawings
and specifications, such covenants, easements, conditions,
modifications and performance bonds as were required at the time of
tentative approval, and all information as is required for a site plan as
defined in Article XII, Site Plan Approval, of Chapter 295, Zoning, in
addition to the preceding requirements of this Part 2. The application
for final approval shall contain a certification by the applicant that the
proposed development conforms to all the provisions of this Part 2,
Chapter 295, Zoning (except as modified by this Part 2), the
Westchester County Health Department Regulations and Planning
Department Regulations and all other applicable laws, rules and
requirements.
§ 112-94 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-95
112:128
D. Planning Board recommendations.
(1) Within 60 days after referral of the application to the Planning
Board for final approval, the Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing thereon in a manner as prescribed by law and in
accordance with site plan review in Article XII, Site Plan Approval,
of Chapter 295, Zoning.
(2) Recommendations.
(a) Within 60 days after the close of said hearing, the Planning
Board shall file a report with the Board of Trustees, which
report shall:
[1] Recommend the granting of final approval of the site plan
submitted;
[2] Recommend the granting of final approval subject to
specific conditions and/or modifications to the site plan as
submitted; or
[3] Recommend denial of final approval, but only in instances
in which the final plan is not in substantial compliance
with the terms and conditions of the tentative approval.
(b) Said recommendations shall be in writing and shall clearly set
forth findings upon which the Planning Board's decision was
based.
(3) Failure by the Planning Board to file such report with the Board of
Trustees within the aforesaid time period shall be deemed to
constitute a recommendation of final approval of the final site plan
as submitted.
E. Action by Board of Trustees.
(1) Within 60 days after the filing of the Planning Board's report
concerning final approval, the Board of Trustees shall:
(a) Grant final approval of the site plan as submitted;
(b) Grant final approval of the site plan subject to stated
conditions and/or modifications; or
(c) Deny final approval of the site plan, but only if the final site
plan is not in substantial compliance with the terms and
conditions of the tentative approval.
(2) The granting of final approval, with or without conditions or
modifications, shall be made on the same findings as those on
which tentative approval was granted in § 112-93 hereof.
F. Upon final approval by the Board of Trustees and after submission of
construction drawings in sufficient detail to assure compliance with
§ 112-95 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-95
112:129
§ 112-96. Petition for review.
At any time following final approval of a site plan, including the issuance of
permits for any part thereof, the applicant may petition for review in detail
of the previously approved plan, stating his reasons therefor. Such reasons
may be based upon such considerations as, but not limited to, changing
social or economic conditions; suggested improvements to layout or design
features; or unforeseen difficulties or advantages that may mutually affect
the interests of the applicant and the village, such as site conditions, state
or federal projects or statutory changes. The Board of Trustees, upon
finding that such petition and reasons are valid, in its sole discretion, may
reconsider the site plan as finally approved, but in such event shall follow
in full all procedures and conditions above required for initial applications.
Each such petition for review shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the
amount or amounts set forth in §§ 112-102 and 112-103 hereof.
§ 112-97. Improvements; performance guaranties.
As a condition of final approval, the applicant shall agree to install all
site improvements, and the Board of Trustees shall require the posting
of adequate performance guaranties to insure the installation of all such
improvements. Such performance guaranties shall be in an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of all such improvements, as estimated by
the Board of Trustees, and should include an agreed-upon date for the
completion of said improvements and shall be in a form satisfactory to
the Village Attorney. Said performance guaranties may be in the form of a
performance bond which shall be issued by a bonding or surety company
approved by the Board of Trustees and should include an agreed-upon date
for the completion of said improvements. Said performance guaranties may
be for a period of time to be determined by the Board of Trustees. The
amount of the performance guaranties shall be reduced by the Board of
Trustees when portions of the required improvements have been completed.
§ 112-98. Independent consultants; fees to be paid by applicant.
In order to assure that the processing of any applications submitted
hereunder progresses in accordance with the requirements of this article,
the Board of Trustees and/or the Planning Board may retain independent
architectural, engineering or other consultants, whose reasonable fees and
expenses shall be paid by the applicant. An estimated sum to cover the
reasonable cost of such consulting services shall be established in a special
Chapter 101, Building Construction, the Building Inspector shall issue
all necessary permits in accordance therewith. Prior to such approval,
no permit of any kind for construction shall be issued.
G. In the event that the applicant fails to begin construction within 12
months from the date of final approval by the Board of Trustees, said
approval shall be deemed null and void, unless said time period is
extended by the Board of Trustees upon good cause shown.
§ 112-95 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-98
112:130
escrow account identified as such and from which vouchers identifying
the consultants' review work may be paid. Said escrow fund shall be kept
current monthly by the applicant as it becomes depleted. Such payments
shall be made prior to and as a condition of the issuance of any building
permit after the billing of such fees and expenses, and if no such building
permit is required after such billing, then prior to and as a condition of the
issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
§ 112-99. Inspection fees.
§ 112-100. Variances.
Contrary provisions of the Village Code or Chapter 295, Zoning,
notwithstanding, the Board of Trustees shall have the exclusive authority to
grant variances in or modifications to the provisions and requirements of
this Part 2, except that no variance shall be granted which will result in an
increase in density or an increase in height.
§ 112-101. Notice of hearing. [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No.
2-2005]
Wherever a public hearing is required, the applicant shall give notice to all
property owners within a radius of 500 feet of each boundary line of the
parcel or parcels by certified mail, return receipt requested or any other
method of delivery providing proof of delivery, or by personal service (with
affidavit of service) not less than 15 days prior to the date of such public
hearing.
A. In addition to the payments required under the preceding § 112-98, the
following fees shall be payable by the applicant for the services of any
and all village employees, consultants and/or independent contractors
for the inspection of any one or more of the following:
(1) Drainage improvements, public and private.
(2) Roads, driveways and walks, public and private.
(3) Rough grading.
(4) Site lighting and basic landscaping.
(5) Water lines and sewer lines.
B. Such fees are to be in the sum to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule,17 and shall be paid prior to and as
a condition of the issuance of any building permit after the billing of
such fees and expenses, and if no such building permit is required after
such billing, then prior to and as a condition of the issuance of any
certificate of occupancy. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
17.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 112-98 CONSERVATION OR CLUSTERED HOUSING § 112-102
112:131
§ 112-102. General application and fee requirements. [Amended
9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
Each submission of a site plan pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be accompanied by a properly completed application form in six copies and
a filing fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in
the fee schedule.18
§ 112-103. Revision procedures; application and fee. [Amended
9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
In any case where an applicant seeks a revision of or an amendment to a site
plan which has been approved, the revised or amended site plan shall be
accompanied by a properly completed application form and a filing fee to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
§ 112-104. Notice of hearing to be given to certain governmental
units.
At least 10 days prior to the date of any public hearing provided for in this
Part 2, the applicant shall give written notice to all governmental units and
agencies as may be required by law. Such units and agencies shall have the
right to appear and be heard.
18.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 112-102 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 112-104
112:132
Chapter 116
(RESERVED)
Chapter 121
(RESERVED)
Chapter 128
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
§ 112-104 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 112-104
128:133

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 128-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson, New York."
§ 128-1 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 128-1
128:135

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 128-2. Statement of purpose.
Since there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical
energy, this chapter is enacted to regulate the installation, repair and
inspection of wiring for electric light, heat or power, and for signal systems
operating on 50 volts or more, in or on all real property within the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 128-3. National code adopted.
All electrical installations, repairs and alterations heretofore mentioned
shall be made in conformity with the requirements of the National Electrical
Code, except where the provisions of this chapter or any other local law,
ordinance or building code19 of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson shall
hereafter differently prescribe, in which event compliance with the
provisions of such local law, ordinance or building code shall be recognized
as proper compliance with this chapter. The requirements of the 1959
National Electrical Code shall be known as National Fire Protection
Association, NFPA No. 70, as approved and adopted by the American
Standards Association in August 1959, and shall include any future
amendments and revisions as they become effective.
§ 128-4. Approved materials.
Only materials, fittings and devices tested and approved by Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., or other laboratories meeting the approval of the Village
Board of Trustees, shall be used.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Building Construction.
§ 128-2 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 128-4
128:137

ARTICLE III
Electrical Licensing Board
§ 128-5. Formation and composition; quorum.
§ 128-6. Tenure of office; vacancies; termination.
A. There is hereby established in and for the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson a board to be known as the "Electrical Licensing Board,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Board."
B. This Board shall consist of five persons, who shall be appointed by the
Village Board of Trustees as follows:
(1) An officer or employee of the Village Building Department.
(2) An electrical contractor or journeyman holding a master
electrician's license.
(3) A New York Board of Fire Underwriters Inspector.
(4) An electrician regularly employed by an industrial firm.
(5) A graduate electrical engineer and/or utility representative.
C. The Board shall elect from its membership a Chairman, who shall retain
voting rights identical with those of the remainder of the Board.
D. The Board shall appoint from its membership a Secretary, who shall
retain voting rights identical with those of the remaining members of
the Board, and may, at its discretion, remove the incumbent Secretary
and appoint another Secretary from one of its five members.
E. Three members, one of whom may be the Chairman, shall constitute a
quorum of the Board for the transaction of business. No
recommendations for the issuance, modification, suspension or
revocation of a license shall be adopted except by the affirmative vote of
at least three members.
A. Appointments to the Board shall become effective on the first regular
meeting of April.
B. Of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of one
year; two for a term of two years; and two for a term of three years;
except that they may continue to serve after the expiration of their
respective terms of office until their successors have been appointed
and have qualified.
C. The successors to all members appointed by virtue of § 128-6A above
shall be appointed for a term of three years, except that they may
continue to serve after the expiration of their terms of office until their
successors have been appointed and have qualified.
§ 128-5 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 128-6
128:139
§ 128-7. Compensation.
Service as a member of the Board shall be completely voluntary, without
salary or compensation, except that any personal expenses incurred by a
member in direct pursuit of Board activities may be reimbursed by the
village upon recommendation of the Board of Trustees.
§ 128-8. Powers and duties.
D. A vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board from any cause
shall be filled as soon as possible by the Board of Trustees of the village
for the unexpired term of the member whose office has become vacant.
E. Service of any member of the Board may be terminated voluntarily by
the member or for good and sufficient reason by the Village Board of
Trustees at any time.
A. The Board shall meet at least once each month or as many other times
as, in the opinion of the Chairman or a majority of the Board, are
necessary or desirable for the effective discharge of the business of the
Board.
B. The Board shall examine all applicants for license as to qualifications
required by this chapter, shall pass judgment on all licensing matters
brought to its attention and shall make appropriate recommendations
to the village authorities as to the issuance, modification, suspension or
revocation of licenses.
C. The Board shall keep a record of all its meetings and proceedings and
its recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 128-6 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 128-8
128:140
ARTICLE IV
Licensing Procedure
§ 128-9. Master electrician's license.
A. Requirements.
(1) Except as provided in § 128-10 below, no person shall conduct a
business to maintain, install or repair any electrical wiring or
equipment in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson until such person
shall apply for and obtain a master electrician's license to engage
in such business as herein provided.
(2) Liability insurance. Before the license is issued to the individual
contractor, the contractor shall supply the village with a certificate
of liability insurance, or a liability insurance policy, in favor of the
village, holding the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, New York,
harmless, in the minimum amounts of $100,000/$300,000 for
liability and $50,000/$100,000 for property damage.
B. Qualifications. An applicant for a master electrician's license shall be 21
years of age or over, a citizen of the United States and shall be at least
one of the following:
(1) An employing electrical contractor who has had an established
business for at least five years in the installation, alteration and
repair of electrical wiring or equipment, or whose experience as a
journeyman electrician as described in Subsection B(2)
immediately following and as an employing contractor totals at
least five years.
(2) An electrician who has worked at least five years with his tools on
the installation, alteration and repair of electrical wiring and
equipment as a journeyman electrician.
(3) A graduate engineer of a college or university who holds at least a
Bachelor of Science Degree in Electrical Engineering and has, in
addition, worked at least one year with his tools on the installation,
alteration and repair of electrical wiring and equipment.
C. Application.
(1) An applicant for a master electrician's license shall apply in
writing, furnishing information as requested, on a proper
application form furnished by the Village Building Department.
(2) An applicant shall receive written notice from the Board or its
authorized agent informing him of the time and place to appear
before the Board for examination as to his qualifications for a
license.
D. Examinations.
§ 128-9 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 128-9
128:141
(1) Except as provided in Subsection D(2) immediately following, an
applicant for a master electrician's license shall be required to
answer a reasonable number of questions, written and/or oral, as
devised by the Board to show that he has sufficient knowledge and
technical ability to perform or supervise the installation, alteration
and repair of electrical wiring and equipment; and no license shall
be issued unless the applicant obtains the minimum passing score
established by the Board.
(2) Examination shall not be required of any established contractor
who had been in business for a period of 10 years and who made
application for a master electrician's license within 60 days after
the enactment of the ordinance dated May 13, 1966, and who
presented good and sufficient proof to the Board that he met the
qualifications required by Subsection B above.
(3) Should the applicant fail in his first examination to attain the
minimum passing score established by the Board, a new application
for a master electrician's license may be initiated by the applicant
not less than 30 days after the date of examination. Subsequent
examinations must be at intervals of not less than six months.
E. Fees.
(1) Upon applying for a master electrician's license, the applicant shall
deposit with the village a sum to be determined by the Village
Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule,20 which shall
constitute the first year's fee. Should the applicant fail the
examination for this license, a refund to be determined by the
Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule will be made
to him. The same fee and refund will apply to subsequent
applications by the same applicant. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L.
No. 4-1999]
(2) Should an examination be denied for any reason, the deposit to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule shall be returned to the applicant. [Amended 9-21-1999
by L.L. No. 4-1999]
(3) Applicants awarded license during the month of December shall
not be required to pay the renewal fee for the year immediately
following, as otherwise required by Subsection E(4) immediately
following.
(4) The annual renewal fee for all master electricians' licenses after
the first year shall be determined by the Village Board by resolution
and set in the fee schedule. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999]
20.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 128-9 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 128-9
128:142
§ 128-10. Limited master electrician's license.
(5) Payment of renewal fee may be deferred upon written application
to the Board. Upon approval of the Board, such a license shall be
termed suspended until such time as the licensee shall again be
capable of pursuing his business and shall pay the renewal fee. The
renewal fee will be prorated for the remainder of the year.
F. Effective term.
(1) A master electrician's license shall remain valid indefinitely upon
proper payment of annual renewal fees, unless suspended or
revoked by the Board as provided herein.
(2) All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on the 31st day of
December succeeding the date of its issue, and shall be renewed
within 30 days preceding such expiration by application to the
Building Inspector and the payment of a fee to be determined by
the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
[Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
G. Restrictions.
(1) No person may lend, rent, transfer or assign in any manner his
license to any other person; nor may any person make use of a
license which is not his own.
(2) The licensee shall, in the pursuit of the business permitted by a
master electrician's license, comply strictly with the provisions of
the NFPA No. 70.
(3) Except as permitted in § 128-11, no person not having been issued
a master electrician's license, as defined herein, shall represent
himself as a master electrician or licensed electrical contractor on
signs, cards, stationery, vehicles, in advertising or in any other
manner for the purpose of pursuing such business in the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
A. Requirements. No industrial or commercial establishment located in
the village shall permit its personnel to engage in the installation,
alteration or repair of electrical wiring and equipment within its
buildings, building or property limits until such establishment shall
apply for and obtain a master electrician's license or a limited master
electrician's license to engage in such activities, as herein provided.
B. Qualifications. An applicant for a limited master electrician's license
shall be a partner, officer, chief electrician or other authorized
representative of the firm who supervises or performs the projected
installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring and equipment.
C. Application.
§ 128-9 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 128-10
128:143
(1) The applicant for a limited master electrician's license shall apply
in writing and furnish information as requested on the proper
application form as supplied by the Village Building Department.
(2) The applicant shall receive written notice from the Board or its
authorized agent of the time and place to appear before the Board
for investigation as to his qualifications for a license.
D. Examinations.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection D(2) below, the applicant for a
limited master electrician's license shall be required to answer a
reasonable number of questions, written and/or oral, as devised by
the Board, to show that he has sufficient knowledge and technical
training to perform or supervise the installation, alteration or
repair of electrical wiring and equipment; and no license shall be
issued unless the applicant obtains the minimum passing score
established by the Board.
(2) Examination shall not be required of any person who makes
application for a limited master electrician's license, in order to
meet the requirements of Subsection A above, within 60 days after
the enactment of the ordinance dated May 13, 1966, and who
presented good and sufficient proof to the Board that he met the
qualifications of Subsection B above.
(3) Should the applicant taking the examination fail to attain the
minimum passing score established by the Board, a new application
for a limited master electrician's license may be initiated by the
same applicant 30 days after the date of examination.
E. Fees.
(1) Upon applying for a limited master electrician's license, the
applicant shall deposit with the village a sum to be determined by
the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule,21 which
shall constitute the first year's fee. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L.
No. 4-1999]
(2) Should an examination be denied for any reason, the deposit to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule shall be refunded to the applicant. [Amended 9-21-1999
by L.L. No. 4-1999]
(3) Should a license be denied, a refund to be determined by the
Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule shall be
returned to the applicant. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999]
21.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 128-10 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 128-10
128:144
§ 128-11. Reciprocal use of licenses.
Licenses issued by other townships and municipalities which are, in the
opinion of the Board, equivalent to the master electrician's license
described in § 128-9A above will be considered as fulfilling the
requirements of § 128-9A, provided that such township and municipalities,
in actual practice, permit within their boundaries the installation, alteration
and repair of electrical wiring and equipment by holders of the master
electrician's license described herein.
(4) Applicants awarded licenses during the month of December shall
not be required to pay the renewal fee for the year immediately
following, as otherwise required by Subsection E(5).
(5) The annual renewal fee for all limited master electricians' licenses
after the first year shall be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule. [Amended 9-21-1999 by
L.L. No. 4-1999]
F. Effective term.
(1) A limited master electrician's license shall remain valid indefinitely
upon proper payment of an annual renewal fee [subject to
provisions of Subsection E(4) and (5) above] or revoked by the
Board as provided herein.
(2) All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on the 31st day of
December succeeding the date of its issue, and shall be renewed
within 30 days preceding such expiration by application to the
Building Inspector and the payment of a fee to be determined by
the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
[Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
G. Restrictions.
(1) A limited master electrician's license shall be valid only as it
pertains to work performed within the property limits of the firm to
whom it is issued.
(2) A licensed firm shall, in pursuit of the activities permitted by a
limited master electrician's license, comply strictly with the
provisions of the National Electrical Code (NFPA No. 70) as
published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and
approved by the American Standards Association.
§ 128-10 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 128-11
128:145

ARTICLE V
Enforcement and Inspection
§ 128-12. Inspector and Deputy.
§ 128-13. Inspection procedure.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector in the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson. The Board of Trustees shall deputize one or
more regular inspectors of the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or
any other agency properly qualified to perform such inspections as his
Deputy Inspector or Inspectors of all electrical installations as provided
for in this chapter. [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
B. It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector or any of his Deputies to
engage in the business or the sale, installation or maintenance of
electrical wiring, electric devices or electric equipment, either directly
or indirectly, and he shall have no financial interest in any concern
engaged in such business in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson at any
time while holding the office of Building Inspector.
A. Inspections shall be made during the installation of an electrical device
or wiring system, to assure compliance with this chapter. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to install or
cause to be installed, or to alter or to repair electrical wiring for light,
heat or power in or on properties in the Village until a job permit has
been issued and an application for inspection has been filed with the
New York Board of Fire Underwriters or any other agency deputized by
the Board of Trustees. [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
B. No work in connection with an electric installation shall be covered or
concealed until it has been inspected as prescribed in this section and
permission to do so has been given by the Inspector.
C. The Inspector shall, within a reasonable time after notice of the
completion of any electric installation which shall come under the
provisions of this chapter, make an inspection of such work, and such
tests as may be necessary to determine that it conforms with this
chapter.
D. The Inspector shall make a reinspection of an electric installation
whenever he deems it necessary in the interest of public safety.
E. If an electric installation, upon reinspection, is found to be defective or
unsafe, the Inspector shall revoke all certificates in effect at that time
relating to such installation, and the user of such installation shall be
discontinued until it has been made to conform to this chapter and a
new certificate has been issued by the Inspector.
F. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of, or to supply current for,
electric devices or wiring for light, heat or power within the village,
§ 128-12 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 128-13
128:147
§ 128-14. Right of appeal.
When the Building Inspector condemns all or part of an electrical
installation, the owner may, within five days after receiving written notice
from the Building Inspector, file a petition, in writing, with the Village Clerk
for review of said action of the Building Inspector. Upon receipt of this
petition, the Electrical Licensing Board, at a meeting which shall be held
within two weeks after receipt of the petition, shall proceed to determine if
the said electrical installation complies with this chapter and shall make a
decision in accordance with its findings.
unless the required certificate of inspection and approval has been
issued.
G. The Inspector may, at his discretion, give temporary permission for a
reasonable time to supply and use current in part of an electrical
installation before such installation has been completed.
H. When, in the opinion of the Inspector or a Fire Chief, any electrical
installation is dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the
work of the Fire Department, either of them may disconnect or cause to
be disconnected said installation.
I. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person, firm or corporation to
connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties
for light, heat or power to any source of electrical energy supply prior
to the issuance of a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance
by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or any other agency
deputized by the Board of Trustees. [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No.
3-2005]
§ 128-13 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 128-14
128:148
ARTICLE VI
Job Permit Fee
§ 128-15. Amount of job permit fee. [Amended 4-17-1972;
4-19-1976 by L.L. No. 2-1976; 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
The fee for each permit issued shall be charged on the basis of the
estimated cost of electrical work involved, to be determined by the Village
Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.22
22.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 128-15 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 128-15
128:149

ARTICLE VII
Penalties, Applicability and Liability
§ 128-16. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or of any
rule or regulation made pursuant thereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $100, and each day the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 128-17. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to electrical installations in
mines, ships, railway cars and automotive equipment, nor the installation
of equipment employed by a railway, electrical or communications utility in
the exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings
used exclusively for that purpose. This chapter shall not apply to any
work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical
machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as their principal business.
It shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by
the government of the United States or the State of New York.
§ 128-18. Liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from nor lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson be deemed to have assumed any such liability by
reason of any license issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 128-16 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 128-18
128:151
Chapter 131
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 131-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 131-2. Compliance required; exceptions.
No decision to carry out or approve an action, other than an exempt
action as set forth in § 617.13(h) of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules
and Regulations or § 617.12 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations designated as a Type II action or an action set forth in § 131-5
hereof or an action listed in a supplemental schedule of Type II actions,
pursuant to the regulations of the Planning Board, shall be made by the
Village Board or by any department, board, commission, agency, officer
or employee of the Village until there has been full compliance with all
requirements of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes,
Rules and Regulations; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed as prohibiting:
A. Unless the context shall otherwise require, the terms, phrases, words
and their derivatives used in this chapter shall have the same meaning
as those defined in § 8-0105 of the Environmental Conservation Law
and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSERVATION COMMISSION — The Conservation Commission of
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson acting as a legislative body.
VILLAGE CLERK — The Village Clerk of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
A. The conducting of simultaneous environmental, engineering, economic
feasibility or other studies and preliminary planning and budgetary
processes necessary to the formulation of a proposal for action which
do not commit the Village to approve, commence or engage in such
action.
§ 128-18 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 131-2
131:152
§ 131-3. Supplemental schedule of Type II actions.
The Planning Board is hereby authorized to establish a supplemental
schedule of Type II actions which shall be consistent with the provisions
of §§ 617.12 and 617.13(h) designated as Type II actions (Title 6 of the
New York Codes, Rules and Regulations), the general purposes and policies
of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations or actions set
forth in § 131-5 hereof. Prior to establishing such supplemental schedule,
which shall be submitted to the Village Board for approval, the Planning
Board shall first consult with the Conservation Commission. In the event
that the Conservation Commission desires to modify, alter or amend the
supplemental schedule of Type II actions, it may submit its
recommendations to the Village Board. Said supplemental schedule of Type
II actions shall not become effective until ratified by the Village Board.
§ 131-4. Actions having significant effect on environment.
The following actions, in addition to those listed in § 617.12 of Title 6 of the
New York Codes, Rules and Regulations as Type I actions, are likely to have
a significant effect on the environment:
B. The granting of any part of an application which relates only to
technical specifications and requirements, provided that no such partial
approval shall entitle or permit the applicant to commence the action
until all requirements of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New
York Codes, Rules and Regulations have been fulfilled.
C. The granting of an approval or conditional approval which is made
subject to compliance with all provisions of a satisfactorily completed
and approved environmental review in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations.
D. The informal submission of a plan or descriptive material by an
individual, group or organization to the Village Board or to any
department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of the
Village for discussion purposes only, which may lead to a formal,
submitted application or formal preapplication process, which
discussion and review will not commit the Village or any department,
board, commission, agency, officer or employee to any approval or
course of action.
A. A residential development of any type or density of development, all or
partially within the boundaries of the Village, wherein:
(1) Six or more units of residence to be located within the Village will
be constructed with individual or collective, nonmechanical
sanitary sewage disposal systems;
(2) Six or more units of residence to be constructed within or without
the Village will be constructed either privately or publicly, with
§ 131-2 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 131-4
131:153
§ 131-5. Actions not having significant effect on environment.
Consistent with Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations and the criteria therein, the following actions, in addition to
those listed in § 617.12 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations as Type II actions, are deemed not to have a significant effect
on the environment:
sewerage systems located within or discharging within the
boundaries of the Village; or
(3) Six or more units of residence to be constructed within or without
the Village will be constructed with their sanitary sewage to be
discharged into a public sewer system located within the Village.
B. The creation of any plats for subdivision pursuant to Chapter 295 of the
Code of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
C. Any application for construction, alteration or modification in any
dedicated public park or dedicated open space, other than the
replacement, maintenance or repair of an existing building, structure,
pavement or facility.
A. Enforcement or criminal proceedings or the exercise of prosecutorial
discretion in determining whether or not to institute such proceedings.
B. Ministerial actions.
C. Maintenance or repair involving no substantial changes in an existing
structure or facility.
D. With respect to the requirements of Subdivision 2 of § 8-0109 of Article
8 of the Environmental Conservation Law, actions requiring a
certificate of environmental compatibility and public need under
Articles VII and VIII of the Public Service Law23 and the consideration,
grant or denial of any such certificate.
E. Actions subject to the jurisdiction of local governments pursuant to
§ 808 of the Executive Law, including actions of such local governments
hereunder.
F. Except as set forth in § 617.5 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules
and Regulations and the State Environmental Quality Review Act,
actions undertaken or approved prior to the effective date(s) of Article 8
of the Environmental Conservation Law. An action shall be deemed to
be undertaken or approved prior to such date(s) if, in the case of
construction activities, a contract for substantial construction activities
has been entered into or if a continuous program of on-site construction
or modification has been engaged in or if, in the case of an action
involving federal participation, either a draft environmental impact
23.Editor's Note: Article VIII of the Public Service Law was in full force and effect until
1-1-1989 and has expired.
§ 131-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 131-5
131:154
§ 131-6. Initial screening statement; fees.
statement or a negative declaration has been duly prepared under the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
G. Actions which are immediately necessary on a limited emergency basis
for the protection or preservation of life, health, property or natural
resources.
H. Actions of the Legislature of the State of New York or any court.
I. Building permits for any type of residential or commercial structure.
J. Certificates of occupancy for any type of residential or commercial
structure.
A. For the purposes of assisting in the determination of whether an action
may or will not have a significant effect on the environment, applicants
for permits or other approvals shall file a written statement with the
Village Board or such other department, board, commission, agency,
officer or employee having jurisdiction over such permit or other
approval.
B. The application shall be on a form provided by the Planning Board and
shall set forth the name of the applicant, the location of the real
property affected, if any, and a description of the nature of the proposed
action. Such statement shall also include any claim that the proposed
action is an exempt action under § 617.13 of Title 6 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations or a Type II action under § 617.12 of Title
6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations or an exempt action
under § 131-5 of this chapter or under the supplemental schedule of
Type II actions and the estimate of the total cost. In addition, applicants
may include a detailed explanation of the reasons why, in their view, a
proposed action may or will not have a significant effect on the
environment. This statement shall contain such additional relevant
information as may be required in the prescribed form and may be
accompanied by drawings, sketches and maps, if any, together with any
other relevant explanatory material required by the Village Board or
such other appropriate department, board, commission, agency, officer
or employee having jurisdiction.
C. Where the action for permit or other approval requires a separate
application, the Planning Board statement shall be filed simultaneously
with the separate application for such action.
D. In addition to any other fees which may be required for such permit or
approval, the application shall be accompanied by such fees as may be
determined from time to time by the Village Manager, pursuant to a
resolution by the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
§ 131-5 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 131-7
131:155
§ 131-7. Notice of proposed action. [Amended 6-17-1986 by L.L. No.
4-1986]
The Village Board or the department, board, commission, officer or
employee that has received such application, statement and fee shall deliver
the same to the Village Clerk, who shall maintain a record of all such
statements. The Village Clerk shall cause a notice to be published in the
official newspaper of the Village, describing the nature of the proposed
action and stating that written views thereon of any person shall be received
by the lead agency, as determined in § 131-8. The Village Clerk shall also
send a copy of such notice to the Conservation Commission, which shall also
express its views, in writing, to the lead agency.
§ 131-8. Lead agency. [Added 6-17-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
The lead agency is the agency (i.e., board, department, office, other body
or officer of the Village) principally responsible for carrying out, funding
or approving an action. The lead agency is responsible for determining
whether an environmental impact statement is required for the action and
for preparing and filing the environmental impact statement if it is required.
Where more than one agency is involved, the lead agency is determined
and designated as provided in §§ 617.6 and 617.7 of Title 6 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations.
§ 131-9. Initial determination; time limits.
§ 131-10. Determination of initial screening statement. [Amended
6-17-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
A. The lead agency, after consultation with the Conservation Commission,
shall render a written determination of such application within 30 days
following receipt of a complete application and statement from the
Village Clerk; provided, however, that such period may be extended by
mutual agreement of the applicant and the lead agency. The
determination shall state whether such proposed action may or will not
have a significant effect on the environment. If the lead agency's
determination is that such proposed action will not have a significant
effect on the environment under § 131-10A of this chapter, the
determination shall so specifically state. The lead agency may hold
informal meetings with the applicant and may meet with and consult
any other person or board or commission for the purpose of aiding it in
making a determination of the application. [Amended 6-17-1986 by
L.L. No. 4-1986]
B. The time limitations provided in this chapter shall be coordinated, to
the extent practicable, with other time limitations provided by statute
or local law, ordinance or regulation of the Village.
A. If the lead agency, after consultation with the Conservation
Commission, determines that the proposed action is an exempt action,
an action listed in § 617.12 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
§ 131-7 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 131-10
131:156
§ 131-11. Draft environmental impact statement. [Amended
6-17-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
Following a determination that a proposed action may have a significant
effect on the environment, the lead agency shall, in accordance with the
provisions of Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations:
§ 131-12. Notice of completion. [Amended 6-17-1986 by L.L. No.
4-1986]
Upon completion of a draft environmental impact statement prepared by
or at the direction of the lead agency, a notice of completion containing
the information specified in § 617.7(d) of Title 6 of the New York Codes,
Rules and Regulations shall be prepared, filed and circulated as provided in
§ 617.7(e) and (f) of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations. In
addition, it shall be published in the official newspaper of the Village. Copies
of the draft environmental impact statement and the notice of completion
shall be filed, sent and made available as provided in § 617.7(e) and (f)
of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations. A copy of the
statement shall be sent to the Conservation Commission.
Regulations as a Type II action or an action listed in a supplemental
schedule of Type II actions, the proposed action may be processed
without further regard to this chapter.
B. If the lead agency, after consultation with the Conservation
Commission, determines that the proposed action will not have a
significant effect on the environment, the lead agency shall prepare, file
and circulate such determination as provided in § 617.7(b) of Title 6 of
the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations, and thereafter the
proposed action may be processed without further regard to this
chapter.
C. If the lead agency, after consultation with the Conservation
Commission, determines that the proposed action may have a
significant effect on the environment, the lead agency shall prepare, file
and circulate such determination as provided in § 617.7(b) of Title 6 of
the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations, and thereafter the
proposed action shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations.
A. In the case of an action involving an applicant, immediately notify the
applicant of the determination and direct the applicant to prepare an
environmental impact report in the form of a draft environmental
impact statement.
B. In the case of an action not involving an applicant, prepare a draft
environmental impact statement.
§ 131-10 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 131-13
131:157
§ 131-13. Public hearing on draft environmental impact statement.
[Amended 6-17-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
The lead agency shall hold a public hearing at its own discretion or at the
request of the Conservation Commission on a draft environmental impact
statement. Notice thereof shall be filed, circulated and sent in the same
manner as the notice of completion and shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Village at least 10 days prior to such public hearing. Such
notice shall also state the place where substantive written comments on
the draft environmental impact statement may be sent and the date before
which such comments shall be received. Notice of the public hearing shall
also be sent to the Village Conservation Commission, which shall submit
its own comments and recommendations to the lead agency prior to the
hearing. Such hearing shall commence no less than 15 calendar days nor
more than 60 calendar days after the filing of draft environmental impact
statement; provided, however, that the lead agency may extend this time
if necessary for public or other agency review of the draft environmental
impact statement or where a different hearing date is required or
appropriate under other applicable law.
§ 131-14. Determination on draft environmental impact statement.
[Amended 6-17-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
If, on the basis of a draft environmental impact statement or a public
hearing hereon, the lead agency makes a written determination that an
action will not have a significant effect on the environment, the proposed
action may be processed without further regard to this chapter.
§ 131-15. Final environmental impact statement. [Amended
6-17-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
§ 131-16. Notice of completion.
A notice of completion of a final environmental impact statement shall be
prepared, filed and sent in the same manner as provided in § 131-12 herein
and shall be sent to all persons to whom the notice of completion of the draft
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the lead agency shall prepare or
cause to be prepared a final environmental impact statement in
accordance with the provisions of Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations, provided further that if the action
involves an application, the lead agency may direct the applicant to
prepare the final environmental impact statement.
B. Such final environmental impact statement shall be prepared within 45
days after the close of any hearing or within 60 days after the filing of
the draft environmental impact statement, whichever last occurs;
provided, however, that the lead agency may extend this time as
necessary to complete the statement adequately or where problems
identified with the proposed action require material reconsideration or
modification.
§ 131-13 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 131-16
131:158
environmental impact statement was sent. Copies of the final environmental
impact statement shall be filed and made available for review in the same
manner as the draft environmental impact statement.
§ 131-17. Approval of actions. [Amended 6-17-1986 by L.L. No.
4-1986]
No decision to carry out or approve an action which has been the subject of
a final environmental impact statement shall be made by the Village Board
or by any department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee of
the Village until after the filing and consideration of the final environmental
impact statement by the lead agency, which shall make a decision whether
or not to approve the action within 30 days of the filing of the final
environmental impact statement.
§ 131-18. Required determination. [Amended 6-17-1986 by L.L. No.
4-1986]
When the lead agency decides to carry out or approve an action which may
have a significant effect on the environment, it shall make the following
findings in a written determination:
§ 131-19. Filing of determination.
For public information purposes, a copy of the determination referred to in
§ 131-18 herein shall be filed and made available as provided in § 617.8(c)
of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
§ 131-20. Public records. [Amended 6-17-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
The Village shall maintain files open for public inspection of all notices of
completion, draft and final environmental impact statements and written
determinations prepared or caused to be prepared by the lead agency.
§ 131-21. Actions involving more than one agency.
Where more than one agency is involved in an action, the procedures of
§§ 617.4 and 617.8 of Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations shall be followed.
A. Consistent with social, economic and other essential considerations of
state policy, to the maximum extent practicable and from among the
reasonable alternatives thereto, the action to be carried out or
approved is one which minimizes or avoids adverse environmental
effects, including the effects disclosed in the relevant environment
impact statements; and
B. All practicable means will be taken in carrying out or approving the
action to minimize or avoid adverse environmental effects, including
the effects disclosed in the relevant environmental impact statements.
§ 131-16 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 131-22
131:159
§ 131-22. Prior actions. [Amended 6-17-1986 by L. L. No. 4-1986]
Actions undertaken or approved prior to the dates specified in Article 8
of the Environmental Conservation Law for local agencies shall be exempt
from this chapter and the provisions of Article 8 of the New York State
Quality Review Act of August 1, 1975, and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New
York Codes, Rules and Regulations; provided, however, that if, after such
dates, the Village or any of its departments, boards, commissions, officers or
employees having jurisdiction modified an action undertaken or approved
prior to that date and the lead agency determines that the modification
may have a significant adverse effect on the environment, such modification
shall be an action subject to this chapter and Part 617 of Title 6 of the New
York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
§ 131-23. Fees and costs.
A. Every application for a determination under this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) For preliminary applications pursuant to § 131-6, Initial screening
statement, and which do not require a final environmental impact
statement: a fee to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule. [Amended 9-21-1999 by
L.L. No. 4-1999]
(2) Where the action requires a draft environmental impact statement
pursuant to § 131-11A hereof: a statutory fee of $25 plus costs of
publication.
(3) Where the action requires a draft environmental impact statement
pursuant to § 131-11B hereof: a statutory fee of $25 plus costs of
publication.
(4) Where the action requires an environmental impact statement
pursuant to § 131-15A hereof and such statement is prepared by
the applicant: a fee to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule. [Amended 9-21-1999 by
L.L. No. 4-1999]
(5) Where the action requires an environmental impact statement
pursuant to § 131-15 hereof and such statement is prepared by or
under the lead agency: a fee to be determined by the Village Board
by resolution and set in the fee schedule. [Amended 6-17-1986
by L.L. No. 4-1986; 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
B. No applicant for action shall be required to pay a fee for processing
environmental impact statements to conclusion under Subsection A(1),
(2), (3), (4) and (5), in an aggregate amount in excess of 1/2 of 1% of the
actual total cost of such action, exclusive of costs of publication and
fees required under Subsection C hereafter or pursuant to any other
provisions of law, and fees paid pursuant to Subsection A(1), (2), (3), (4)
§ 131-22 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 131-23
131:160
Chapter 141
FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 143. Blasting — See Ch. 184, Art. X.
and (5) hereof shall be applied to fees required to be paid under any of
such sections.
C. The Village may establish reasonable fees for technical services
required or requested to be rendered by any Village agency with
respect to any application hereunder.
§ 131-23 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 131-23
141:161

ARTICLE I
Explosives
[Adopted 2-4-1902]
§ 141-1. Permit required for storage or transport.
No person, firm or corporation shall store or keep on any premises in the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, or carry or convey over, through or upon
any of the streets of said village, any dynamite or other explosive without
a permit so to do issued by the Manager of said village pursuant to a
resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees of said village authorizing the
granting of such permit.
§ 141-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall
incur a penalty of $100 for each offense.
§ 141-1 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 141-2
141:163

ARTICLE II
Fireworks and Firearms
[Adopted 4-30-1925]
§ 141-3. Firing of fireworks or firearms.
It shall not be lawful for any person to fire or set off any gunpowder, squib,
rocket, firecracker or fireworks, or to fire any cannon, gun or pistol, in any
part of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 141-4. Sale of fireworks, firearms and ammunition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale within the
village any blank cartridges, pistol, cannon, firecracker, torpedo canes for
firing ammunition, or any ammunition commonly known as "car-track
ammunition," and any and all kinds, within said village.
§ 141-5. Car-track explosives.
No person shall place upon any street, railway or railroad track in the
village any explosive of any sort whatsoever to be discharged by contact
with the wheels or any portion of cars or vehicles passing thereover.
§ 141-6. Firing of salutes and blasting excepted.
Nothing in this article contained shall be construed to prevent the firing of
salutes under written permits therefor to be granted by the Mayor of the
village, nor to prevent the use of explosives in blasting operations in the
quarrying of rock and stone and in such other work requiring the use of
explosives.
§ 141-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 141-3 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 141-7
141:165
Chapter 143
FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
Gasoline — See Ch. 156.
Oil burners — See Ch. 204.
§ 141-7 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 141-7
141:166
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)24
§ 143-1. through § 143-2. (Reserved)
24.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Inflammable Material, adopted 5-28-1925, was repealed
3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019.
§ 143-1 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 143-1
141:167

ARTICLE II
Sprinkler Systems
[Adopted 5-16-1989 by L.L. No. 3-1989]
§ 143-3. Regulated buildings and structures.
A. All classifications of buildings listed below, which buildings are
constructed after the effective date of this article, shall be required to
have approved sprinkler systems as hereinafter listed and defined.
Such systems shall be approved by the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters, Factory Mutual National Fire Protection Association or
other nationally recognized approval organization prior to installation
and shall meet all prescribed standards of installation and operations.
(1) Multiple dwellings, including apartment buildings, cooperative
apartments and condominiums, except enclosed closets 50 square
feet or less in area and bathrooms.
(2) Office buildings.
(3) Administrative buildings.
(4) Bank buildings.
(5) Professional buildings.
(6) Retail and personal service buildings (mercantile).
(7) Industrial buildings.
(8) Storage buildings.
(9) Amusement park buildings.
(10) Armories.
(11) Art galleries.
(12) Assembly halls.
(13) Auditoriums.
(14) Bathhouses.
(15) Bowling alleys.
(16) Club rooms.
(17) Coliseums and stadiums.
(18) Courtrooms and buildings.
(19) Dance halls.
(20) Exhibition halls or buildings.
§ 143-3 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 143-3
141:169
(21) Gymnasiums.
(22) Indoor tennis courts or other sport courts.
(23) Lecture halls.
(24) Public libraries.
(25) Lodge halls or rooms.
(26) Hotels.
(27) Motels.
(28) Lodging and boarding houses.
(29) Motion-picture theaters.
(30) Museums.
(31) Nightclubs.
(32) Recreation centers.
(33) Restaurants, with seating capacity of 30 or more, excluding
counter seats.
(34) Skating rinks.
(35) Theaters.
(36) Churches, synagogues and similar places of worship.
(37) Schools, colleges and similar places of education.
(38) Outpatient clinics.
(39) Day-care centers.
(40) Child-caring institutions.
(41) Clinics.
(42) Hospitals.
(43) Infirmaries.
(44) Sanitariums.
(45) Commercial boathouses.
(46) Nursing homes.
(47) Group homes.
(48) Halfway houses.
§ 143-3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 143-3
141:170
§ 143-4. Compliance required.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building,
structure or portion thereof unless compliance is met, as defined in § 143-3A
above.
§ 143-5. Certificate of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for occupancy or use of any
building, structure or portion thereof required to have a sprinkler system,
as defined in § 143-3A above, unless such system is installed, inspected,
tested and approved.
§ 143-6. Installation exceptions.
Sprinklers shall not be required to be installed in spaces where the
discharge of water would be hazardous. In such places, other approved fireextinguishing
equipment shall be provided by the Fire Prevention Code.25
§ 143-7. Additional requirements for buildings over two stories.
Buildings more than two stories in height, in addition to meeting the
sprinkler requirements as hereinbefore defined, shall conform to the
following:
§ 143-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
(49) Service stations, automobile repair shops and gasoline filling
stations.
(50) All attached one-family cluster housing, exclusive of modular
construction. The installation of sprinklers, where required, may be
supplied from a domestic service line as per National Fire
Protection Association 13D.
(51) One-, two- and three-family residences in detached structures.
B. Height requirements. All buildings required by this article to install
approved automatic sprinkler systems must do so, irrespective of
building height, including installation in basement areas.
A. All walls enclosing elevator shafts, except the walls with elevator door
openings, shall be constructed of approved masonry materials.
B. Walls enclosing all stairwells shall be constructed of approved masonry
materials.
25.Editor's Note: The Fire Prevention Code is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 143-3 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 143-8
141:171

ARTICLE III
Controlling Provisions
[Adopted 5-20-2008 by L.L. No. 6-200826]
§ 143-9. Fire prevention standards.
The controlling fire prevention standards for the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson are included both in this chapter and in the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, as currently in effect and as amended
from time to time. Whenever any provision of this chapter differs from the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the provision
that is the more restrictive or imposes a higher standard shall govern.
26.Editor's Note: This Local Law also retitled this chapter from Fire Prevention to Fire
Prevention and Life Safety.
§ 143-9 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 143-9
141:173

ARTICLE IV
Notification Regarding Fire or Explosion
[Adopted 5-20-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
§ 143-10. Chief to notify Building Inspector.
The Chief of the fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson shall promptly notify the
Building Inspector of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage,
fuel-burning appliance, chimney, or gas vent.
§ 143-10 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 143-10
141:175

ARTICLE V
Operating Permits
[Adopted 5-20-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
§ 143-11. Operating permits required.
Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or using
the categories of buildings listed below. Any person who proposes to
undertake any activity or to operate any type of building listed in this
section shall be required to obtain an operating permit prior to commencing
such activity or operation.
§ 143-12. Applications for operating permits.
An application for an operating permit shall be in writing on a form provided
by or otherwise acceptable to the Building Inspector. Such application
shall include such information as the Building Inspector deems sufficient
to permit a determination that quantities, materials, and activities conform
to the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code. If the Building Inspector determines that tests or reports are
necessary to verify conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or
provided by such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise
acceptable to the Building Inspector, at the expense of the applicant.
§ 143-13. Inspection.
The Building Inspector, Fire Inspector, or their designees shall inspect the
subject premises prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
§ 143-14. Multiple activities.
In any circumstance in which more than one activity listed in § 143-11 is to
be conducted at a location, the Building Inspector may require a separate
A. Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in quantities
exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3)
or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled "Fire Code of New York State"
and incorporated by reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1.
B. Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited to,
commercial and industrial operations that produce combustible dust as
a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling.
C. Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies.
D. Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more.
E. Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a substantial
potential hazard to public safety, as determined by resolution adopted
by the Board of Trustees of the Village.
§ 143-11 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 143-14
141:177
operating permit for each activity or may, in his/her discretion, issue a
single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
§ 143-15. Duration of operating permits.
Operating permits shall be issued for such period of time, not to exceed
one year in the case of any operating permit issued for an area of public
assembly and not to exceed three years in any other case, as shall be
determined by the Building Inspector to be consistent with local conditions.
The effective period of each operating permit shall be specified in the
operating permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
application to the Building Inspector, payment of the applicable fee, and
approval of such application by the Building Inspector.
§ 143-16. Revocation or suspension of operating permits.
If the Building Inspector determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
the Building Inspector shall revoke or suspend the operating permit.
§ 143-17. Fee.
An application for an operating permit or for renewal or reissuance of an
operating permit shall be accompanied by a fee to be determined by the
Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
§ 143-14 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 143-17
141:178
ARTICLE VI
Firesafety and Property Maintenance Inspections
[Adopted 5-20-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
§ 143-18. Inspections required.
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings and
structures shall be performed by the Building Inspector and/or the Fire
Inspector, or an inspector designated by the Board of Trustees at the
following intervals:
§ 143-19. Inspections permitted.
In addition to the inspections required by § 143-18, a firesafety and property
maintenance inspection of any building, structure, use or occupancy, or of
any dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector or their designees at any time upon: the request of the owner
of the property to be inspected or an authorized agent of such owner;
or receipt by the Building Inspector of a written statement alleging that
conditions or activities failing to comply with the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code or the State Energy Conservation
Construction Code exist; or receipt by the Building Inspector of any other
information, reasonably believed by him or her to be reliable, giving rise to
reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities failing to comply
with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code exist; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting an inspection under
any circumstances under which a court order or warrant permitting such
inspection is required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been
obtained.
§ 143-20. OFPC inspections.
Nothing in this section or in any other provision of this article shall
supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and responsibilities of the New
York State Office of Fire Prevention and Control (OFPC) and the New York
State Fire Administrator under the Executive Law and the Education Law.
A. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures that contain an area of public assembly shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
B. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at least
once every 12 months.
C. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsections A or B of this section, and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not included
in Subsections A or B of this section, shall be performed at least once
every 36 months.
§ 143-18 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 143-21
141:179
§ 143-21. Fee.
A fee for inspections pursuant to this article shall be determined by the
Board of Trustees and set in the fee schedule. Such fee shall become due
at the time each inspection is performed. This section shall not apply to
inspections performed by OFPC.
§ 143-21 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 143-21
141:180
ARTICLE VII
Fires on Streets or Public Places
[Adopted 5-20-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008]
§ 143-22. Prohibitions.
No person or persons shall place or burn or cause to be placed or burned
any rubbish, papers or light any inflammable material on any street or
public place in the Village.
§ 143-23. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
§ 143-22 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 143-23
141:181
Chapter 146
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 250.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 146-1. Findings.
The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson finds that the potential and/or actual
damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents
of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 146-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 146-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to
water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases in erosion
or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers that are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development that may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
§ 143-23 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 146-3
141:182
§ 146-4. Definitions; word usage.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a waiver.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE,
AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred
to as the "base floodplain" or "l00-year floodplain." For purposes of this
chapter, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in
meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
§ 146-3 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 146-4
141:183
BUILDING — See "structure."
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete, or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces that would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case
of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to
have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones
V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow
of the water; and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the
base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C,
X, or D, elevated building also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones
V1-V30, VE, or V, elevated building also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along water courses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation, and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
§ 146-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 146-4
141:184
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The same meaning as "flood elevation
study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use that cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
Flood or flooding also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection B(1)(a) above.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
(1)
§ 146-4 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 146-4
141:185
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The Hastings-on-Hudson Building
Inspector.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of l929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — The same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle that is:
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
(1) Built on a single chassis;
§ 146-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 146-4
141:186
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 146-11B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building on a site,
such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings, or
construction of columns. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation (such as clearing, excavation,
grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or walkways, or
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the
erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory buildings
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures that
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
(1)
§ 146-4 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 146-4
141:187
§ 146-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 146-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 146-7. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
VILLAGE — Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
WAIVER — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
that permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
specifications that have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and that are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson,
Community Number 360913, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36119C0244F,
36119C0263F, 36119C0307F, 36119C0326F the effective date of
which is September 28, 2007, and any subsequent revisions to
these map panels that do not affect areas under the Village's
jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Westchester County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated September
28, 2007.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at:
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson Building Department, 7 Maple Avenue,
Hastings-on-Hudson, New York 10706.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through March 20, 1997, and shall supersede all previous laws
adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
§ 146-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 146-7
141:188
§ 146-8. Warning and disclaimer of responsibility.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, any officer or employee thereof, or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
under it.
§ 146-9. Designation of local administrator.
The Village Building Inspector is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 146-10. Floodplain development permit.
adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, or local laws, the most
restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
A. Requirement of permit. A floodplain development permit is hereby
required for all construction and other development to be undertaken in
areas of special flood hazard in the Village for the purpose of protecting
its citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 146-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing: the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
B. Application for permit. The applicant shall provide the following
information where applicable.
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially
improved structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or
Zone A if base flood elevation data are available. Upon completion
of the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit to the local
administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 146-7 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 146-10
141:189
§ 146-11. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the
structure, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the
as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer
or surveyor.
(3) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 146-12C(3).
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 146-12E.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by
a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that
demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide
equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The
applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
to revise the documents enumerated in § 146-6, when notified by
the local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs
assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also
provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or
relocated stream segment will be maintained.
(6) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required
by the local administrator, which shows whether proposed
development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may
result in physical damage to any other property.
(7) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from
other sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the
permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments that are greater than either 50 lots or five acres.
C. Fees. All applications for floodplain development permits shall be
accompanied by an application fee to be determined by the Village
Board of Trustees by resolution and set in the fee schedule. In addition,
the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village, in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 223, Professional Fees, of
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson Code for any additional costs
necessary for the review, inspection, and approval of the project.
A. Permit application reviews. The local administrator shall:
§ 146-10 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 146-11
141:190
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 146-10, and for compliance with the provisions
and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe
from flooding. If a proposed building site is located in an area of
special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall meet the applicable standards of § 146-12.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., streambank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§ 146-12, no permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise the
application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate the
adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
New York State or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the Village's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation data
(these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified
a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, New York State, or other source, including
data developed pursuant to § 146-10B(7), as criteria for requiring
that new construction, substantial improvements, or other
proposed development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. With respect to the alteration of any
watercourse, the local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 146-11 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 146-11
141:191
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, the local administrator shall obtain from the permit
holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The certificate
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed
land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. A
certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
(unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any waiver provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 146-14 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 146-14 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) The local administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance upon
satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood
hazard in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted, as prescribed in § 146-11E, and/or any certified
elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements,
§ 146-11 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 146-11
141:192
§ 146-12. Construction standards.
or encroachment analyses that may have been required as a
condition of the approved permit.
(2) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 146-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly
or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a
certificate of compliance has been issued by the local administrator
stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this chapter.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance.
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 146-11D(1) and (2), and whether or not the
structures contain a basement.
(3) Floodproofing certificates, required pursuant to § 146-11D(1), and
whether or not the structures contain a basement.
(4) Waivers issued pursuant to § 146-13.
(5) Notices required under § 146-11C.
A. General standards. The following standards apply to all new subdivision
proposals and other development, including new and substantially
improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 146-6.
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems, shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
§ 146-11 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 146-12
141:193
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson agrees to apply to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a
conditional FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses, and mapping
and reimburses the Village for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses, and mapping and reimburse the Village for all
costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 146-6, no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development in the floodway (including fill)
shall be permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson agrees to apply to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a
conditional FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is
received, and the applicant provides all necessary data,
analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village for all fees
and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant
must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Village for all costs related to the final map
revisions.
C. Standards for all structures. In all areas of special flood hazard, the
following standards are required:
(1) Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to
structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during the base
flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable New York State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
(b) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
§ 146-12 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 146-12
141:194
(c) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage in an area other than a basement and that
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters.
[1] Designs for meeting this requirement must be either
certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[a] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding; and
[b] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
[2] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens,
or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas
subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are
not permitted.
(3) Utilities.
(a) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other
service equipment shall be located at or above the base flood
elevation. Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction
boxes, and panels shall be elevated to or above the base flood
elevation unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of
the electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or
the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations.
(b) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system.
(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems for buildings that
have openings below the base flood elevation shall be provided
with automatic backflow valves or other automatic backflow
devices that are installed in each discharge line passing
through a building's exterior wall.
§ 146-12 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 146-12
141:195
(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
D. Additional standards for residential structures. In addition to the
standards required in Subsections A, B, and C above, the following
standards shall apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard:
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood level.
(2) Within Zone A when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 146-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Additional standards for nonresidential structures. In addition to the
standards required in Subsections A, B, and C above, the following
standards shall apply to new and substantially improved commercial,
industrial, and other nonresidential structures located in areas of
special flood hazard:
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to
or above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two
feet above the base flood level with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components located below the base flood level must be capable
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects
of buoyancy.
§ 146-12 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 146-12
141:196
§ 146-13. Waivers.
(2) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 146-12E(1)(b).
(3) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing
certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local
administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of § 146-12E(1)(b), including the specific elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be
floodproofed.
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
(5) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Procedure.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
is hereby authorized to hear and decide appeals and requests for
waivers from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
§ 146-12 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 146-13
141:197
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during periods
of flooding;
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
(4) Waivers shall be issued only upon receiving written justification of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the waiver would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a waiver will not result in
increased flood heights, pose additional threats to public
safety, engender extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(5) Waivers shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
§ 146-13 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 146-13
141:198
(6) Waivers shall be issued only upon a determination that the waiver
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(3) above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach
such conditions to the granting of waivers as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(8) Any applicant to whom a waiver is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that: the issuance
of a waiver to construct a structure below the base flood level will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and such
construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of
all waiver actions as required in § 146-11H of this chapter.
(9) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any waivers to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(10) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. Conditions for waivers.
(1) Generally, waivers may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 146-13A(3)(a) through (l) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the waiver increases.
(2) Waivers may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(b) The waiver is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(3) Waivers may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(a) The criteria of § 146-13A(4), (6), (7) and § 146-13B(1) are met.
§ 146-13 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES § 146-13
141:199
§ 146-14. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village
from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy
an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements of
this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for and
received an approved waiver under § 146-13 will be declared noncompliant
and notification sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 146-15. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
Chapter 152
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 88. Handbills and posters — See Ch. 162.
§ 152-1. Definitions.
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
A. Terms defined by statute. As used in this chapter, terms, including the
terms "games of chance," "authorized organization," "lawful purpose,"
"net proceeds," "net lease," "authorized games of chance lessor,"
"single prize," "authorized supplier of games of chance equipment,"
"one occasion" and "licensed period," shall have the meanings
designated in the definitions set forth in Article 9-A, § 186, of the
General Municipal Law, except that poker is prohibited in the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 146-13 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 152-1
152:200
§ 152-2. Designation of administrative official.
The Village Manager is hereby delegated the authority granted to the
Village Board by Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law in relation
to the issuance, amendment and cancellation of licenses, the conduct of
investigations and hearings and the collection and transmission of fees.
§ 152-3. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization other than an
authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall
be permitted to conduct games of chance within the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
§ 152-4. Application.
STATE BOARD — The New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Mayor and Board of Trustees.
VILLAGE MANAGER — The Village Manager of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson and, for the purposes of this chapter, the chief law
enforcement officer thereof.
A. Each applicant for a license, after obtaining an identification number
from the State Board, shall file with the Village Manager a written
application to conduct games of chance on a form to be prescribed by
the State Board or Village Manager duly executed and verified. Such
application shall contain all of the information set forth in § 190,
Application for license, of the General Municipal Law.
B. In each application there shall be designated not less than four bona
fide members of the applicant organization under whom the games of
chance will be managed, and to the application shall be appended a
statement executed by the members so designated that they will be
responsible for the management of the games of chance in accordance
with the terms of the license, Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law,
the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the State
Board.
C. Each applicant for a license to lease premises to a licensed organization
for the purposes of conducting games of chance therein shall file with
the Village Manager a written application therefor on a form to be
prescribed by the State Board or the Village Manager, duly executed
and verified, which shall set forth the name and address of the
applicant, designation and address of the premises intended to be
covered by the license sought, a statement that the applicant in all
respects conforms with the specifications contained in the definition of
"authorized organization" and all other requirements set forth in Article
9-A of the General Municipal Law, the State Board and the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 152-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 152-5
152:201
§ 152-5. Restrictions.
A. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall conduct a game of
chance or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting games
of chance any premises for any consideration whatsoever, directly or
indirectly, except as provided in this chapter.
B. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid wholly or
partly on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived
from the operation of a game of chance.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment
specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of
chance equipment licensed by the State Board or from another
authorized organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance shall be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct
the same, and the net proceeds of any rental derived therefrom shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the authorized games of
chance lessor.
E. No single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $100. Except in a game
of chance known as the "merchandise wheel," no single prize consisting
of merchandise shall exceed the actual value of $250. No single wager
shall exceed $2.
F. In addition to merchandise wheels, no more than five other single types
of games of chance shall be conducted during any one license period.
G. Except for merchandise wheels, no series of prizes on any one occasion
shall aggregate more than $200 when the licensed organization
conducts five single games of chance exclusive of merchandise wheels
during any one license period. Except for merchandise wheels, no
series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than $250
when the licensed authorized organization conducts less than five
single types of games of chance, exclusive of merchandise wheels
during any one license period.
H. No person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized
organization, its auxiliary or affiliated organization shall participate in
the management or operation of a game of chance as set forth in this
chapter.
I. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of chance.
J. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law or this chapter, poker is prohibited in the village.
§ 152-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 152-5
152:202
§ 152-6. Authorized supplier of games of chance equipment.
K. Credit shall not be extended to a person to participate in playing a game
of chance.
L. No game of chance shall be conducted on other than the premises of an
authorized organization or an authorized games of chance lessor.
A. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization shall sell or
distribute supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for
use in conduct of games of chance without having first obtained a
license therefor upon written application made, verified and filed with
the Board in the form prescribed by the rules and regulations of the
Board. In each such application for a license under this section shall be
stated the names and addresses of its officers, directors, shareholders
or partners, the amount of gross receipts realized on the sale and rental
of games of chance supplies and equipment to duly licensed authorized
organizations during the last preceding calendar or fiscal year and such
other information as shall be prescribed by such rules and regulations.
The fee for such license shall be a sum to be determined by the Village
Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule,27 plus an amount equal
to 2% of the gross sales and rentals, if any, of games of chance
equipment and supplies to authorized organizations by the applicant
during the preceding calendar year or fiscal year if the applicant
maintains his accounts on a fiscal-year basis. No license granted
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be effective for a period
of more than one year.28
B. The following shall be ineligible for such a license:
(1) A person convicted of a crime who has not received a pardon or a
certificate of good conduct or a certificate of relief from disabilities.
(2) A person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter or who for other reasons is not of a good moral character.
(3) A public officer or employee.
(4) An authorized games of chance lessor.
(5) A firm or corporation in which a person defined in Subsection B(1),
(2), (3) or (4) above, or a person married or related in the first
degree to such a person, has greater than a 10% proprietary,
equitable or credit interest or in which such a person is active or
employed.
C. The Village Manager shall have power to examine or cause to be
examined the books and records of any applicant for a license under
this section. Any information so received shall not be disclosed except
27.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 152-5 GAMES OF CHANCE § 152-6
152:203
§ 152-7. Investigation; issuance and duration of licenses; fees.
so far as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Any solicitation of an organization licensed to conduct games of chance,
to purchase or induce the purchase of games of chance supplies and
equipment, other than by a person licensed or otherwise authorized
pursuant to this section, shall constitute a violation of this section.
E. Any person who willfully shall make any material false statement in any
application for a license authorized to be issued under this section or
who willfully shall violate any of the provisions of this section or of any
license issued hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, in
addition to the penalties in such case made and provided, shall forfeit
any license issued to him or it under this section and be ineligible to
apply for a license under this section for one year thereafter.
F. At the end of such period specified in the license, a recapitulation shall
be made as between the licensee and the Village Manager in respect to
the gross sales and rentals actually recorded during that period and the
fee paid therefor, and any deficiency of fee thereby shown to be due
shall be paid by the licensee, and any excess of fee thereby shown to
have been paid shall be credited to said licensee in such manner as
shall be prescribed by law.
A. The Village Manager shall make an investigation of the qualifications of
each applicant and the merits of each application with due expedition,
after the filing of the application.
B. If the Village Manager shall determine that the applicant is duly
qualified to be licensed to manage games of chance under this chapter;
that the member of the applicant designated in the application to
conduct games of chance is a bona fide active member of the applicant
and is a person of good moral character and has never been convicted
of a crime or, if convicted, has received a pardon or a certificate of good
conduct or a certificate of relief from disabilities; that such games of
chance are to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Article
9-A of the General Municipal Law and in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the State Board and this chapter and that the proceeds
thereof are to be disposed of as provided by this chapter; and if the
Village Manager is satisfied that no commission, salary, compensation,
reward or recompense whatsoever shall be paid or given to any person
managing, operating or assisting therein, except as otherwise provided
in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law or in this chapter, the
Village Manager shall issue a license to the applicant for the conduct of
games of chance upon payment of a license fee to be determined by the
Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule29 for each
license period.30
29.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 152-6 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 152-7
152:204
§ 152-8. Hearings; appeals; amendment of licenses.
C. If the Village Manager shall determine that the applicant seeking to
lease a premises for the conduct of games of chance to a games of
chance licensee is duly qualified to be licensed under this chapter; that
the applicant satisfies the requirements for an authorized organization
as defined in § 186 of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law; that the
Village Manager shall find and determine that the public shall not be
disadvantaged by the issuance of the license; that the applicant has
filed its proposed rent for each license period and that the Village
Manager has approved the proposed rent as fair and reasonable and
that the net proceeds therefrom will be devoted to the lawful purposes
of such applicant; that there is no diversion of the funds of the proposed
lessee from the lawful purposes as defined in Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law; and that the leasing of the premises for the conduct of
games of chance is to be in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the State Board and this chapter, he shall issue a license permitting the
applicant to lease said premises for the conduct of games of chance to
the games of chance licensee or licensees specified in the application
during the period therein specified or such shorter period as the Village
Manager shall determine, but not to exceed 12 license periods during a
calendar year, upon payment of a license fee to be determined by the
Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.31 Nothing
herein shall be construed to require the applicant to be licensed under
this chapter to conduct games of chance.32
D. No license shall be issued which shall be effective for a period of more
than one year.
A. No application for the issuance of a license to conduct games of chance
or lease premises to an authorized organization shall be denied by the
Village Manager until after a hearing is held, upon due notice to the
applicant, at which time the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon
its qualifications and the merits of the application.
B. Any applicant for or holder of any license hereunder aggrieved by any
action of the Village Manager to which an application has been made or
by which a license has been issued may appeal to the State Board from
the determination of the Village Manager by filing with the Village
Manager written notice of appeal within 30 days after the
determination or action appealed from, and, upon the hearing of such
appeal, the evidence, if any, taken before the Village Manager and any
additional evidence may be produced and shall be considered in
arriving at a determination of the matters in issue. The action of the
State Board upon said appeal shall be binding upon the Village
Manager and all parties to said appeal.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
31.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 152-7 GAMES OF CHANCE § 152-8
152:205
§ 152-9. Form, content and display of licenses.
§ 152-10. Control and supervision; inspection of premises; alcoholic
beverages.
C. Any license issued hereunder may be amended upon application to the
Village Manager if the subject matter of the proposed amendment could
lawfully and properly have been included in the original license and
upon payment of any additional license fee as would have been payable
if it has been so included.
A. Each license to conduct games of chance shall be in a form as shall be
prescribed in the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board
or the Village Manager and shall contain a statement of the name and
address of the licensee, the name and address of each member of the
licensee under whom the games of chance shall be managed, of the
place where and the date and time when the games of chance are to be
conducted and of the purposes to which the entire net proceeds of the
games of chance are to be devoted and any other information which
may be required by said rules and regulations shall be contained
herein. Each license issued for the conduct of any games of chance shall
be conspicuously displayed at the place where the same is to be
conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.
B. Each license to lease premises for conducting games of chance will be
in a form as shall be prescribed in the rules and regulations of the State
Board or the Village Manager and shall contain a statement of the name
and address of the licensee and the address of the leased premises, the
amount of permissible rent and any other information which may be
required by said rules and regulations. Each license shall be
conspicuously displayed upon the premises at all times during the
conduct of the games of chance.
A. The Village Manager shall have and exercise rigid control and close
supervision over all games of chance conducted under each license, to
the end that the same are fairly conducted in accordance with the
provisions of said license, the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board.
The Village Manager and the State Board shall have the right of entry,
by their respective officers and agents, at all times into any premises
where any game of chance is being conducted or intended to be
conducted or where any equipment being used or intended to be used
in the conduct thereof is found for the purpose of inspecting the same.
The Village Manager or his agent shall make an on-site inspection
during the conduct of all games of chance licensed pursuant to this
chapter.
B. Subject to the applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law, beer may be offered for sale on the premises during the conduct of
§ 152-8 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 152-10
152:206
§ 152-11. Procedure following license period.
games of chance, but the offering of all other alcoholic beverages is
prohibited.
A. Within seven days after the conclusion of any licensed period, the
authorized organization which conducted the games of chance and its
members who were in charge thereof and, when applicable, the
authorized games of chance lessor which rented its premises therefor
shall each furnish to the Village Manager a statement subscribed by the
member in charge and affirmed by him as true, under the penalties of
perjury, showing the amount of the gross receipts derived therefrom,
each item of expense incurred or paid, each item of expenditure made
or to be made other than prizes, the name and address of each person
to whom each item of expense has been paid or is to be paid, with a
detailed description of the merchandise purchased or the services
rendered therefor, the net proceeds derived from the conduct of the
games of chance during the licensed period and the use to which such
proceeds have been or are to be applied. It shall be the duty of each
licensee to maintain and keep such books and records as may be
necessary to substantiate the particulars of each statement of receipts.
B. Upon filing the statement of receipts, the authorized organization
furnishing the same shall pay to the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson an
additional fee in the sum of 5% of the net proceeds, if any, for the
licensed period covered by the statement and determined in
accordance with the schedule as shall be established from time to time
by the State Board or the Village Manager to defray the actual cost to
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson of administering the provisions of
this chapter.
C. The Village Manager and the State Board shall have the power to
examine or cause to be examined the books and records of:
(1) Any authorized organization which is or has been licensed to
conduct games of chance, so far as they may relate to games of
chance, including the maintenance, control and disposition of the
net proceeds derived from games of chance or from the use of its
premises for games of chance, and to examine any manager, officer,
director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in relation
to the conduct of any games of chance under any license, the use of
its premises for games of chance or the disposition of the net
proceeds derived from games of chance, as the case may be.
(2) Any authorized games of chance lessor so far as the same may
relate to leasing premises for games of chance and to examine said
lessor or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee thereof
under oath in relation to said leasing. Any information so received
shall not be disclosed except for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 152-10 GAMES OF CHANCE § 152-12
152:207
§ 152-12. Prohibitions; penalties for offenses.
A. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play or
operate or assist in operating any game of chance conducted pursuant
to any license issued under this chapter.
B. No games of chance shall be conducted under any license issued under
this chapter more often than 12 times in any calendar year. Games of
chance may be conducted only between the hours of 12:00 noon and
11:00 p.m. every day except Sunday. Games of chance shall not be
conducted on Sundays. The 11:00 p.m. closing period shall also apply to
a legal holiday.
C. No person shall operate or assist in operating any games of chance
under any license issued under this chapter, except a bona fide member
of the authorized organization to which the license is issued or a bona
fide member of an organization or association which is an auxiliary or
affiliate to the licensee. The head or heads of the authorized
organization shall, upon request, certify under oath that the persons
assisting in holding, operating or conducting any game of chance are
bona fide members of such authorized organization, auxiliary or
affiliated organization.
D. No games of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except that
owned or leased by the authorized organization so licensed or used
without payment of any compensation therefor by the licensee.
E. No items of expense shall be incurred or paid in connection with the
conducting of any game of chance pursuant to any license issued under
this chapter, except those that are:
(1) Reasonable and are necessarily expended for games of chance
supplies and equipment.
(2) Prizes.
(3) Stated rental, if any.
(4) Bookkeeping or accounting services according to a schedule of
compensation prescribed by the State Board.
(5) Janitorial services and utility supplies, if any.
(6) License fees.
(7) Cost of bus transportation, if authorized by the Village Manager.
(8) Security personnel.
F. A fee may be charged by any licensee for admission to and participation
in any games of chance conducted under any license issued under this
chapter. Every winner shall be determined and every prize shall be
awarded and delivered on the same calendar day as the game was
played.
§ 152-12 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 152-12
152:208
G. A licensee may advertise the conduct of games of chance to the general
public by means of handbill and poster and by one sign not exceeding
60 square feet in area, which may be displayed on or adjacent to the
premises owned or occupied by a licensed authorized organization, and
when an organization is licensed to conduct games of chance on
premises of an authorized games of chance lessor, one additional such
sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises in which the
games are to be conducted. Additional signs may be displayed upon any
fire-fighting equipment belonging to any licensed authorized
organization which is a volunteer company or upon any equipment of a
first-aid or rescue squad in and throughout the community served by
such volunteer company or such first-aid or rescue squad, as the case
may be. All advertisements shall be limited to the description of such
event as "games of chance" or "Las Vegas night," the name of the
authorized organization conducting such games, the license number of
the authorized organization as assigned by the clerk or department and
the date, location and time of the event.
H. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization lawfully
conducting or participating in the conduct of games of chance or
permitting the conduct upon any premises owned or leased by him or it
under any license issued hereunder shall be liable to prosecution or
conviction for violation of any provision of Article 225 of the Penal Law
or any other law or ordinance to the extent that such conduct is
specifically authorized by this chapter. However, this immunity shall not
extend to any person or corporation knowingly conducting or
participating in the conduct of games of chance under any license
obtained by any false pretense or by any false statement made in any
application for a license or otherwise, or permitting the conduct upon
any premises owned or leased by him or it of any game of chance
conducted under any license known to him or it to have been obtained
by any such false pretense or statement.
I. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization who or
which shall make material false statement in any application for any
license issued pursuant to this chapter; shall pay or receive a rental in
excess of the amount specified as the permissible rent in the license
provided for in § 193 of the General Municipal Law for the use of any
premises for conducting games of chance; shall fail to keep such books
and records as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected
with the conducting of games of chance or the leasing of premises to be
used for the conduct of games of chance; shall falsify or make any false
entry in any books or records so far as they relate in any manner to the
conduct of games of chance, to the disposition of the proceeds thereof
and to the application of the rents received by any authorized
organization; or shall divert or pay any portion of the net proceeds of
any game of chance to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
organization, except in furtherance of one or more of the lawful
purposes defined in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
§ 152-12 GAMES OF CHANCE § 152-12
152:209
§ 152-13. Posting of rules and regulations.
The Village Manager shall maintain for public inspection all bulletins issued
by the State Board pertaining to authorized games of chance, and the
Village Manager shall enforce within the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson all
such rules and regulations, instructions, limitations and playing rules not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 154
shall forfeit any license issued under this chapter and be ineligible to
apply for a license under this chapter for at least one year thereafter.
J. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization holding,
operating or conducting games of chance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, except when operating, holding or conducting:
(1) In accordance with a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter;
or
(2) On behalf of a bona fide organization of persons 60 years of age or
over, commonly referred to as "senior citizens," solely for the
purpose of amusement and recreation of its members, and:
(a) The organization has applied for and received an identification
number from the State Board;
(b) No player or other person furnishes anything of value for the
opportunity to participate;
(c) The prizes awarded or to be awarded are nominal;
(d) No person other than a bona fide active member of the
organization participates in the conduct of the games of
chance; and
(e) No person is paid for conducting or assisting in the conduct of
the games of chance.
K. Alcoholic beverages.
(1) Sale, service and consumption of all alcoholic beverage, except
beer, shall be prohibited at any premises where games of chance
are conducted.
(2) No alcoholic beverage shall be offered or given as a prize in any
games of chance.
L. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
M. Each violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense, and
each violation shall constitute and be punishable as a separate
misdemeanor.
§ 152-12 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 152-13
154:210
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 154-1. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to conduct a garage sale
in the Incorporated Village of Hastings-on-Hudson without first complying
with the regulations set forth herein.
§ 154-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic
sale," "rummage sale" or "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale of
tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 154-3. Regulation of sales.
A. Garage sales in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson shall be regulated in
the following manner:
(1) Merchandise. Garage sales shall offer only used, unwanted items of
personal property owned by the resident of the property where the
sale is held. No new merchandise shall be offered for sale nor may
new merchandise from other sources be brought in and offered for
sale.
(2) Hours. Garage sales shall not commence before 10:00 a.m. and
must terminate by 6:00 p.m.
(3) Limitation on number and duration of sales. No person shall
conduct more than two garages sales on his premises in any one
calendar year. Such sale may not extend for a period of more than
three days.
(4) Signs.
(a) Garage sales may be advertised through the newspaper or
other news media. A sign, not greater in size than three feet by
three feet, may be installed on the property where the sale is
being conducted.
§ 152-13 GARAGE SALES § 154-3
154:211
§ 154-4. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 154-5. Enforcement; responsibility for good order.
(b) The signs shall be displayed only during the sale and shall be
promptly removed after the sale.
B. It is not the intention of this chapter to change or amend Chapter 295,
Zoning, of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale any item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other
communication media who publishes or broadcasts in good faith
without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or
without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been
complied with.
E. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson or under the protection of the nonconforming use section
thereof or any sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and
which sale would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not
otherwise prohibited.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or the
Building Inspector.
B. The owner or tenant of the premises on which such sale or activity is
conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during all
hours of such sale or activity. No such person shall permit loud or
boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles to impede the
passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such premises.
All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the
Police Department or Fire Department of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 154-3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 154-6
154:212
§ 154-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, association or corporation conducting any such sale or similar
activity who shall violate any of the terms and regulations of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 or be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days for each violation.
Chapter 156
GASOLINE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 143.
§ 154-6 GASOLINE § 154-6
156:213

ARTICLE I
Pumps
[Adopted 3-19-1957]
§ 156-1. Permit required.
No gasoline pump shall be installed, maintained, operated, suffered or
permitted to remain on any public street or sidewalk in the village unless a
permit therefor has been issued by the Board of Trustees.
§ 156-2. Qualification for permit.
No permit to install, maintain or operate a gasoline pump shall be issued
except to a person lawfully conducting a gasoline service station in
connection with which a gasoline pump or pumps were maintained and
operated on the public street or sidewalk at the time of the adoption of
this article, and no such permit shall be issued for the maintenance and
operation of any gasoline pump except inside of the curb immediately
adjacent to the premises on which such gasoline service station is operated,
nor shall a permit be issued for the maintenance and operation of more than
two pumps in connection with any gasoline service station.
§ 156-3. Application; issuance; fee; term.33
Permits shall be issued for a calendar year expiring on December 31 of each
year, upon application of the person conducting a gasoline service station,
which application shall be approved by the owner of the premises on which
such station is conducted upon payment of a fee to be determined by the
Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.34 Such permit shall
be revocable by the Board of Trustees at any time, and for the year 1957
shall be issued from the effective date of this article to January 1, 1958, at
the same fee prescribed for the calendar year.
§ 156-4. Location; obstruction of sidewalk.
No gasoline pump shall be maintained or operated so as to obstruct or
impede passage of any sidewalk, except that if the sidewalk extends to the
curb, such pump shall extend not more than 30 inches from the curb unless
the Board of Trustees specifically provides for a different location in the
permit to be issued, and no automobile or other vehicle being serviced from
such gasoline pump shall be parked or permitted to be, in whole or in part,
on any sidewalk, nor shall any equipment or other articles be displayed for
sale or left standing or be placed anywhere in the area of the street or
between the curb and property line of the building.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
34.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 156-1 GASOLINE § 156-5
156:215
§ 156-5. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by revocation of
operator's permit or permits and by a fine of $25 for each day during which
the violation exists.
§ 156-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 156-5
156:216
ARTICLE II
Storage
[Adopted 6-7-1971]
§ 156-6. Bulk storage of gasoline limited.
No person, firm or corporation, including any division, subsidiary or
affiliated entity, shall be allowed to store in bulk more than an aggregate of
20,000 gallons of gasoline in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 156-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GASOLINE — An inflammable mixture, liquid or any substance or
compound which will emit an inflammable vapor at a temperature below
100° F., when tested in a Tagliabue open cup tester.
§ 156-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this article shall be subject to a
penalty of not more than $250, 30 days' imprisonment or both. Each day of
such storage shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 156-6 GASOLINE § 156-8
156:217
Chapter 160
GREEN BUILDING CODE
Chapter 162
(RESERVED)
Chapter 166
HOUSING STANDARDS
Chapter 170
(RESERVED)
Chapter 176
(RESERVED)
Chapter 184
PARADES AND GATHERINGS
§ 184-1. Permit required.
Any individual or organization causing a congregation of people at any
public place within the Village or wishing to participate in or conduct any
organized parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, on the
public streets, sidewalks, or other public property in the Village shall first
file a permit application with the Village Clerk and pay the appropriate fee.
§ 184-2. Fees.
The fee for such permit shall be set by the Board of Trustees by resolution
and set forth in the fee schedule.
§ 184-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.35
Chapter 190
MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING
35.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Certain Trades and Occupations, adopted 12-2-1913, as
amended, was repealed 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 15-2008.
§ 156-8 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 190-1
166:218
§ 190-1. Purpose.
§ 190-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The head of the Department.
BENCHMARKING INFORMATION — Information generated by Portfolio
Manager, as herein defined, including descriptive information about the
physical building and its operational characteristics.
BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING — The process of measuring a
building's energy use, tracking that use over time, and comparing
performance to similar buildings.
COVERED MUNICIPAL BUILDING — A building or facility that is owned or
occupied by the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson that is 1,000 square feet or
larger in size.
DEPARTMENT — The Building Department of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
ENERGY — Electricity, natural gas, steam, hot or chilled water, fuel oil,
or other product for use in a building, or renewable on-site electricity
generation, for purposes of providing heating, cooling, lighting, water
heating, or for powering or fueling other end uses in the building and
related facilities, as reflected in utility bills or other documentation of actual
energy use.
ENERGY PERFORMANCE SCORE — The numeric rating generated by
Portfolio Manager that compares the energy usage of the building to that of
similar buildings.
ENERGY USE INTENSITY (EUI) — The kBTUs (1,000 British thermal units)
used per square foot of gross floor area.
A. Buildings are the single largest user of energy in the State of New York.
The poorest performing buildings typically use several times the energy
of the highest performing buildings for the exact same building use. As
such, this chapter will use building energy benchmarking to promote
the public health, safety, and welfare by making available good,
actionable information on municipal building energy use to help
identify opportunities to cut costs and reduce pollution in the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
B. Collecting, reporting, and sharing building energy benchmarking data
on a regular basis allows municipal officials and the public to
understand the energy performance of municipal buildings relative to
similar buildings nationwide. Equipped with this information, the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is able to make smarter, more costeffective
operational and capital investment decisions, reward
efficiency, and drive widespread, continuous improvement.
§ 190-1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-2
166:219
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total number of enclosed square feet measured
between the exterior surfaces of the fixed walls within any structure used
or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
PORTFOLIO MANAGER — ENERGY STAR® Portfolio Manager, the
internet-based tool developed and maintained by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy
performance of buildings nationwide, or successor.
UTILITY — An entity that distributes and sells energy to covered municipal
buildings.
WEATHER NORMALIZED SITE EUI — The amount of energy that would
have been used by a property under thirty-year average temperatures,
accounting for the difference between average temperatures and yearly
fluctuations.
§ 190-3. Applicability.
§ 190-4. Benchmarking required for covered municipal buildings.
§ 190-5. Disclosure and publication of benchmarking information.
A. This chapter is applicable to all covered municipal buildings as defined
in § 190-2 above.
B. The Administrator may exempt a particular covered municipal building
from the benchmarking requirement if the Administrator determines
that it has characteristics that make benchmarking impractical.
A. No later than December 31, 2016, and no later than May 1 every year
thereafter, the Administrator or his or her designee from the
Department shall enter into Portfolio Manager the total energy
consumed by each covered municipal building, along with all other
descriptive information required by Portfolio Manager for the previous
calendar year.
B. For new covered municipal buildings that have not accumulated 12
months of energy use data by the first applicable date following
occupancy for inputting energy use into Portfolio Manager, the
Administrator or his or her designee from the Department shall begin
inputting data in the following year.
A. The Department shall make available to the public on the internet
benchmarking information for the previous calendar year, no later than
December 31, 2016, and by September 1 of each year thereafter for
covered municipal buildings; and
B. The Department shall make available to the public on the internet and
update at least annually, the following benchmarking information:
§ 190-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 190-5
166:220
§ 190-6. Maintenance of records.
The Department shall maintain records as necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this chapter, including but not limited to energy bills and other
documents received from tenants and/or utilities. Such records shall be
preserved by the Department for a period of three years.
§ 190-7. Enforcement and administration.
(1) Summary statistics on energy consumption for covered municipal
buildings derived from aggregation of benchmarking information;
and
(2) For each covered municipal building individually:
(a) The status of compliance with the requirements of this
chapter; and
(b) The building address, primary use type, and gross floor area;
and
(c) Annual summary statistics, including site EUI, weather
normalized source EUI, annual GHG emissions, and an energy
performance score where available; and
(d) A comparison of the annual summary statistics (as required
above) across calendar years for all years since annual
reporting under this chapter has been required for said
building.
A. The Administrator or his or her designee from the Department shall be
the Chief Enforcement Officer of this chapter.
B. The Chief Enforcement Officer designated hereunder may promulgate
regulations necessary for the administration of the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Within 30 days after each anniversary date of the effective date of this
chapter, the Chief Enforcement Officer shall submit a report to the
Board of Trustees, including but not limited to summary statistics on
energy consumption for covered municipal buildings derived from
aggregation of benchmarking information, a list of all covered
municipal buildings identifying each covered municipal building that
the Administrator determined to be exempt from the benchmarking
requirement and the reason for the exemption, and the status of
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 190-5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-7
166:221
Chapter 193
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 86. Peace and good order — See Ch. 212.
§ 190-7 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 190-7
193:222
ARTICLE I
Loud and Disturbing Noises
[Adopted 12-2-1913]
§ 193-1. Prohibited noises; exception.
Ringing of bells, blowing of horns or whistles, except on the Fourth of July or
the day on which the national independence is celebrated, and the day prior
thereto, loud shouting and all other unusual, improper or disturbing noise
in any of the streets, lanes, public places or grounds is hereby forbidden.
§ 193-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this article shall be liable and subject to a penalty of
$10 for each and every violation thereof; and a violation of this article shall
constitute disorderly conduct, and the person violating the same shall be a
disorderly person.
§ 193-1 NOISE § 193-2
193:223

ARTICLE II
Music in Certain Restaurants
[Adopted 7-6-1939, as amended through 5-4-1970]
§ 193-3. Hours.
No music of any kind or description, including instrumental music, radio,
player piano, jukebox, recorded, electronically reproduced or vocal music,
which shall interfere with the repose, health, comfort, safety or welfare of
any person shall be played, caused to be played or permitted to be played
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. in any restaurant, bar,
tavern and/or other public place licensed to sell liquors, wines or beer to be
consumed on the premises.
§ 193-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who plays or who causes or permits such music to be played in
violation of this article and any person owning, managing or conducting a
restaurant, bar, tavern or other public place licensed to sell liquors, wines
or beer in which such music is played in violation hereof shall be guilty of
disorderly conduct and shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25 nor
more than $250 for each offense. Each and every day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 193-3 NOISE § 193-4
193:225
Chapter 196
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 241. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 252.
§ 196-1. Prior notice required. [Amended 2-18-2020 by L.L. No.
1-2020]
No civil action shall be maintained against the Village for damages or
injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, or crosswalk being defective, out of
repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed, or for damages or injuries to
person or property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow
or ice upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, street, highway, bridge or culvert,
unless written notice of the defective, unsafe, dangerous, or obstructed
condition or of the existing snow or ice, relating to the particular place, was
actually given to the Village Clerk of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and
there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after receipt of such
notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained of,
or to cause the snow or ice to be removed, or the place otherwise made
reasonably safe.
§ 196-2. Revival of claims; waiver of limitation.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or
cause of action now barred by any existing requirement or statute of
limitations nor to waive any existing limitation now applicable to any claim
or cause of action against the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
Chapter 201
OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER
§ 201-1. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DENSE SMOKE — Includes smoke which is so heavy and thick as to prevent
the seeing of objects through it at the point of emission into the external
air; or the equivalent of No. 3 Grade of the Ringelmann Smoke Scale, the
standard device used by the United States Bureau of Mines.
OFFENSIVE ODOR — Any unpleasant, disgusting or putrid odor which
offends the sensibility of or which interferes with the repose, health,
comfort or welfare of a substantial segment of the community residing in
§ 193-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 201-1
201:226
residential districts adjacent to the building from which such offensive odor
is emanating.
SUBSTANTIAL SEGMENT — Fifteen or more residents in such residential
zone, whether or not such persons are members of the same household.
TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER — Any solid, liquid or gaseous matter,
including but not limited to gases, vapors, dusts, fumes and mists,
containing properties which by chemical means are:
§ 201-2. Emission of offensive odors.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or any agent, officer
or employee thereof to cause, allow or permit any land use which emits any
offensive odor outside of such land or any building thereon in which such
use is conducted.
§ 201-3. Dissemination of toxic or noxious matter.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or any agent, officer
or employee thereof to cause, allow or permit any land use which will cause
any dissemination whatsoever of toxic or noxious matter outside such land
or any building thereon in which such use is conducted.
§ 201-4. Emission of substances endangering comfort, health,
safety or property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or any agent, officer
or employee thereof to cause, allow or permit to escape into the open air
such quantities of dense smoke, soot, ash, dust, steam, cinders, dirt, trade
wastes or other pollution or noxious gas, in such place or manner as to
cause, or have a natural tendency to cause, injury, detriment or annoyance
to any person or persons or to the public, or to endanger the comfort and
repose, health or safety of any person or persons, or the public, or in such
manner as to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to
business or property.
§ 201-5. Emission of substances causing nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or any agent, officer
or employee thereof to cause, allow or permit to escape into the air such
quantities of dense smoke, soot, ash, dust, steam, cinders, dirt, trade wastes
or other pollution or noxious gas in such place or manner as to cause,
or have a natural tendency to cause, nuisance to persons residing in the
vicinity.
A. Inherently harmful and likely to destroy life or impair health; or
Likely to cause injury to the well-being of persons or damage to
property.
B.
§ 201-1 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 201-6
201:227
§ 201-6. Inspection and enforcement.
Any police officer, member of the Sanitation Department, Building Inspector
or persons designated by the Chief of Police or the Village Manager shall
have the right and authority, at all reasonable times, to visit and inspect
premises and machinery, equipment and appliances for the purpose of
ascertaining the amount or character of fuel used and manner of using the
same, and any fact or facts showing compliance with or violation of this
chapter.
§ 201-7. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of the foregoing shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both.
Chapter 204
OIL BURNERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 143.
§ 204-1. Regulations for installation. [Amended 2-5-2019 by L.L.
No. 2-2019]
The installation of oil-burning appliances and their auxiliary and accessory
apparatus shall be in accordance with the amended regulations of the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) No. 31, Standard for the
Installation of Oil-Burning Equipment.
§ 204-2. Permits for installation; fee. [Amended 4-3-197236]
No oil burner shall be installed in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson without
application being made therefor to the Building Inspector, accompanied by
a fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule.37
§ 204-3. Inspection prior to use; permit for operation.
Before use of said apparatus is begun, it shall be inspected by the Building
Inspector of the village, who shall determine if the installation conforms
with the regulations as published, and, if it does, he shall issue a permit for
the operation of the apparatus in question.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
37.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 201-6 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 204-4
201:228
§ 204-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-5-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
Failure to obtain an operation permit as provided in § 204-3, before using
the appliances, shall be punished subject to the penalties prescribed by
§ 1-13 of the Village Code.
Chapter 209
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 88. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 282.
§ 204-4 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 204-4
201:229

ARTICLE I
Swimming Pool and Related Facilities
[Adopted 11-4-1963]
§ 209-1. Authorization to construct.
The Village Board may hereafter authorize the construction of a swimming
pool and related facilities on Hillside Property, which is now owned by the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 209-2. Charges and rules for use. [Amended 1-10-1966;
1-15-1968; 4-17-1972; 4-21-1975 by L.L. No. 1-1975; 4-19-1976 by
L.L. No. 1-1976; 5-16-1978 by L.L. No. 1-1978; 5-4-1981 by L.L. No.
2-1981; 5-17-1982 by L.L. No. 3-1982; 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999;
5-19-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009; 3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 7-2019]
The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is hereby authorized to impose rules and
collect charges for the use of the swimming pool and related facilities, all in
accordance with the fees and rules to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule,38 which may be amended from time
to time at the recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 209-3. Disposition of moneys received.
Any moneys received as a result of the charges shall be used only for
the purpose of operating, maintaining and improving the swimming pool
and related facilities, including reserves and the payment of principal and
interest on bonds and other obligations authorized for the construction,
maintenance or reconstruction thereof.
§ 209-4. Guest passes. [Amended 2-7-1966; 5-19-2009 by L.L. No.
1-2009; 3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 7-2019]
The Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby empowered to permit
guest privileges for use of the pool facility. The number of guests, their
qualifications, and the times of admittance to and use of the pool shall be
set by the Parks and Recreation Commission on an annual basis for each
season. The charge for each guest shall be determined by the Village Board
by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
38.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 209-1 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 209-4
201:231

ARTICLE II
Department and Commission
[Adopted 3-22-1971 by L.L. No. 1-1971]
§ 209-5. Department established.
There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation Department for the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 209-6. Commission established.
There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation Commission for the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 209-7. Present Commission abolished.
The Recreation Commission of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson as
presently constituted is hereby abolished.
§ 209-8. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PARK or PARKS — Includes all dedicated public parks, playgrounds, athletic
fields, recreation centers, open spaces and other areas used for park and
recreation purposes, beautification projects, including all buildings,
structures, equipment and appurtenances, as well as entrances and
approaches thereto, and roads and parking places located in such park or
parks, and such other rights and appurtenances as the Village may have
or utilize for such park purposes, whether the same be under the care and
control of the Village by lease or otherwise, provided only that the same be
used for park and recreation purposes or either of such purposes.
RECREATION — Refers to leisure activities voluntarily engaged in by
residents of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, which are offered under the
auspices of the Parks and Recreation Department.
§ 209-9. Superintendent of Parks and Recreation Department.
A. Appointment. The Parks and Recreation Department shall be
administered by a Superintendent of Parks and Recreation, who shall
be appointed by and be responsible to the Village Manager. The Village
Manager shall make such appointment after consultation with the Parks
and Recreation Commission. He shall be appointed in the manner
provided by the Civil Service Law of the State of New York from a list of
eligible candidates determined by a competitive test.
B. Duties. The Superintendent of Parks and Recreation shall be the
administrative head of the Department of Parks and Recreation. He
shall perform the duties required of him in accordance with policies
established by the Parks and Recreation Commission and under the
administrative supervision of the Village Manager, and he shall be
§ 209-5 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 209-9
201:233
§ 209-10. Employees currently employed.
The provisions of § 209-9A requiring appointment under the Civil Service
laws shall not apply to any person employed by the Recreation Commission
as of the effective date of this article.
§ 209-11. Duties of Department.
The Department shall operate and maintain all of the parks and recreation
services and facilities assigned to it from time to time by the Village Board
of Trustees. Said operation and maintenance shall be governed by the
policies established by the Parks and Recreation Commission. The Village
Manager, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, may transfer
related administrative functions to the Parks and Recreation Department,
or from the Parks and Recreation Department to other Village departments
or offices, when, in his judgment, such transfer is necessary and proper.
§ 209-12. Parks and Recreation Commission.
subject to all the laws, controls, procedures, rules and regulations
applicable to other Village departments. The Superintendent of Parks
and Recreation shall attend all regular and special meetings of the
Commission and may participate fully in all discussions. He shall have
no vote on said Commission. The Superintendent shall, upon
consultation with and the approval of the Village Manager, and within
budgetary limitations, employ all other persons as he shall deem
necessary and proper to carry out the policies established by the Parks
and Recreation Commission.
A. Appointment and organization. The Parks and Recreation Commission
shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of the Village. Six
of such members shall be appointed by the Village Manager with the
advice and consent of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The seventh
member shall be jointly designated by the Village Manager and by the
Board of Education of Union Free School District No. 4. [Amended
5-17-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
B. Term of office. The members of this Commission shall serve for a term
of three years, each term to expire at the end of the Village's official
year. Except that of those first appointed, three shall be chosen from the
present Recreation Commission and shall serve a term of two years
each on the new Parks and Recreation Commission; two additional
members shall be chosen from the present Recreation Commission and
shall serve a term of one year each; the member jointly designated by
the Village Manager and the Board of Education and the member
appointed from the Conservation Commission will each serve a term of
three years. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for the term
of three years from and after the expiration of the terms of their
predecessors in office.
§ 209-9 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 209-12
201:234
C. Compensation. The members of the Parks and Recreation Commission
shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to
reimbursement for any expenditures authorized in the performance of
their duties.
D. Officers. The members of the Commission shall annually elect, from its
own members, a Chairman and Vice Chairman.
E. Vacancies. Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner in which the original appointment
was made. [Amended 3-16-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
F. Powers, duties and responsibilities.
(1) The Commission shall be responsible for the making of policies
which govern the regulation and use of all Village parks, recreation
programs and related facilities.
(2) The Commission shall ascertain and evaluate the recreation needs
of all Village residents, and recommend to the Superintendent of
Parks and Recreation, from time to time, the establishment,
operation and expansion or retrenchment of parks and recreation
services with respect to these needs.
(3) The Commission shall develop and recommend to the Mayor and
Board of Trustees plans for future park and recreation programs
and facilities, capital projects and improvements.
(4) The Commission shall make recommendations with respect to the
budget for operations and capital projects submitted to it by the
Superintendent and approve the budget prior to his submission of
such budget to the Village Manager.
(5) The Commission shall recommend long-range plans to the Board of
Trustees, and also recommend operating policies and regulations
for the Department, for the protection, conservation and
enhancement of the natural plant life, wildlife, brooks, ponds and
other water resources, soils and scenic beauty of Village park
lands.
(6) The Commission shall advise on matters having to do with the
regulation and use of the parks and recreation facilities and submit
to the Mayor and Board of Trustees, for its consideration,
resolutions or ordinances regulating the use of such facilities and
fixing the fees and charges to be paid for the use of any such
facilities.
(7) The Commission may appoint such committees from time to time as
it may deem necessary.
G. Meetings. The Commission shall regularly meet once each month at a
time and place set by said Commission for its regular meeting, and such
meeting shall be open to the public. A quorum shall consist of four
§ 209-12 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 209-12
201:235
members. The Chairman or any three members of the Commission may
call a special meeting of said Commission for such purposes as are
designated in said call. Notice of said meeting shall be given, in writing,
to all members and to the Superintendent of Parks and Recreation 72
hours in advance of said special meeting. The Village Clerk shall be
responsible for giving notice of all regular and special meetings of the
Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 209-12 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 209-12
201:236
ARTICLE III
Hillside Park
[Adopted 5-3-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971]
§ 209-13. Naturally vegetated areas to be preserved.
No building, structure, paving or other improvement or facility of any kind
(other than replacement, maintenance, alteration or repair of an existing
building, structure, pavement, improvement or facility) shall hereafter be
erected or installed in any naturally vegetated area of Hillside Park.
§ 209-14. Park management shall not be hindered.
This section shall not be deemed to prohibit measures required by good
principles of park management, such as protection against fire and soil
erosion and creation and maintenance of nature trails.
§ 209-13 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 209-14
201:237

ARTICLE IV
Vehicles in Parks
[Adopted 7-5-1977 by L.L. No. 3-1977]
§ 209-15. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PARK or PARKS — Includes all dedicated public parks, playgrounds, athletic
fields, recreation centers, open spaces, natural and underdeveloped areas
and other areas used for park, conservation and recreational purposes or
beautification projects, including all buildings, structures, equipment and
appurtenances, as well as entrances and approaches thereto and roads and
parking places located in such park or parks and such other rights and
appurtenances as the Village may have or utilize for such park purposes,
whether the same are under the care and control of the Village by reason of
ownership, lease, use or otherwise and whether the same are under the care
and control of the Union Free School District No. 4 or any other municipal
corporation, provided only that the same are used for park and recreation
or conservation purposes.
RECREATION — Refers to leisure activities, whether or not organized
and whether or not under the jurisdiction of the Parks and Recreation
Department, school district or any other municipal agency, engaged in by or
available to residents of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
VEHICLES and VEHICULAR TRAFFIC — All automobiles, vans, trucks,
minibikes, motorbikes, mopeds and power-driven vehicles of any sort.
Police, fire, ambulance and other emergency vehicles and vehicles used in
furtherance of municipal or school district matters are not included in the
terms "vehicle" or "vehicular traffic" as used herein.
§ 209-16. Entering parks during certain hours prohibited.
No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle owned by such person to
enter or remain in any park or parks in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 209-17. Operation of vehicles in parks during certain hours
prohibited.
No person shall operate any vehicle in any park or parks in the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 209-18. Suspension of law.
The prohibition against vehicular traffic in this article shall be suspended
during any event sponsored and scheduled by any agency of the Village or
by the School Board and for 30 minutes past the official termination of such
event.
§ 209-15 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 209-19
201:239
§ 209-19. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
7-2019]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
§ 209-19 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 209-19
201:240
ARTICLE V
Sales in Public Parks and Playgrounds
[Adopted 3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 7-2019]
§ 209-20. Permit required.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any object or merchandise in any public
park or playground of the Village except under a written permit by the
Village Clerk, and then only at the place or places designated in the permit.
§ 209-21. Licensing and fees.
All persons wishing to sell wares in a public park or playground shall
complete an application as created by the Village Clerk and pay such a fee
as set by resolution of the Village Board and placed in the fee schedule.
§ 209-22. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
§ 209-20 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 209-22
201:241

ARTICLE VI
Tennis and Day Camp Regulations
[Adopted 3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 7-2019]
§ 209-23. Tennis permits.
§ 209-24. Day camp.
Charges, per season, are to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule.
A. Charges.
(1) Charges for tennis permits, per season, for adults and children are
to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the
fee schedule.
(2) A guest must be accompanied by a permit holder, with a charge to
be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule.
B. Regulations.
(1) All players are subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the
Parks and Recreation Commission.
(2) A tennis permit entitles the permit holder to use the public tennis
courts operated by the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 209-23 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 209-24
201:243
Chapter 212
(RESERVED)
Chapter 214
PEDDLING, VENDING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ice cream and nonalcoholic beverages — See
Ch. 170.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 184, Art. II.
Noise — See Ch. 193.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 252.
§ 214-1. License required.
No person shall hawk, vend, peddle, solicit or offer for sale in or upon any
street, park or other public place, or by going from house to house, in the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson any goods, wares or merchandise, and no
person shall solicit from place to place or house to house or in any street or
public place in said village orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise,
periodicals or other commodities, or for service to be performed, or for
the making, manufacturing or repairing of any article or thing whatsoever
for future delivery without a license therefor granted by the Village Clerk
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except that such license
shall not be required:
§ 214-2. Form of application.
A. Of any holder of a license granted pursuant to § 32 of the General
Business Law;
B. For the soliciting of orders for, or peddling, vending or offering for sale,
meats, fish, fruit or farm products by farmers or other persons who
produce the same; or
C. Of any honorably discharged soldier, airman, sailor or marine who is
crippled as a result of injuries received while in the military or naval
service of the United States.
A. Each application for a license required by this chapter must be filed
with the Village Clerk and must be accompanied by the required license
fee. Such application shall be on a form provided by the Village Clerk
and must be sworn to before a notary public and contain, among other
things, the following information concerning the applicant:
(1) The applicant's full name, residence, place of residence for the five
years previous to the applicant's present address, date and place of
birth, height, color of eyes and hair, length of time the applicant has
§ 209-24 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 214-2
201:244
§ 214-3. Fingerprinting.
Each applicant for a license required by this chapter shall file impressions
of the fingers of the right and left hand on forms furnished by the Chief of
Police under the supervision of such police officer as may be designated by
the Chief of Police.
§ 214-4. Form of license; defacing license; replacement fee; penalty.
[Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
All licenses required hereunder shall contain a photograph and signature
of the applicant. A portion of the photograph on each license shall be
impressed with the seal of the village. All licenses shall be numbered in the
order in which they are issued and shall contain the name and place of the
residence of the licensee and the date of issuance and the date of expiration
thereof. No licensee shall deface, remove, change or obliterate any official
entry made upon said license in any respect whatsoever, and if such official
license shall be defaced, obliterated or changed in any respect, the licensee
shall report same immediately to the Village Clerk, who may, upon payment
of a fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in
the fee schedule,39 issue a replacement license. Any license which shall be
defaced, obliterated or changed in any respect shall be deemed void. Willful
violation of this section shall subject the licensee to a fine of not more than
$200.
resided at present address, whether a citizen of the United States
and, if a naturalized citizen, the place of securing such citizenship;
(2) Names and addresses of previous employers for the past five years;
(3) Marital status;
(4) All felonies or misdemeanors with which the applicant has been
charged and the disposition of each such charge;
(5) What, if any, licenses for peddling or vending issued by any state,
municipality or other such authority have previously been held by
the applicant;
(6) All instances in which any such licenses may have been revoked or
suspended and the details thereof; and
(7) Any other information of similar nature that may reasonably be
required.
B. The application shall, after completion, be submitted to the Chief of
Police for investigation, and his recommendation shall be endorsed
thereon prior to the issuance thereof. No license shall be issued to a
person who has been convicted of a felony, and a license may be denied
to a person convicted of a misdemeanor.
39.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 214-2 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 214-5
201:245
§ 214-5. License fees. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
The license fees shall be as determined by the Village Board by resolution
and set in the fee schedule.
§ 214-6. Limitations on days and hours.
No person shall solicit orders for, peddle, vend, hawk or offer for sale in any
street, park or other public place, or by going from house to house, in the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, any goods, wares, merchandise or service,
except during the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Monday through
Saturday of each week, other than legal holidays. This limitation on days
and hours shall be set forth on each license issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 214-7. Exhibition of license.
Every person while exercising a license issued under this chapter shall
carry such license on his person and shall exhibit the same on demand.
Every vehicle used by a licensee hereunder shall have the name of the
licensee and his address plainly, distinctly and legibly painted in letters and
figures at least two inches in height and in a conspicuous place on the
outside of every such vehicle used in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson in
the course of such business.
§ 214-8. Prohibitions.
No licensee hereunder shall:
A. Falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or quality
of any article offered for sale or service or offer for sale any
unwholesome, tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise.
B. Blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to attract public
attention to his wares, or shout or cry out his wares.
C. Stand or permit the vehicle used by him to stand in one place, in any
public place or street, for more than 10 minutes, or in front of any
premises for any time if the owner or lessee of the ground floor thereof
objects, or in any place if traffic is thereby obstructed.
D. Sell any confectionery, ice cream or other edibles within 250 feet of any
school between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days.
E. Create or maintain any booth or stand, or place any barrels, boxes,
crates or other obstructions, upon any street or public place for the
purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise.
F. Deposit or throw, or cause or permit to be deposited or thrown, any
refuse or other substance upon any public or private property within
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 214-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 214-8
201:246
§ 214-9. Surety bond. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
An application for a license shall also be accompanied by a surety bond,
approved as to form and surety by the Village Clerk, in a sum to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule,40
with a sufficient surety or sureties or sufficient collateral security for the
due observance during the time of the license of any and all provisions of
this chapter.
§ 214-10. Purchase agreement.
All orders taken by a licensee hereunder who demands, accepts or receives
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing,
in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and
one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the deposit of money is
paid to the licensee.
§ 214-11. Recording of applications, licenses granted and
complaints.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep a record of all applications
and of all licenses granted hereunder, and it shall be the duty of the Chief
of Police to keep a record of all complaints which may be made against any
licensee or applicant hereunder.
§ 214-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision hereunder shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not more than $200, and each day on which such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and such offense
shall constitute disorderly conduct.
§ 214-13. Revocation of license.
The Village Clerk may, at any time, for a violation of this chapter or any
other ordinance or any law, revoke any license issued hereunder. When a
license is revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the license shall
G. Keep the vehicles and receptacles used by him in a dirty and unsanitary
condition or allow foodstuffs and edibles offered for sale to be kept
uncovered or unprotected from dirt, dust and insects.
H. Permit or suffer any vehicle used by him hereunder to stand or remain
within 500 feet of any grounds occupied by a school during school hours
except as set forth in Subsection D hereinabove, or within 100 feet of
any street intersection.
I. Attempt to hawk, vend, peddle or offer anything for sale to any person
who objects thereto.
40.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 214-8 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 214-13
201:247
be made. Notice of such revocation and the reason(s) therefor shall be in
writing and served by the Village Clerk either personally or by mailing the
same to the address given in the application.
§ 214-14. Organizations and occupations exempted.
This chapter shall not apply to:
Chapter 217
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms, fireworks and explosives — See Ch.
141.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 143.
Gasoline — See Ch. 156.
Noise — See Ch. 193.
Offensive, toxic or noxious matter — See Ch.
201.
Oil burners — See Ch. 204.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 217-1. Purpose.
Consistent with the general purposes of this chapter, it is the intent of the
performance standards to set specific controls on potentially objectionable
external aspects of land uses in such a way as to:
A. Religious, civic or philanthropic organizations which have a tax
exemption as a charitable institution, pursuant to § 501, as amended, of
the Internal Revenue Code. [Amended 10-19-1982 by L.L. No.
6-1982]
B. (Reserved)41
C. The hand delivery of merchandise, goods, wares, newspapers,
periodicals or other items or commodities the purchase of which was
not obtained by a door-to-door solicitation.
A. Reduce to a reasonable minimum the dissemination of smoke, gas, dust,
odor and other atmospheric pollutants outside the building in which the
use is conducted.
B. Control noise perceptible beyond the boundaries of the site of the use.
C. Prevent the discharge of waste materials into any watercourse.
D. Prevent the dissemination of vibration, heat or electromagnetic
interference beyond the immediate site on which the use is located.
41.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding purveyors of ice cream, nonalcoholoic
beverages, and other food refreshments, was repealed 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 17-2008.
§ 214-13 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 217-1
201:248
§ 217-2. Conformance required.
No use shall hereafter be established, altered, moved or expanded unless
it complies with the performance standards set forth in this chapter.
Continued conformance with such standards shall be required for the
continuance of any certificate of occupancy issued on such basis.
§ 217-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DECIBEL (db) — A unit of level used in acoustics to express the ratio of two
sound pressures. The number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two
sound pressures is 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio.
FREQUENCY BAND — The range of frequencies between two specified
frequencies.
NIGHTTIME — The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. prevailing
time.
NOISE OF IMPULSIVE CHARACTER — A noise such as that from a hammer
blow, punch press, gunshot, etc.
NOISE OF PERIODIC CHARACTER — A noise such as that from a power
planner, power saw, transformer hum, etc.
OCTAVE BAND — A frequency band one octave wide.
OCTAVE BAND ANALYZER — An instrument for measuring the sound
pressure level in each of the octave bands which comprise the spectrum
of the sound. The octave band analyzer shall conform to United States of
America Standard USASI Z24.10 1953, or the latest revision thereof.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, organization, firm or
partnership.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL) — The sound pressure level, in decibels,
of a sound is 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the measured sound
pressure to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar; SPL=20 log10 (sound
pressure/reference pressure).
VILLAGE — The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson in the County of
Westchester and State of New York.
§ 217-4. Declaration of policy on noise.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village to prevent any loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noise. Noise of such character, intensity and
E. Eliminate physical hazard by reason of fire, explosion, radiation or any
similar cause.
F. Regulate and control the generation and flow of vehicular traffic so as
to prevent hazardous conditions and traffic congestion in the streets.
§ 217-1 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 217-4
201:249
duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual or
contrary to the public welfare, as herein set forth, is prohibited.
§ 217-5. Prohibited noise levels.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any mechanism or
device which shall create a noise within the village exceeding the
limiting noise levels set forth in the following table:
Octave Band Center
Frequency in Hertz
(CPS)
Sound Pressure Level in Decibels
Above 0.0002 Microbar
63 70
125 63
250 56
500 49
1,000 45
2,000 40
4,000 38
8,000 35
B. The values in Subsection A above refer to smooth and continuous noise;
however, in the event that the noise is not smooth and continuous and is
not radiated at nighttime, one or more of the following corrections shall
be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given above:
Type of Operation or Character of Noise Correction db
Daytime operation only + 5
Noise source operates less than 20% of any 1
hour
+ 5*
Noise source operates less than 5% of any 1 hour +10*
Noise source operates less than 1% of any 1 hour +15*
Noise of impulsive character - 5
Noise of periodic character - 5
*NOTE: Apply one of these corrections only.
C. Noise measurement required under the terms of this chapter shall be
made by the use of an octave band analyzer as defined herein.
D. Noise measurements and limits shall conform to the following
practices:
(1) Noise shall be measured at least four feet above ground level, but
not more than an altitude exceeding 40 feet above ground level.
§ 217-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 217-5
201:250
§ 217-6. Prohibited noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but any enumeration herein
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(2) Facility noise originating on residential property shall be measured
at the property line of the property on which the noise source is
located.
(3) Facility noise originating on business or commercial property shall
be measured at the property line of the nearest residential
property.
A. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except as a warning signal pursuant to
the provisions of the motor vehicle laws of the State of New York.
B. The operation of any radio, television, phonograph or use of any musical
instrument in such a manner or with such volume so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any residence.
C. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or longcontinued
noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in
any residence.
D. The blowing of any whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger.
E. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, air compressor or motor vehicle
engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
F. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or
unloading any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers.
G. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors.
H. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale or
display of merchandise by the creation of noise, except bells sounded by
a licensed mobile vendor, provided that the sound thereof is not audible
more than 300 feet from said vehicle.
I. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other
moving vehicles or aircraft for advertising or sales purposes.
J. The use of leaf blowers, except between October 15 and May 15, and
then only from 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., provided that they conform to
the decibel level restrictions set forth in § 217-5 and to the steady state
and impact vibrations restrictions of § 217-8. The Village Manager is
§ 217-5 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 217-6
201:251
§ 217-7. Permitted noises.
The following noises shall be permitted:
§ 217-8. Vibrations.
authorized to permit the use of leaf blowers between May 16 and
October 14, subject to the same time limits and provisos, in either of the
following situations: [Added 3-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; amended
5-6-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
(1) If the Village Manager determines that an emergency situation
exists in the Village.
(2) If a Village resident or property owner has a medical condition
requiring a leaf blower to clean up leaves and other yard debris and
presents the Village Manager with a letter from a physician stating
that such medical necessity exists. In such a situation, only one leaf
blower may be used per property and may not be operated
concurrently with any other electric or fuel-powered yard
maintenance equipment.
A. Sound created by persons engaged in construction work during the
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., prevailing time, Monday through
Saturday, and 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., prevailing time, Sunday,
including but not limited to building, repairing, grading, leveling and
excavating.
B. Sound created by any government agency by the use of public warning
devices.
C. Sound created by lawn mowers, chain saws, rakers, or similar
equipment in use between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, Monday through Saturday, and 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, Sunday, provided that they conform to the decibel level
restrictions set forth in § 217-5 and to the steady state and impact
vibrations restrictions of § 217-8. [Amended 3-4-2008 by L.L. No.
1-2008]
D. Sound created by public utilities in carrying out the operations of their
franchise.
E. Sounds connected with sporting, musical or band events of any public
or private school.
F. Sounds connected with parades or ceremonies authorized in
accordance with Chapter 184 of the Village Code.
G. Sound created by village departments in carrying out their operations.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
§ 217-6 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 217-8
201:252
§ 217-9. Smoke, dust and other atmospheric pollutants.
FREQUENCY — The number of oscillations per second of a vibration.
IMPACT VIBRATIONS — Earth-borne oscillations occurring in discrete
pulses at or less than 100 per minute.
STEADY STATE VIBRATIONS — Continuous earth-borne oscillations.
Discrete pulses that occur more than 100 times per minute shall be
considered steady stated vibrations.
THREE-COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM — A device for recording
the intensity of any vibration in three mutually perpendicular
directions.
B. Method of measurement. For the purpose of measuring vibration, a
three-component measuring system shall be employed.
C. Maximum permitted steady state and impact vibration displacement.
No activity shall cause or create a steady state or impact vibration on
any lot line with a vibration displacement by frequency bands in excess
of that indicated in the following table:
Vibration Displacement
(inches)
Frequency
(cycles per second) Steady State Impact
Under 10 .0005 .0010
10 to 19 .0004 .0008
20 to 29 .0003 .0006
30 to 39 .0002 .0004
40 and over .0001 .0002
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
DUST — Solid particulate matter capable of being air- or gas-borne.
PARTICULATE MATTER — Any finely divided liquid or solid matter,
including smoke, capable of being air- or gas-borne.
RINGLEMANN SMOKE CHART — A chart for determining the density
of smoke and is issued by the Federal Bureau of Mines.
SMOKE — Any emission into the open air from any source, except
emissions of any uncontaminated water vapor.
SMOKE UNIT — A measure of the quantity of smoke being discharged
and is the number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in a
Ringlemann Smoke Chart by the time of emission in minutes. For
§ 217-8 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 217-9
201:253
§ 217-10. Odorous, toxic or noxious matter.
example, the emission of Ringlemann Smoke Chart No. 1 for one minute
equals one smoke unit.
B. Method of measurement of smoke. For the purpose of grading the
density of smoke, the Ringlemann Smoke Chart shall be used to
determine the total smoke units emitted. A reading shall be taken every
minute for an hour or, if less than an hour, until the total smoke units
emitted exceed the number allowed by this chapter. Each reading shall
be multiplied by the number of minutes during which it was observed
and the product added.
C. Maximum permitted emission of smoke. There shall be no measurable
emission of smoke, gas or other atmospheric pollutant. The emission of
one smoke unit per hour and smoke with discernible density of No. 1 on
the Ringlemann Chart shall be prohibited.
D. Maximum permitted emission of dust.
(1) The emission of dust related to combustion for direct heating from
any source shall not exceed 0.30 pound of dust per 1,000 pounds of
flue gas adjusted to 50% excess air for combustion at standard
temperature and pressure (760 millimeters of mercury).
(2) There shall be no measurable emission of dust or other particulate
matter not related to combustion for indirect heating.
(3) All properties shall be suitably improved and maintained with
appropriate landscaping and paving, or other type of improvement,
so that there will be no measurable windblown dust or other similar
types of air pollution created.
E. General control over smoke and other particulate matter. In addition to
the preceding performance standards regulating the emission of smoke
and other particulate matter, such emissions shall not be permitted,
regardless of quantity, if they will be in any way detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or other aspects of the
general welfare or cause or be a potential source of damage or injury to
property.
A. Odorous matter. No land use shall be permitted which emits any
offensive discernible odors outside the building in which the use is
conducted. An odor shall be deemed offensive which is commonly
regarded as disagreeable to reasonable sensibility by usual and
customary community standards.
B. Toxic or noxious matter. For the purpose of this section, "toxic or
noxious" matter is defined as any solid, liquid or gaseous matter,
including but not limited to gases, vapors, dusts, fumes and mists,
containing properties which by chemical means are inherently harmful
and likely to destroy life or impair health or likely to cause injury to the
§ 217-9 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 217-10
201:254
§ 217-11. Radiation and electromagnetic interference.
§ 217-12. Fire and explosive hazards.
No storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which burn
actively and support combustion easily or which have a low ignition
temperature or a high rate of burning or create great heat, and no materials
producing flammable or explosive gases or vapors under ordinary
temperature conditions, shall be permitted, except as otherwise expressly
permitted.
§ 217-13. Liquid or solid wastes.
The discharge of any and all wastes which may arise in connection with
the use of any premises shall be permitted only if in complete accordance
with all pertinent laws and regulations and shall be subject to the approval
of the County Health Department. Facilities for the storage of solid wastes
and other refuse shall be provided in an enclosed location, which facilities
shall be designed so as to discourage the breeding of rodents or insects and
shall be located so as not to be visible from the street or from any adjoining
property in a residential district.
§ 217-14. Vehicular traffic.
No business or industrial use shall be permitted where it is determined
by the Planning Board, due to the nature of such use and the type and
number of vehicle trips which it will generate, particularly in relation to the
capacity of the street system serving the lot upon which it is to be located,
that the result will be unusual traffic hazards or congestion or noise and
well-being of persons or damage to property. No use shall be permitted
which will cause any dissemination whatsoever of toxic or noxious
matter outside the building in which the use is conducted.
C. Nothing herein shall prohibit the normal and usual use of any stove,
fireplace or other outdoor cooking devices, provided that the emission
therefrom shall not endanger the public health, safety, comfort or other
aspects of the general welfare or cause to be a potential source of
damage or injury to property.
A. Radiation. The handling, storage or disposal of radioactive material or
waste by-products, whether or not licensed by the Atomic Energy
Commission, shall be conducted only in accordance with the standards
established in Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 30, Code of Federal Regulations,
Standards for Protection Against Radiation, as amended, and in
accordance with any other applicable laws or regulations.
B. Electromagnetic interference. No operation shall be permitted if not
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission which produces
perceptible electromagnetic interference with normal radio or
television reception in any area within or without the village.
§ 217-10 OFFENSIVE, TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER § 217-14
201:255
air pollution conditions that are inconsistent with provisions of this chapter.
If, however, a limit is placed upon such use, either in terms of employees
or other appropriate measure, which, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
would be adequate to ensure that the potential traffic generation from such
use will be properly related to the capacity of the street system serving it,
the approving authority may approve such use with such limitation to which
the owners are required to adhere.
§ 217-15. Evidence of conformance.
In the case of any application for the establishment of a use which, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, may violate any preceding performance
standards contained in this chapter, the Planning Board may require the
applicant, at his own expense, to provide such evidence as is necessary to
determine whether or not the proposed use will conform. If the Planning
Board determines it necessary, expert advice may be obtained, with the cost
of such advice paid for in advance by the applicant as a condition of further
consideration of the application. Any permitted use, once established, shall
be maintained in strict accordance with the standards and requirements
contained herein as a condition of its continuance.
§ 217-16. Enforcement; notice of violation; noncompliance.
[Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005; 3-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
If, in the judgment of the Building Inspector, there is a violation of the
performance standards contained in this chapter, other than of §§ 217-6 or
217-7, the following procedures shall be followed:
A. The Building Inspector shall give written notice, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or any other method of delivery providing
proof of delivery, to the owner and tenants of the property upon which
the alleged violation occurs. Such notice shall describe the particulars
of the alleged violation and the reasons why the Building Inspector
believes there is a violation in fact and shall require an answer or
correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector within a reasonable time limit set by said Building Inspector,
but in no event to exceed 30 days. The notice shall state that failure to
reply or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The notice
shall further state that, upon request of those to whom it is directed,
technical determinations of the nature and extent of the violation as
alleged will be made and that, if violation as alleged is found, costs of
the determinations will be charged against those responsible, in
addition to such other penalties as provided by law.
B. If, within the time limit set, there is no reply but the alleged violation is
corrected to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector, he shall note
"Violation Corrected" on his copy of the notice and shall retain it among
his records.
§ 217-14 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 217-16
201:256
§ 217-17. Penalties for offenses of noise provisions. [Added
3-4-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Any person violating any provision of §§ 217-6 or 217-7 shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by a fine of $50 for the first offense and $200 for each
additional offense in the same calendar year.
Chapter 221
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 184, Arts. IV
and V.
Oil burners — See Ch. 204.
C. If there is no reply within the time limit set and the alleged violation is
not corrected to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector, he shall
proceed to take action in accordance with Chapter 295, Zoning, and the
violator shall be subject to the penalties and an injunction prescribed in
Chapter 295, Zoning.
§ 217-16 PLUMBING § 217-17
221:257

ARTICLE I
Requirements for Plumbers
[Adopted 5-5-1936; amended in its entirety 12-15-1969]
§ 221-1. Establishment of Examining Board.
§ 221-2. Terms of office of Examining Board.
The Examining Board of Plumbers shall hold office as follows: the three
master plumbers and one journeyman plumber shall serve for a period of
three years and the Plumbing Inspector shall serve as a permanent member
of the Board. At the expiration of their terms, appointments will be made for
a full term by the Board of Trustees.
§ 221-3. Vacancies in Examining Board.
Vacancies by death, removal, inability to act, resignation or removal from
the village of any member shall be filled by the Board of Trustees for the
unexpired term. In the event of the term of office or removal of the Plumbing
Inspector, appointed by said Board of Trustees, expiring during the duration
of appointment to serve on the Examining Board of Plumbers, his successor
shall act in his stead.
§ 221-4. Compensation of members of Examining Board;
examination requirements.
The compensation for the services of the master and journeymen plumbers
of the Examining Board shall be $5 for each member of the Examining
Board present at the examination. Only the members present at the
examination shall be recompensed. No examination shall be held except
in the presence of at least three members of the Examining Board.
Examination shall be given within 30 days from date of application.
§ 221-5. Qualifications of Examining Board members.
All members of the Examining Board shall be citizens and actual residents
of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
A. A Board of Examiners shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, who shall examine and determine the
competency and fitness of applicants for licenses to engage in the
business of plumbing or employing plumbers in the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson, and shall report their findings to the Board of Trustees of
said village.
B. The Board of Examiners shall consist of five members, composed of
three master plumbers, one journeyman plumber and the Plumbing
Inspector of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 221-1 PLUMBING § 221-6
221:259
§ 221-6. Powers and duties of Examining Board.
The powers and duties of the Examining Board are as follows:
§ 221-7. Requirements of conducting plumbing business.
A. To meet at stated intervals. They shall also meet whenever the Board of
Trustees or the Mayor shall, in writing, request them to do so.
B. Three members of the Examining Board shall constitute a quorum.
C. To have jurisdiction over and to examine all persons desiring or
intending to engage in the trade, business or calling of plumbing and
employing plumbers in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
D. To have powers of examining persons applying for licenses or
certificates of competency.
E. To determine their fitness and qualifications for conducting the
business of employment of master plumbers.
F. To recommend the issuing of licenses or certificates of competency to
all such persons who shall have passed a satisfactory examination
before such Board.
G. Shall be by it determined to be qualified for conducting the business of
employment of master plumbers.
H. To formulate, in conjunction with the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson, a code of rules and regulations for the work of
plumbing and drainage and venting; also oil-burner and gas-burner and
fitting installations in such village, including the materials,
workmanship and manner of executing such work, and from time to
time to add to, amend or alter the same, or, in its discretion, to adopt
the Standard Plumbing Code recommended by the State Department of
Health.
A. No person otherwise qualified shall engage in the trade, business or
calling of a plumber, or of plumbing, gas-burner installation or gasfitting
installations, in said village as employing or master plumber until
he has first procured from the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and the
Examining Board of Plumbers of said village, so designated by local law
in such village, a metal plate sign or a certificate certifying that he has
complied with all requirements as provided herein. Such plate, sign or
certificate is to be conspicuously posted in place of business where such
business is conducted.
B. Any person retiring, abandoning or not actually engaged in such trade,
business or calling, hereinbefore mentioned, shall surrender to the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson such plate, sign or certificate, and shall
not again engage in such trade, business or calling until he has again
procured a plate, sign or certificate as hereinbefore provided.
§ 221-6 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 221-7
221:260
§ 221-8. Violations; license revocation; expiration; insurance.
C. Any person to whom a license or certificate to do plumbing in the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson has been issued, who shall loan, rent,
sell or transfer the same to anyone other than to whom it has been
issued, will be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 and shall have his
license or certificate suspended.
A. Any willful violation of the provisions of this regulation or article shall
constitute disorderly conduct.
B. Such license or certificate of competency may be canceled by the
Examining Board of Plumbers of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson,
duly appointed, and enforced therein, after a hearing had before said
Examining Board of Plumbers, and upon a prior notice of not less than
10 days, stating the ground of complaint, and served on the person
charged with the violation; but such revocation shall not be operative
unless concurred in by the majority of the Board of Examiners present.
C. All licenses or certificates of competency issued under the provisions of
this article and all licenses authorizing connections with a water main
or mains or street sewers shall expire the 31st day of December of the
year in which they shall be issued and may be renewed within 30 days
preceding such expiration, such renewals to be for one year from the
first day of January in each year; renewal bond and filing fee to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule.42
D. Insurance.
(1) In addition to providing and filing the surety (Plumbers' Board)
bond herein required, no plumber licensed under and pursuant to
the provisions of this article shall engage in any plumbing business
or work within the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson unless there is on
file in the office of the Building Inspector a current certificate of
insurance in form satisfactory to the Building Inspector evidencing
that the plumber is carrying in full force and effect a contractor's
protective liability policy of insurance or such other insurance as
will provide that an insurance company licensed to do business
within the State of New York will pay on behalf of the plumber all
sums which the plumber shall become legally obligated to pay as
damages to persons or property because of any act or omission of
the plumber, or any other person for whose acts or omissions the
plumber is legally responsible arising out of performance of
plumbing services for others by the plumber. Said insurance policy
shall be in the minimum amount of $20,000 to cover any and all
claims arising or resulting from any one service performed by the
plumber.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 221-7 PLUMBING § 221-8
221:261
§ 221-9. Responsibilities of employing plumbers or master
plumbers; penalties for offenses.
§ 221-10. Special inspections.
§ 221-11. Cost of examination.44
(2) Any certificate of insurance or renewal thereof shall be filed
annually in the office of the Building Inspector in January of each
year, commencing on January 1 of each year.
A. All licensed master and employing plumbers shall be held responsible
for all acts of their apprentices or employees in connection with the
business for which such licenses are given. Any person violating any of
the provisions of this article may be liable to a fine not exceeding $100
for each offense, and, if the person offending shall be a licensed
plumber, may have his license suspended.
B. Any person doing plumbing work as a trade or calling for compensation
without a license or certificate of competency being issued thereto shall
be guilty of disorderly conduct. This provision does not apply to such
plumbing work as performed and inspected under State Factory Laws;
neither is it intended to apply to such persons making replacements to
parts of fixtures, such as washers, not requiring inspection, and where
no compensation is made.
A. In the event that the Village Plumbing Inspector shall be engaged in
doing the business of plumbing, and has complied with all of the
requirements of this article, any work performed by said Inspector shall
be inspected by two members designated by the Board of Examining
Plumbers.
B. A fee for such inspection shall be paid and divided equally between the
two members making inspection.
C. Fees are to be as provided in the Plumbing Code43 under the heading
"Fees for Inspection."
A. The expense of examination for license or certificate of competency
shall be and is hereby to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule,45 which shall be paid to the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson by the applicant, in advance.
B. If the application is denied for failure to pass the required test, the
applicant shall receive a refund of only an amount to be determined by
the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule on his
deposit, the balance to be retained by the Village of Hastings-on-
43.Editor's Note: See Article II, Adoption of State Code, of this chapter.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
45.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 221-8 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 221-11
221:262
§ 221-12. Exemption from examination.
§ 221-13. Special dispensation.
§ 221-14. Registration fee.
Hudson to cover expenses of the Board of Examining Plumbers, the
balance to the Village Treasury. All moneys so collected shall be paid to
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
A. A plumber holding a license or certificate of competency showing that
he has passed a test for plumbers in the State of New York may not be
required to subject himself to a test, but must present such license or
certificate to the Examining Board of Plumbers for its certification; but
the fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in
the fee schedule must be paid in any event.46
B. When no examination test is held, no compensation will be paid to the
Examining Board, but the entire fee shall be paid to the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
A. Plumbers who have filed their bond with the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson, and whose name appears on the list on file in said Village
Clerk's office as of the date of May 5, 1936, may be extended the
privilege of presenting themselves to the Examining Board of Plumbers
for examination and test without payment of the fee to be determined
by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule,47
provided that he has signed, in writing, within 30 days of notice, his
willingness to present himself for examination and test on a date set by
the Examining Board of Plumbers.48
B. Failure to avail himself of this opportunity will disqualify him from this
exemption.
C. When no registration fee is paid as covered by the preceding section, no
compensation will be paid to the Examining Board of Plumbers.
A. The license fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and
set in the fee schedule need only be paid once during the existence of
the business of the individual actively engaged in the business, but, in
addition thereto, a surety bond, plus a fee for the filing of the bond, in
an amount to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set
in the fee schedule shall be filed and paid each year to the Village Clerk
of Hastings-on-Hudson, after recommendation from the Board of
Examining Plumbers to the Board of Trustees that a license or
certificate of competency be issued, and the surety bond being
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
47.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 221-11 PLUMBING § 221-14
221:263
satisfactory to and approved by the Board of Trustees of Hastings-on-
Hudson.49
B. No license or certificate of competency, except as hereinbefore
provided, shall be issued until:
(1) Payment of a fee to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule.50
(2) Passing an examination by the Board of Examining Plumbers.
(3) Furnishing of a bond for one year in an amount to be determined by
the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule, and a
certificate of insurance for $20,000.51
(4) Payment of a fee to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule52 for filing of the bond.
[Amended 4-17-197253]
C. All bonds and certificates of insurance shall be for one year, beginning
on the first day of January and expiring on the 31st day of December of
the current year.
D. Should a plumber fail to file a bond and certificate of insurance on the
first day of January, but elects to do so during the current year, the term
of the bond shall be for the remainder of that year.
E. For failure to file a bond and certificate of insurance during any one
year or longer period, the applicant's license or certificate of
competency will be voided until such time as the applicant requests, in
writing, accompanied by the required fee to be determined by the
Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule, to reinstate his
plumber's license within the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.54
F. Applicants having complied with the foregoing requirements and
licenses or certificates issued must comply with all rules and
regulations prescribed in the Plumbing Code.55
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
52.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
55.Editor's Note: See Article II, Adoption of State Code, of this chapter.
§ 221-14 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 221-14
221:264
ARTICLE II
Adoption of State Code
[A resolution accepting the State Building Construction Code and
making it applicable to the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson was
adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson 8-11-1953. The State Building Construction Code
applicable to plumbing became effective in the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson upon its promulgation 2-15-1958.]
PLUMBING § 221-14
221:265
Chapter 223
PROFESSIONAL FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 22.
Planning Board — See Ch. 45.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 76.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 131.
Signs — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 223-1. Reference of applications to professionals. [Amended
7-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
The Board of Trustees, the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals,
or the Village Manager, in the review of any application, may refer such
application to such engineering, planning, legal, technical, environmental,
or other professionals as the referring board or official deems reasonably
necessary to enable it to review the application as required by law.
§ 223-2. Escrow account; payment of fees.
A. At the time of submission of any application, or during the review
process, the reviewing board or official may require the establishment
of an escrow account from which withdrawals shall be made to
reimburse the Village for the costs of professional review services.
[Amended 7-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
B. The sum deposited shall be held by the Treasurer in a separate account
for the benefit of the applicant and will be disbursed by the Treasurer
for payment of professional fees in accordance with the usual
requirements of the Village for the payment of bills.
C. The Board of Trustees, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, or
Village Manager shall not consider or consider further any application
for which a deposit is required under this chapter until the Treasurer
has certified that the deposit has been made. [Amended 7-24-2007 by
L.L. No. 2-2007]
D. If such account is not replenished within 30 days after the applicant is
notified, in writing, of the requirement for such additional deposit, the
reviewing board or official may suspend its review of the application.
[Amended 7-24-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
E. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless
all professional review fees required by this chapter have been
reimbursed to the Village.
F. After all pertinent charges have been paid, the Village shall refund to
the applicant any funds remaining on deposit.
§ 221-14 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-3
221:266
§ 223-3. When effective; applicability.
Chapter 224
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 106. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 252.
§ 224-1. Purpose; definitions.
§ 224-2. Exterior maintenance.
A. This chapter shall become effective upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
B. This chapter shall be applicable to applications pending at the time it
becomes effective, unless the reviewing Board shall determine that its
application would be impracticable or unjust in the particular
circumstances. Where this chapter shall be applicable to a pending
application, it shall require an applicant to pay for fees only for services
rendered after it shall have become effective.
A. Multifamily premises, commercial premises and single-family
residences shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter so as to establish reasonable safeguards for the safety, health
and welfare of the occupants and users thereof and of the general
public.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — A building, structure or land used for any
purpose other than for single-family or multifamily purposes, including
premises used for retail purposes, business purposes or industrial
purposes.
MULTIFAMILY PREMISES — Any building which is used as a home
or residence, other than a single-family residence, together with any
garage or other accessory buildings and the lot upon which such
building or buildings are constructed.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE — A building which is occupied
exclusively as the home or residence of a single family, together with
any garage or other accessory building and the lot upon which such
building or buildings are constructed.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be drained to prevent damage to
buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant water.
Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers or other
§ 223-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-2
224:267
§ 224-3. Buildings and structures.
The owner shall keep all and every part of the building and accessory
structures in attractive condition and good repair, including but not limited
to the following:
satisfactory drainage systems shall be provided and utilized. In no
case shall the water from any rain leader be allowed to flow over the
sidewalk or adjoining property.
B. Fences and retaining walls shall be maintained in a safe condition.
C. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, steps,
walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall be
maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather
conditions. Within 12 hours after the cessation of snowfall, snow shall
be plowed or shoveled from all steps, walks, driveways and parking
areas used or intended to be used by tenants, occupants, customers,
invitees or other members of the public.
D. No snow removed from driveways, walks or other areas shall be
deposited upon the public streets or highways so as to interfere with
the use of such streets or highways or with the use of any other
premises.
E. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, all
driveways and parking spaces provided shall be kept in good repair, and
such driveways and parking spaces shall be regularly cleaned to avoid
accumulation of dirt, paper and other debris.
F. Heavy undergrowth and accumulation of plant growth which are
unsightly, noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated or
removed. Hedges and shrubs shall be kept pruned or trimmed. Grass
shall not be permitted to exceed six inches.
G. The owner shall keep all and every part of the premises which he owns
and the steps, walks, driveways and parking areas located in the front,
rear or side of said premises, from the building line to the nearest
public street line, in a clean, sanitary and safe condition and free from
litter, debris, paper, dirt, garbage and junk and, except for public
improvements, in good repair.
H. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, all areas
within 20 feet of a public highway shall either be used as driveways and
parking areas, which areas shall be in compliance with Subsection E of
this section, or shall be planted with grass, shrubbery, flowers, trees or
other suitable plantings so that they will not be unsightly in
appearance.
I. Dead or incurably diseased trees shall be taken down, and the diseased
portion thereof removed and destroyed. Trees shall be kept pruned, and
dead wood shall be removed.
§ 224-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 224-3
224:268
§ 224-4. Control of infestation.
§ 224-5. Garbage and refuse.
§ 224-6. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
A. Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
B. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, interior
floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition.
A. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, grounds,
buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insects, vermin and
rodents.
B. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, where
the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows and other
openings in basements and cellars shall be screened with wire mesh or
other suitable material.
C. From May 1 to October 1, entrances to multifamily premises shall be
provided with self-closing-type devices or screens. Windows and other
openings in such premises used for ventilation shall be screened.
A. Sanitary methods and facilities shall be used for the collection, storage
and handling and disposal of garbage, refuse and other debris.
B. Garbage, refuse and other debris shall not be permitted to accumulate
on any single-family, multifamily or commercial premises.
A. Owners of premises and other persons, as defined in § 224-8B, shall be
responsible for compliance with this chapter.
B. In addition, tenants and occupants of multifamily and commercial
premises shall be responsible for compliance with respect to the
following:
(1) Maintaining all and every part of the commercial premises which
they rent, occupy or control and the steps, walks, driveways and
parking areas located in the front, rear or side of said premises,
from the building line to the nearest public street curbline, in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition and free from litter, debris,
paper, dirt, garbage and junk.
(2) Maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition all plumbing, cooking
and refrigeration fixtures and appliances as well as other building
equipment and storage facilities in that part of the premises which
they occupy or control.
§ 224-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-6
224:269
§ 224-7. Enforcement.
§ 224-8. Penalties for offenses.
§ 224-9. Notice of violation; contents; hearing; appeal.
(3) Keeping exits from that portion of the premises which they occupy
clear and free from obstructions.
(4) Disposing in a clean and sanitary manner of all garbage, refuse and
debris in the provided facilities.
(5) Exterminating insects, rodents or other pests within that part of the
premises which they occupy.
A. The Building Inspector and other duly appointed law enforcement
officers of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson shall be charged with the
duty of administering and enforcing this chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to issue a notice of
violation or to order, in writing, the correction of all conditions found to
exist in or on any premises which violate the provisions of this chapter.
A. Any person, upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, shall be fined
a sum of money of not less than $100 nor more than $200 for the first
offense and not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for the second or
any subsequent offense within a twelve-month period. In addition, such
person shall be subject to an injunction prohibiting and otherwise
preventing any further violations.
B. The term "person" shall include the owner, tenant, occupant,
mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, sublessee, agent or any other person, firm or
corporation directly or indirectly in control of any premises, building or
part thereof.
A. A notice of violation issued by the Building Inspector relative to a
premises shall be served either personally upon the person or by
posting the violation notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises
affected. If a notice of violation is served by posting it upon the
premises, a copy thereof shall be mailed to the person to whom it is
directed.
B. A notice of violation shall state that unless, within 10 days from service
of the notice, a written request is made for a hearing before the
Building Inspector, such notice shall, at the expiration of such ten-day
period, be deemed an order to cease and desist from and to abate the
described violation; such notice shall prescribe a reasonable time
within which such person shall be required to cease and desist from and
abate such violation. The notice may also contain an outline of remedial
action which, if taken, will effect compliance with this chapter.
§ 224-6 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 224-9
224:270
§ 224-10. Emergencies.
Whenever the Building Inspector or enforcement official finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate attention to protect the public
health or safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting
the existence of such emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, such order shall take effect immediately. Any
person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately
but, upon petition to the Building Inspector or the local Justice Court, shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, the Building
Inspector or court shall continue such order in effect or shall modify or
withdraw it.
§ 224-11. Action upon noncompliance.
C. If a hearing is requested, it shall be commenced not later than 10 days
after the request is made, provided that for good cause the Building
Inspector may postpone such hearing for a reasonable time. If, after the
hearing, the enforcement officer finds that no violation exists or that
unusual, extraordinary or undue hardship shall occur as a result of the
physical dimension and proportion of the property, he shall withdraw
the notice. If he finds that a violation does exist, he shall forthwith issue
an order requiring the abatement of the same within a prescribed
reasonable time. The proceedings at such hearing, which shall be
informal in all respects, shall be summarized in a report reduced to
writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
Building Inspector.
D. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Building Inspector may
within 10 days of the decision of the Building Inspector appeal said
decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson by filing the appropriate form.
E. The provisions of §§ 224-7B and 224-9A notwithstanding, it shall not be
necessary for the Building Inspector to issue a notice of violation or to
order, in writing, the correction of a condition in the instance of a
second or any subsequent offense within a twelve-month period, and in
the case of a second or subsequent offense, the person in violation may
immediately be served with an appearance ticket or summons.
A. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, person or agent so
notified to properly comply with this chapter within 20 days after the
service of notice as provided herein, the Building Inspector is hereby
authorized and empowered to pay for the correction of such violation,
subject to the approval of the Village Manager of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
B. When the village has effected the correction of the violation or has paid
for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus the accrued legal rate of
interest per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not
§ 224-9 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 224-11
224:271
Chapter 234
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills and posters — See Ch. 162.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 252.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to such owner by the
village, and such charge shall become due and payable by said owner
or person at the time of the payment of such bill.
C. Where the full amount due the village is not paid by such owner within
20 days after the correction of such violation as provided in Subsections
A and B above, then, and in that case, the Building Inspector shall cause
to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk a sworn statement showing
the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was
completed and the location of the property by section, lot and block on
which said work was done and the name of the reputed owner thereof.
The filing of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege
on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount
due in principal and interest, plus cost of court, if any, for collection,
until final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and,
further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at the legal rate of
interest in the event that the same is not paid in full on or before the
date the tax bill upon which such charge appears becomes delinquent.
Sworn statements filed in accordance with the provisions hereof shall
be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied
with and the work has been properly and successfully done and shall be
full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement,
plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated and
described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as
provided by law.
§ 224-11 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 224-11
224:272
ARTICLE I
Signs Projecting Over Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 12-16-1942]
§ 234-1. Permitted signs. [Amended 11-9-1948; 11-16-2010 by L.L.
No. 9-2010]
A. Flat signs, lights or transparencies parallel to the front of the building
to which they are attached, and fastened thereto for their entire length,
may be erected, provided that no such sign, light or transparency shall
be more than 30 inches in height or project more than nine inches over
the sidewalk.
B. Signs perpendicular to the front of the building to which they are
attached may be erected, provided that every such sign must not
project more than 4 1/2 feet from the building wall and must be at its
lowermost part not less than nine feet above the ground.
C. No sign, light or transparency permitted by Subsections A and B shall
be at any point higher than the building to which it is attached, nor shall
any extension or additional sign or light of any kind be hung from or
attached to any such permitted sign, light or transparency.
D. Theater signs and fixed canopies or marquees shall not be governed by
the provisions of the preceding subsection but shall comply with all the
following requirements:
(1) A fixed canopy or marquee may be erected over the main entrance
to a theater, provided:
(a) That no part thereof shall be less than nine feet above the
sidewalk at any point thereof.
(b) That no part thereof shall be nearer than two feet to the
perpendicular projection of the street curb.
(c) That such canopy or marquee shall not be greater in length
along the front of the building of which it is a part than 60% of
the total width of the building at the building line.
(d) That the vertical height thereof shall at no place exceed three
feet.
(2) A vertical sign bearing only the name of the theater may be erected
above such canopy or marquee; provided, however, that such sign
shall not:
(a) Exceed two feet in thickness at any point.
(b) Extend upward above the parapet of the front wall in excess of
two feet.
§ 234-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 234-1
224:273
§ 234-2. Compliance required.
The erection, after the adoption of this article, of any sign, light or
transparency of any kind projecting over a sidewalk within the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson, New York, except those referred to in § 234-1 hereof,
is prohibited.
§ 234-3. Construction specifications. [Amended 11-9-1948]
All permitted illuminated signs, including the uprights, supports and braces
for the same, shall be constructed of metal or other noncombustible
material, and shall be properly and firmly attached to the building. Red,
green and flash-type lights are prohibited. No permitted sign shall be
erected or maintained so as to obstruct any window or fire escape.
§ 234-4. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect or place in position any signs
or lights except in accordance with the provisions of this article. A permit
signed by the Building Inspector shall be obtained before any sign, light or
transparency is erected.
§ 234-5. Application for permit; bond.
§ 234-6. Fee for permit. [Amended 4-17-1972]
(c) Extend outward from the front building line in excess of two
feet.
A. Every application for a permit shall be in writing and signed by the
owner or lessee of the building to which it is proposed to attach such
sign or lights, and shall be accompanied by a statement of the
specifications for such sign or lights and a plan of the same showing the
method of attachment to the building, which statement and plan shall
be in duplicate. The permit shall be issued to the owner or lessee of the
building.
B. The owner or lessee of every existing sign that projects over a street or
sidewalk of the village, and every applicant for a permit for a new sign,
shall furnish a public liability bond issued by an approved surety
company in an amount to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule.56 The term of the bond shall be
for the calendar year and it shall be renewed annually not later than the
first day of January so long as the sign remains in place. [Amended
9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
A. The fee for a permit to erect a sign, light or transparency shall be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
56.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 234-1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 234-6
224:274
§ 234-7. Proximity of lighted signs to dwellings.
No permit shall be issued for a sign with lights, if the same is intended to
be attached to a building which adjoins a building occupied exclusively as
a private dwelling, until the written consent of the owner of such dwelling
shall be obtained and filed with the application for a permit.
§ 234-8. Penalties for offenses.
Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding $10 for each offense. Each
day a violation continues to exist shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. The Village Manager shall have the right to modify or amend such fee,
from time to time, and to establish the administrative procedure
regarding the application and payment for such permit.
§ 234-6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 234-8
224:275

ARTICLE II
Signs Projecting from Banks
[Adopted 4-29-1958]
§ 234-9. Applicability; construction; permit required.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance, only the following
provisions shall apply to the erection, alteration and maintenance of signs
projecting from the wall of a building occupied by a federal or statechartered
bank or savings and loan association.
§ 234-10. Application for permit; fees; issuance.
A. Every such sign must not project more than 4 1/2 feet from the building
wall and it must be at its lowermost part not less than nine feet above
the ground.
B. No such sign may be erected except pursuant to a permit obtained from
the Building Inspector as provided in this article.
A. Application for an erection permit must be made in writing upon forms
provided by the Building Inspector and must contain or have attached
thereto the following matter provided at the expense of applicant:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, who
shall be the one for whose benefit the sign is being erected.
(2) The address of the building from which the sign will project.
(3) Written consent of the building owner to erection of the sign.
(4) The name of the person, firm, association or corporation erecting
the sign.
(5) Two blueprint or ink drawings of the plans and specifications and
method of construction and attachment to the building.
(6) Two copies of stress sheets and calculations prepared by a licensed
professional engineer, giving dead-load and wind-pressure
specifications for the sign.
(7) A certification by a professional engineer licensed by the State of
New York that the sign, including the uprights, supports and braces
for the same, has been designed, constructed and will be erected
under his supervision to resist wind, seismic and fire hazards.
(8) A certification by an insurance company authorized to do business
in the State of New York that it has issued a liability insurance
policy which agrees to indemnify, save and keep harmless the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and/or any of its employees in the
amount of $250,000, from any and all costs, damages or expenses
of any kind whatsoever which may be suffered by said village and/
or any of its employees by reason of the granting of this permit or
§ 234-9 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 234-10
224:277
§ 234-11. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
by reason of the negligence of any person, firm, association or
corporation in constructing, erecting, altering or maintaining such
sign. Such policy must also insure the permittee in the amount of
$250,000 against any legal liability of the permittee arising from
the construction, erection, alteration or maintenance of such sign.
The certification shall also contain a promise by the insurance
company to notify the village of the termination, cancellation or
change in any of the provisions of the policy. This permit shall be
valid only so long as the liability insurance policy described herein
is in effect.
B. Fees, issuance and conditions of permit.
(1) The fee for the erection permit shall be determined by the Village
Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.57 Thereafter, on the
anniversary date of the issuance of said permit, an annual fee to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule shall be payable to the Village Manager, who shall issue a
receipt for the same. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
(2) No such sign may be altered except pursuant to a permit obtained
from the Building Inspector. Application forms for such a permit
may be obtained from him. An alteration application fee to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule shall be paid. Any information required in § 234-9 or
subdivisions thereof may also be required in connection with the
application provided for herein. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L.
No. 4-1999]
(3) It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, upon the filing of an
application for an erection or alteration permit, to examine the
plans, specifications and other data and the premises upon which it
is proposed to erect or alter the sign. If he finds that the proposed
sign complies with this article and all applicable rules and
regulations, he shall issue the permit. This permit shall become null
and void unless the erection or alteration of the sign is completed
within six months after date of issuance.
(4) All fees are paid for the purpose of compensating the village for the
expense of processing the application form and inspections of
signs, and they may not be returned.
A. The Building Inspector shall inspect such signs annually and at such
other times as he deems necessary. Access to any premises necessary to
make such an inspection shall be afforded at reasonable hours.
57.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 234-10 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 234-11
224:278
B. If the Building Inspector shall find that any such sign is unsafe or
insecure or has been constructed, erected, altered or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this article or any applicable rules or
regulations, he shall give written notice to the offender. If the latter fails
to remove, repair or alter the sign or otherwise comply with this written
notice within 10 days after it is given, such sign may be removed or
altered to comply by the Building Inspector at the expense of the
offender or owner of the sign. The Building Inspector may remove any
sign summarily and without notice at the expense of the sign owner
where it is an immediate peril to persons or property.
C. A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$100. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 234-11 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 234-11
224:279
Chapter 241
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Notification of defects — See Ch. 196.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 252.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 282.
§ 241-1. Duty of owner.
It shall be the duty of the owner of every parcel of real property abutting a
public sidewalk to keep such sidewalk free and clear from snow and ice.
§ 241-2. Removal by Village.
Whenever the owner of a parcel of real property abutting a public sidewalk
fails to remove snow and ice therefrom within 12 hours following the end of
a snowfall or within four hours after written notice by the Superintendent
of Public Works to the owner to remove same, the Superintendent of Public
Works shall have the right to remove such snow and ice from such sidewalk,
and the expenses incurred by the Village for labor, equipment and materials
shall be billed to the owner. If such bill is not paid within 30 days from
issuance, the expense incurred by the Village shall be assessed against
the property and become a lien thereon collected in the same manner as
delinquent Village taxes.
§ 241-3. Severe icing.
In the event that snow and ice on any public sidewalk shall be frozen so hard
that they cannot be removed without injury to such sidewalk, the owner of
such property abutting such sidewalk shall strew the same with salt, sand,
sawdust or other suitable material and in such a manner as will render
such sidewalk safe for pedestrian traffic. As soon as practical thereafter the
owner shall clear such sidewalk of snow, ice and other materials strewn
thereon.
§ 241-4. Snow, ice and water falling from buildings.
The owner of any building or other structure abutting a public sidewalk
shall not cause, allow or permit snow, ice or water to fall therefrom onto
said public sidewalk.
§ 241-5. Depositing snow and ice on streets prohibited.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause, deposit, throw, place, pile or
plow any snow or ice onto any public street, avenue or roadway within
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 234-11 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 241-5
224:280
§ 241-6. Snow emergency. [Amended 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 18-2008;
2-5-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
A snow emergency may be designated by the Mayor or, in his absence, the
Acting Mayor or Village Manager or, in the absence of any of them, by the
Chief of Police. The Village shall notify the public of such snow emergency
designation by the use of the Village notification system and other news
media.
§ 241-7. Snow emergency route. [Amended 2-5-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
Whenever a snow emergency has been designated, no vehicle may be
operated on any of the streets listed below unless such vehicle is four-wheel
or all-wheel drive or properly equipped with snow tires, all-weather tires, or
chains:
B. No person, firm or corporation shall cause, deposit, throw, place, pile or
plow any snow or ice onto any parcel of land within six feet of any
street, avenue or roadway in such a manner as to cause the height of
the snow and ice so piled, gathered or plowed to exceed three feet six
inches in height above the existing natural grade of such parcel of land.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall cover any portion of any fire
hydrant with snow or ice.
D. The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson shall have the right to remove any snow or ice deposited,
thrown, placed, piled or plowed in violation of this section, and the
costs of the labor, equipment and materials used therefor shall be
charged to and paid by the violator. If such bill is not paid within 30
days from issuance, in the case of a property owner, the expenses
incurred by the Village shall be assessed against the property and shall
become a lien thereon collected in the same manner as delinquent
Village taxes.
A. High Street.
B. Main Street.
C. Maple Avenue.
D. Mt. Hope Boulevard.
E. North Street.
F. Pinecrest Drive.
G. Southside Avenue.
H. Spring Street.
I. Tompkins Avenue.
§ 241-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 241-7
224:281
§ 241-8. Snow emergency parking restrictions. [Amended 4-16-2002
by L.L. No. 2-2002; 2-5-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 241-9. Responsibility for notices; exemptions from provisions.
J. Villard Avenue.
K. Washington Avenue.
A. Whenever a snow emergency has been designated, parking shall be
prohibited on certain designated streets. Signs reading "No Parking
During Snow Emergency" shall be required to be posted along the
below routes every 500 feet:
Name of Street Side
Circle Drive Left
Euclid Avenue East
Mt. Hope Boulevard South
Olinda Avenue North
Rosedale Avenue West, between Hillside Avenue
and Mt. Hope Boulevard
Scenic Drive East
Villard Avenue South
Washington Avenue South
B. Upon declaration of a snow emergency, parking regulations in the
following parking lots shall be temporarily suspended and vehicles shall
be allowed to park therein free of charge. Owners of such motor
vehicles shall remove the same from the municipal parking lots listed
below within 12 hours following the end of a snowfall.
(1) Zinsser Plaza Parking Lot.
(2) Southside Plaza Parking Lot (ConEdison Lot).
(3) Warburton Avenue Parking Lot.
(4) Steinschneider Plaza Parking Lot.
(5) Boulanger Plaza Parking Lot.
C. The Chief of Police is authorized to issue further directives as he deems
necessary for public safety.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, superintendents, janitors or caretakers
of buildings shall be deemed the authorized agents of the owners of
such buildings for the purposes of receiving written notices provided
for herein.
§ 241-7 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 241-9
224:282
§ 241-10. Towing, removal and storage of vehicles.
In addition to any other remedies or penalties, the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson shall have the right to tow, remove and store, at the expense of the
owner, any vehicles in violation of any section of this chapter.
§ 241-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-5-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
Chapter 244
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 252.
B. Municipal corporations are excluded from the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 241-9 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 241-11
224:283

ARTICLE I
Use of Materials as Landfill
[Adopted 4-4-1933]
§ 244-1. Permit required.
No animal or vegetable substances and no dirt gathered in cleaning yards,
buildings or docks, or waste of mills or factories, or any old building
material, abandoned automobiles or any other materials which are offensive
or tend, by decay, to become putrid or render the atmosphere impure or
unwholesome, shall be deposited or used to fill up or raise the surface level
of any lot or grounds of property within the limits of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson unless pursuant to a special permit from the Board of Trustees
of said Village.
§ 244-2. Storage or deposit of offensive matter and refuse.
No person shall permit or have any offensive substance, water or
abandoned automobiles or any other kind of old refuse on his premises
to the prejudice of life or health, or throw, deposit or allow to be thrown
or deposited on any lot or premises within the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson, or on any street or public place in said Village, any offensive matter
whatsoever, or any garbage, refuse, rubbish, abandoned automobiles or old
building materials or any other refuse or matter whatsoever.
§ 244-3. Penalties for offenses.
Every person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be punishable upon conviction.
§ 244-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-3
224:285

ARTICLE II
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 8-16-1950]
§ 244-4. Definitions. [Amended 5-3-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
For the purposes of this article, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
CURBSIDE PICKUP — The act of refuse removal from a person's property
by the Department of Public Works or other refuse carter.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS (or DPW) — The Department of Public
Works of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
PERSON — An individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization, or other legal entity of any kind.
REFUSE — Solid waste, trash, litter or any item discarded or rejected by
any person in the Village. Categories of refuse are defined as follows:
BULK REFUSE — Refuse consisting of large household items, such
as furniture, mattresses and box springs, stoves, washers, dryers and
other large appliances, and large electronic items.
A.
COMPOSTABLE REFUSE — Refuse consisting of yard waste, household
food scraps, and ash from household fireplaces and wood stoves.
B.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION REFUSE — Refuse consisting
of lumber, concrete, pipe, brick, masonry, sheetrock, and other
construction materials from buildings and other structures.
C.
GARBAGE REFUSE — Nonhazardous waste materials common to
ordinary household, institutional or business use not listed as
recyclable, bulk, or construction and demolition refuse.
D.
HAZARDOUS REFUSE — All materials defined as such by the
Westchester County Department of Environmental Facilities (DEF).
E.
RECYCLABLE REFUSE — All materials defined as such by the
Westchester County Department of Environmental Facilities (DEF) plus
textile recyclables.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLES — All materials defined as such
by the Westchester County Department of Environmental Facilities
(DEF).
(1)
PAPER RECYCLABLES — All materials defined as such by the
Westchester County Department of Environmental Facilities (DEF).
(2)
TEXTILE RECYCLABLES — Cloth, clothing, shoes, belts, hats,
gloves, handbags, cloth shopping bags, drapes, curtains, towels,
sheets, pillowcases, blankets, but not mattresses or pillows. Textile
recyclables may be used, worn, torn, stained, etc.
(3)
F.
§ 244-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-4
224:287
SUPERINTENDENT — Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
VILLAGE — Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
VILLAGE MANAGER — Village Manager of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
§ 244-5. Separation, storage, and collection. [Amended 10-10-1995
by L.L No. 8-1995; 5-3-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
A. Every generator of refuse to be collected within the Village by the
Department of Public Works or any other agency shall be required to
separate the refuse into nonrecyclable, recyclable, and hazardous
components and to further separate recyclable materials into
categories for collection as designated by the regulations of the
Superintendent.
B. Commingled recyclables and paper recyclables are eligible for curbside
pickup.
C. Storage and collection of paper and commingled recyclables.
(1) Paper recyclables shall be bundled with string or twine or placed in
paper bags or an appropriate container but not placed in a plastic
bag. Paper recyclables shall not be placed in the same container
with commingled recyclables. Paper items shall be kept dry until
pickup.
(2) Commingled recyclables (i.e., glass, plastic, and metal) shall be
clean and free from food waste and placed loose in an appropriate
container, not a plastic bag. Containers need not have lids, but shall
have drainage so as not to collect water. Containers shall not weigh
more than 50 pounds when filled.
(3) For single-family and two-family residences, recycling refuse
containers shall be in a single location at the curb. If a person has
difficulty in adhering to this provision either because of human
physical difficulty or property difficulty, provisions will be made on
a case-by-case basis by the Village Manager or the Superintendent.
(4) For multifamily residences, the owner or agent having
management or control of the building shall designate a common
and accessible location or locations within the grounds of the
residence where recyclable refuse is to be accumulated prior to
collection. Such containers shall be placed in a readily accessible
location for collection by the Department of Public Works. All walks
and entrances to the location of refuse storage must be kept clear
of ice, snow and other obstructions.
(5) For nonresidential establishments, recyclable refuse containers
shall be placed in a readily accessible location for collection by the
Department of Public Works. All walks and entrances to the
§ 244-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 244-5
224:288
location of recyclable refuse storage must be kept clear of ice, snow
and other obstructions
(6) Recyclable refuse containers shall be put at the curb no earlier
than 5:00 p.m. the night prior to scheduled pickup. Recyclable
refuse containers for nonresidential properties shall be removed
from the curb no later than four hours after the garbage has been
picked up.
D. Disposal of recyclables other than paper and commingled recyclables.
(1) Textiles shall be placed in the blue bins at the Department of Public
Works yard or any other drop for the purpose of receiving textile
refuse.
(2) Small household electronics shall be disposed of according to
regulations of the Westchester County Department of
Environmental Facilities (DEF).
E. Storage and collection of garbage refuse.
(1) All containers for the storage of garbage refuse shall be solid and
watertight and have a removable (nonhinged), tight-fitting lid.
Containers shall be free from handling hazards and made of such
quality as to prevent collapsing during handling. Containers shall
have a maximum capacity of 50 gallons and shall not weigh more
than 50 pounds when filled. If the container is lined with a plastic
bag, the bag shall be tied or twist-tied closed.
(2) If garbage refuse is not stored in a container, it shall be contained
in a plastic bag durable enough to withstand standard use and be
tied or twist-tied closed and weigh no more than 50 pounds.
(3) Any garbage refuse that cannot be placed in containers or bags
shall be securely bundled and tied and left at the curb for
collection. The weight of each bundle shall not exceed 50 pounds
and shall be limited to four feet in length and 18 inches in height,
width or diameter.
(4) All containers shall be maintained in a sound and sanitary
condition.
(5) For single-family and two-family residences, garbage refuse
containers shall be placed in a single location, either at the curb or
at a location chosen by the resident. If a person has difficulty in
adhering to this provision either by human physical difficulty or
property difficulty, provisions will be made on a case-by-case basis
by the Village Manager or Superintendent.
(6) For multifamily residences, the owner or agent having
management or control of the building shall designate a common
and accessible location or locations within the grounds of the
residence where garbage refuse is to be accumulated prior to
§ 244-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-5
224:289
collection. Such containers shall be placed in a readily accessible
location for collection by the Department of Public Works. All walks
and entrances to the location of refuse storage must be kept clear
of ice, snow and other obstructions.
(7) For nonresidential establishments, garbage refuse containers shall
be placed in a readily accessible location for collection by the
Department of Public Works. All walks and entrances to the
location of refuse storage must be kept clear of ice, snow and other
obstructions.
(8) Garbage refuse containers shall be put at the curb no earlier than
5:00 p.m. the night prior to scheduled pickup. Garbage refuse
containers for nonresidential properties shall be removed from the
curb no later than four hours after the garbage has been picked up.
(9) If a dumpster is used, it shall be of sufficient strength for the
purpose of holding the material intended to be disposed of.
Dumpsters shall be either covered or contained in a covered
structure so as not to collect precipitation
F. Residential compostable refuse.
(1) Residential yard waste, including but not limited to leaves, grass
and branches generated on site, may be placed at the curb for
pickup according to the Village's pickup schedule.
(2) Yard waste shall be placed in biodegradable bags or containers not
to exceed 50 pounds in weight.
(3) Tree trimmings and brush shall be tied in bundles not over three
feet in length, weighing not more than 50 pounds.
(4) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
person from utilizing self-generated vegetative yard waste and selfgenerated
vegetative household waste for compost, mulch or other
agricultural, horticultural, silvicultural, gardening or landscaping
purposes. Any such waste shall be composted or used in a manner
not to endanger public health, safety and welfare.
G. Residential bulk refuse. Residents shall contact the Department of
Public Works for bulk refuse pickup. Items for bulk pickup shall be put
at the curb no earlier than 5:00 p.m. the night prior to scheduled
pickup. If a person has difficulty in placing the bulk refuse at the curb,
either because of physical difficulty or property difficulty, provisions
will be made on a case-by-case basis by the Village Manager or
Superintendent.
H. Hazardous waste. All hazardous waste shall be disposed of according to
Westchester County regulations.
§ 244-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 244-5
224:290
§ 244-6. Village-owned litter baskets. [Amended 5-3-2011 by L.L.
No. 4-2011]
§ 244-7. Fees for collection and disposal. [Amended 4-3-1971;
2-5-1980 by L.L. No. 1-1980; 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999; 5-3-2011
by L.L. No. 4-2011]
§ 244-8. Penalties for offenses; enforcement. [Amended 5-3-2011 by
L.L. No. 4-2011]
I. Construction and demolition refuse. Residents and nonresidential
establishments must arrange for the pickup of construction and
demolition refuse with a certified waste company or recycler.
J. No animal substances and no dirt gathered from docks, or waste of
mills or factories, or recyclable, bulk, hazardous, construction or
demolition refuse, or any other materials which endanger public health,
safety and welfare shall be deposited or used to fill up or raise the
surface level of any lot or grounds of property within the limits of the
Village.
A. Village-owned litter baskets shall not be used for the disposal of refuse
generated by households, institutions or commercial establishments.
B. If a Village-owned litter basket or collection site consists of one or more
receptacles designated for the separate collection for recyclable and
nonrecyclable materials, users shall be required to separate their litter
into the designated categories and to place it in the proper receptacle.
A. The fee schedule for the collection and disposal of commercial refuse
and incinerated residue is to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule.58
B. The Superintendent of Public Works is hereby authorized to extend and
determine the fees based on the schedule in Subsection A, and the
Village Clerk shall bill quarterly each of the commercial accounts in the
Village.
A. The Superintendent of Public Works issues warnings requiring
compliance with the foregoing provisions. Failure to comply with or to
perform an act required by any such warning shall constitute a violation
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $250 per
offense.
B. The Village Manager, Superintendent of Public Works, or a designated
agent shall have the authority to conduct inspections of receptacles
containing any refuse in order to detect violations of this article.
58.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 244-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-8
224:291
§ 244-9. Disposal of yard waste. [Added 12-15-2009 by L.L. No.
4-200959]
Yard waste, including leaves, grass, branches and similar materials, may not
be disposed of at the Department of Public Works (DPW) facility except as
follows:
C. The Village may refuse to accept garbage refuse containing recyclables
or other nongarbage refuse at any refuse disposal facility owned or
operated by the Village.
A. Yard waste may be deposited only at the area designated by the
Department of Public Works for such waste and only at the times
designated by the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Only yard waste produced in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson may be
deposited at the DPW facility.
C. The only persons who may deposit yard waste at the DPW facility are:
(1) Individual owners or tenants of property within the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson who are depositing yard waste from only their
own property.
(2) Landscaping or home improvement contractors or companies,
subject to the following:
(a) They must have a home improvement license issued by
Westchester County.
(b) They must obtain a yard waste permit annually from the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson. The fee for the yard waste permit shall
be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the
fee schedule.60
(c) They must pay a fee for each truckload of yard waste deposited
in an amount to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule.
D. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who violates any provision
of this section shall, upon conviction of violation, be fined not more than
$500 per offense. In addition, the yard waste permit may be revoked at
the discretion of the Village.
59.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former §§ 244-9 through 244-13 as
§§ 244-10 through 244-14, respectively.
60.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 244-8 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 244-9
224:292
ARTICLE III
Littering
[Adopted 6-20-1966]
§ 244-10. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes an individual, individuals, a firm, partnership or
corporation.
§ 244-11. Garbage, rubbish and other wastes. [Amended 12-3-1985
by L.L. No. 5-1985]
No person shall place, leave or deposit or cause to be placed, left or
deposited any dirt, filth, waste, garbage or rubbish in or upon any street,
highway, sidewalk, public place or public lands lying within the Village.
Every person owning or occupying a place of business within the Village
shall keep the sidewalk in front of his or her business premises free of litter.
Without limitation on the foregoing, every such person shall sweep or cause
to be swept and removed any litter on the sidewalk in front of his or her
premises twice each day that his or her premises are open for business.
§ 244-12. Abandonment or discard of certain articles.
No person shall abandon or discard or cause to be abandoned or discarded
any article or thing, including but not limited to shopping carts, shopping
wagons, baskets, crates, boxes or cartons, in or upon any street, highway,
sidewalk or public place or public lands lying in the Village.
§ 244-13. Receptacles for wastes; pickups.
§ 244-14. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-3-2011 by L.L. No.
4-2011]
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or
by imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days, or both.
A. No person, being the owner or in control of a receptacle containing any
dirt, filth, waste, garbage or rubbish, shall permit the contents of such
receptacle to be blown therefrom by the wind onto or upon any street,
highway, public place or public lands lying within the Village.
B. This section shall not be construed to apply to the monthly pickups or
other pickups as set by the Village Manager from time to time;
provided, however, that such refuse shall not be placed in the required
area for pickups more than 48 hours prior to such date set.
§ 244-10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-14
224:293

ARTICLE IV
Retail Checkout Bags
[Adopted 6-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 244-15. Purpose.
Nonbiodegradable plastic bags often are discarded into the environment
and end up polluting our waterways, clogging sewers, endangering marine
life and causing unsightly litter. These bags last hundreds of years in
landfills and are a potential source of harmful chemicals when they do break
down. The intent of this article is to improve the environment in Hastingson-
Hudson by encouraging the use of reusable checkout bags and banning
the use of plastic bags for retail checkout of purchased goods.
§ 244-16. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
CHECKOUT BAG — A carry-out bag that is provided to a customer at the
point of sale. The term "checkout bag" does not include plastic produce
bags, garment bags or plastic bags measuring 28 inches by 36 inches or
larger in size.
GARMENT BAG — A large plastic bag with two openings that is used to
transport clothing from a dry cleaner.
PLASTIC PRODUCE BAG — A flexible container made of very thin plastic
material with a single opening that is used to transport produce, meats or
other items selected by customers to the point of sale.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag that should have the following
characteristics:
RETAIL SALES — The transfer to a customer of goods in exchange for
payment occurring in retail stores, sidewalk sales, farmers' markets, flea
markets and restaurants. The term "retail sales" does not include sales of
goods at yard sales, tag sales, and other sales by residents at their home.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag with handles that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse and is:
§ 244-17. Restriction.
A. Contains no old-growth fiber;
Is one-hundred-percent recyclable overall and contains a minimum of
forty-percent postconsumer recycled content; and
B.
Displays the words "Reusable" and "Recyclable" on the outside of the
bag.
C.
A. Made of cloth or other fabric; and/or
B. Made of durable plastic that is at least 2.25 mils thick.
§ 244-15 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-17
224:295
§ 244-18. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person engaged in retail sales shall provide only reusable bags and/
or recyclable paper bags as checkout bags to customers.
B. Nothing in this section shall preclude persons engaged in retail sales
from making reusable bags available for sale to customers.
A. In the event that there is noncompliance with this article, the owner of
the property or the owner's agent or the person performing such
violation shall be notified in writing with a first-time warning and shall
forthwith stop with the violating activity. Such notice shall be served
upon a person to whom it is directed either by delivering it personally to
him or her or by posting same upon a conspicuous portion of the
property and sending a copy of same by certified mail. Such notice shall
provide a period of 10 business days to cure such violation and come
into compliance with this chapter, after which a violation and summons
may be issued.
B. Any owner, representative, or business establishment which violates
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction of violation, be fined
not more than $100 for a first violation after a first-time warning and a
fine not exceeding $200 for a second or subsequent violation.
C. Any violation of this article may also be enjoined pursuant to law.
§ 244-17 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 244-18
224:296
ARTICLE V
Expanded Polystyrene Containers
[Adopted 6-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 244-19. Purpose.
Expanded polystyrene is difficult to recycle, does not decompose and makes
up a significant portion of the trash polluting local waterways. There are
also potential health risks; styrene, which is used to make polystyrene, is
listed as a possible carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on
Cancer. The intent of this article is to improve the environment in Hastingson-
Hudson, as well as the health of its residents, by banning the use of
expanded polystyrene containers.
§ 244-20. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE — Blown polystyrene and expanded and
extruded foams that are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a
styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques, including,
but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead foam),
injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blown molding (extruded
foam polystyrene).
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A premises or part of a premises
where food is provided directly to the consumer, whether such food is
provided free of charge or sold, and whether consumption occurs on or off
the premises or is provided from a pushcart, stand or vehicle. "Food service
establishment" shall include, but not be limited to, full-service restaurants,
fast-food restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, coffee shops, grocery stores,
vending trucks or carts and cafeterias.
POLYSTYRENE LOOSE-FILL PACKAGING — A void-filled packaging
product made of expanded polystyrene that is used as a packaging fill
(commonly known as "packing peanuts").
SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES — Cups, containers, lids, closures, trays,
plates, knives, spoons, stoppers, paddles, straws, place mats, napkins,
doilies, wrapping materials, toothpicks and all similar articles that are
intended by the manufacturer to be used once for eating or drinking and
generally recognized by the public as items to be discarded after one use.
STORE — A retail or wholesale establishment, other than a food service
establishment.
§ 244-21. Restrictions.
A. No food service establishment or store shall sell or provide singleservice
articles that consist of expanded polystyrene, including but not
limited to providing food in single-service articles that consist of
expanded polystyrene.
§ 244-19 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-21
224:297
§ 244-22. Penalties for offenses.
B. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Expanded polystyrene containers used for prepackaged food that
have been filled and sealed prior to receipt by the food service
establishment or store;
(2) Single-service articles consisting of expanded polystyrene sold in
grocery stores off the shelf that do not contain any food or
beverages in them; or
(3) Expanded polystyrene containers used to store raw meat, pork,
fish, seafood or poultry sold from a butcher case or similar retail
appliance.
C. No store shall sell or offer for sale polystyrene loose-fill packaging.
A. In the event that there is noncompliance with this article, the owner of
the property or the owner's agent or the person performing such
violation shall be notified in writing with a first-time warning and shall
forthwith stop with the violating activity. Such notice shall be served
upon a person to whom it is directed either by delivering it personally to
him or her or by posting same upon a conspicuous portion of the
property and sending a copy of same by certified mail. Such notice shall
provide a period of 10 business days to cure such violation and come
into compliance with this chapter, after which a violation and summons
may be issued.
B. Any owner, representative, or business establishment which violates
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction of violation, be fined
not more than $100 for a first violation after a first-time warning and a
fine not exceeding $200 for a second or subsequent violation.
C. Any violation of this article may also be enjoined pursuant to law.
§ 244-21 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 244-22
224:298
Chapter 249
STEEP SLOPES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 131.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 249-1. Purpose and intent.
A. A fundamental responsibility of the Planning Board is protection of the
people and the land within the borders of the Village. The topography of
Hastings-on-Hudson is hilly and characterized by steep slopes and
rocky outcroppings. Construction on such terrain has the inherent risk
of causing damage to the ecology.
B. In the past, the inability to build on such sites created a natural form of
protection. Recent developments in the technology of construction have
now exposed more sensitive sites to development and, consequently,
potential risk to the environment. In addition, the scarcity of buildable
land has made these sites more desirable.
C. Steep slopes are environmentally sensitive areas and a valued natural
resource. The Planning Board recognizes the need to protect these
areas from any adverse effects of disturbance in order to ensure the
public health, safety and general welfare. At the same time, the
Planning Board recognizes the need to achieve a balance between
protecting the public interest and safeguarding the rights of property
owners regarding the use of their land.
D. Steep slopes, including vegetation and rock outcroppings located on
them, are important environmental features that contribute
significantly to the visual impression one forms when traveling through
Hastings-on-Hudson. Areas that are highly visible from roadways, other
public places and adjacent and nearby properties are particularly
important in maintaining Hastings-on-Hudson's character.
Overdevelopment of or improperly managed disturbance to these areas
are detrimental to the visual character of Hastings-on-Hudson.
E. It is in the public interest to regulate, preserve, protect and conserve
steep slopes so as to maintain and protect the natural terrain and its
vegetative features, preserve wetlands, water bodies and watercourses,
prevent flooding, protect important scenic views and vistas, preserve
areas of wildlife habitat, provide safe building sites and protect the
subject property and adjoining properties by preventing erosion, creep
and sudden slope failure.
§ 244-22 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 249-1
224:299
§ 249-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SLOPE — The ratio of vertical to horizontal distance, measured in a
minimum area of 1,000 square feet.[Amended 12-20-2011 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
STEEP SLOPE(S) — Ground area(s) of at least 1,000 square feet with a
slope of 15% or more, as measured in accordance with § 249-3.
§ 249-3. Determination of steep slopes.
Slope is to be determined from on-site topographic surveys prepared with a
two-foot contour interval. The vertical rise is to be measured, on the basis
of two-foot contours, in a ten-foot horizontal length.
§ 249-4. Applicability. [Amended 12-20-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
Any construction, development, paving, regrading, or stripping of
vegetation that might affect or create a steep slope requires steep slope
approval granted in accordance with this chapter.
§ 249-5. Restrictions on steep slope disturbances.
F. The intent of this chapter is twofold: to preserve steep slopes to the
greatest extent practicable and to regulate their use by minimizing the
deleterious effects of development on slopes both to adjacent and
nearby properties.
G. The MR-C and the CC Districts are excluded from the application of
§ 249-5 because of the existing development and the desired density in
these downtown districts and other provisions in the Zoning Code to
control the height of buildings in these districts.61
A. For any lot that contains a slope in excess of 15% but not greater than
25%, not more than a total of 35% of such steep slope shall be:
(1) Developed;
(2) Paved;
(3) Regraded; or
(4) Stripped of vegetation without appropriate measures to prevent
erosion.
B. For any lot that contains a slope in excess of 25%, not more than a total
of 25% of such steep slope shall be:
(1) Developed;
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 295, Zoning.
§ 249-1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 249-5
224:300
§ 249-6. Applications involving cluster plat review.
In any application involving the review of a cluster subdivision plat,
submitted pursuant to Village Law § 7-738, the Board of Trustees or the
Planning Board, whichever is vested with final authority in determining the
maximum number of dwelling units that would be permitted if the land
were subdivided into lots conforming to the minimum lot size and density
requirements of otherwise applicable zoning regulations, shall first subtract
from the square footage reflected in the plat that amount of land which
is restricted from development or disturbance, pursuant to § 249-5 of this
chapter.
§ 249-7. Steep slope approval application requirements. [Amended
12-20-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
(2) Paved;
(3) Regraded; or
(4) Stripped of vegetation without appropriate measures to prevent
erosion.
C. If the proposed activity for which application is being made or approval
is being sought would create a steep slope, such steep slope shall be
subject to the restrictions of Subsections A and B above.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the MR-C and CC
Districts. [Added 12-20-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
A. Applications for steep slope approval shall include the following
information in addition to any other information required by this
chapter or by the Building Inspector:
(1) A detailed site plan of the property showing, at a scale of not less
than 10 feet equals one inch, the applicant's entire property, the
adjacent properties, and existing streets and showing the following
information:
(a) The location of all existing and proposed structures and paved
surfaces on the applicant's property and any existing septic
systems and wells on such property;
(b) The location of the proposed area of disturbance on the
applicant's property and its relation to neighboring properties'
structures, roads, watercourses and wetlands;
(c) The location on the applicant's property of all existing
watercourses, wetlands, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops, single trees with a diameter of eight inches or more
measured three feet above the base of the trunk, and all other
significant existing land features; and
§ 249-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 249-7
224:301
(d) The existing grades on the applicant’s property, indicating
proposed paved areas, storm drainage facilities, retaining
walls and ground cover, as well as the location of trees and
ornamental shrubs. Site topography must be colored, crosshatched
or otherwise marked to show different slope
categories.
(2) A landscaping plan for the applicant's property, indicating
proposed paved areas, storm drainage facilities, retaining walls
and ground cover, as well as the location of trees and ornamental
shrubs.
(3) Architectural plans, elevations, sections of the structures and
related improvements.
(4) A statement prepared by a licensed architect, registered landscape
architect or engineer describing:
(a) The methods to be used in overcoming foundation and other
structural problems created by slope conditions, in preserving
the natural watershed and in preventing soil erosion;
(b) The methods to be used to eliminate or mitigate water runoff
on all adjacent properties and any other property that will be
naturally affected by increased water runoff; and
(c) The methods used to minimize the impact of changes in
topography on adjacent and nearby properties through
landscaping, retaining walls and terracing of gardens.
(5) A plan submitted under the seal of a licensed professional engineer
showing and certifying the following:
(a) All existing and proposed natural and artificial drainage
courses and other features for the control of drainage, erosion
and water.
(b) The calculated volume of water runoff from the slope(s) and
from the lot in question, as unimproved.
(c) The calculated volume of water runoff from the slope(s) and
from the lot in question, as improved.
(d) The existence, location and capacity of all natural and artificial
drainage courses and facilities within 500 feet of the lot which
are or will be used to carry or contain the water runoff from the
slope(s) and the lot.
(6) A statement made under the seal of a licensed professional
engineer certifying that:
(a) The proposed activity will disturb the steep slope area to the
minimum extent possible; and
§ 249-7 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 249-7
224:302
§ 249-8. Special hardship exception.
The Planning Board may grant a special hardship exception to an applicant
who cannot meet the requirements of § 249-5 of this chapter, provided that
the applicant demonstrates that:
(b) The proposed mitigation measure will prevent, to the
maximum extent practical, the adverse effect of any
disturbance of the steep slope area on the environment and
any neighboring properties.
(7) Proof that all adjacent property owners have been notified of the
steep slope application and of the Planning Board meeting at which
it will be considered. Notice shall be provided in accordance with
§ 295-143C, except that only adjacent property owners need be
notified.
(8) The Planning Board may, at its discretion, waive any of the
requirements of Subsection A except Subsection A(7).
B. The application shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector who shall
determine whether the application is complete and includes all
information and submissions required by this section. If the Building
Inspector determines that the application is complete, (s)he shall
review it and refer it to the Planning Board with his or her
recommendation.
C. The Planning Board shall review the application and all information and
submissions and, within 60 days of the receipt of a complete
application, shall approve, approve with condition or deny the
application.
A. The lot cannot be developed without disturbing more than the
percentage limits in § 249-5;
B. The proposed construction/disturbance is not contrary to the objectives
of this chapter;
C. The steep slope area or areas will be disturbed to the minimum extent
consistent with the objectives of this chapter;
D. Appropriate mitigation measures will be taken to prevent, to the
maximum extent practical, the adverse environmental effects of such
disturbance of the steep slope area; and
E. The requirements of § 249-7 of this chapter are met.
§ 249-7 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 249-8
224:303
Chapter 250
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, EROSION AND WATER
POLLUTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 131.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 146.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 249.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 249-8 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 249-8
224:304
ARTICLE I
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
§ 250-1. Legislative findings.
The Board of Trustees hereby determines:
§ 250-2. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public residing within the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson and to address the legislative findings in § 250-1 above. This article
seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species.
C. Clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance, or placement of fill
during construction tends to increase soil erosion and add to the loss of
native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing streambank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow.
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the Village.
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities.
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 250-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-2
224:305
§ 250-3. Applicability.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as
amended or revised.
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
General Permit for Construction Activities, GP-02-01, or as amended or
revised.
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels.
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities that would otherwise degrade local water
quality.
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff that flows from
any specific site during and following development to the maximum
extent practicable.
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management practices and ensure that these management practices
are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
G. Encourage the use of green infrastructure practices to control
stormwater runoff, such as protecting natural areas, reducing
impervious cover, and using runoff reduction techniques, to the
maximum extent practicable. [Added 1-18-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
A. This article shall be applicable to all land development activities as
defined in § 250-5. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a
land development activity, other than an exempt activity as defined in
§ 250-4, in the absence of a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) approved by the Stormwater Management Officer or other
approving authority as specified in Subsection B below.
B. The Stormwater Management Officer shall be the approving authority
for all stormwater pollution prevention plans, except as follows:
(1) The Planning Board shall be the approving authority for any
application involving property that is also the subject of a pending
site plan, subdivision, or steep slopes application or other
application requiring Planning Board approval.
§ 250-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-3
224:306
§ 250-4. Exemptions.
The following activities may be exempt from review under this article:
§ 250-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, organization or other legal entity of any kind, including
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the approving authority for
any application involving property that is also the subject of a
pending special permit application if the application does not
require Planning Board approval.
C. The approving authority may review the plans; engage the services of a
registered professional engineer to review the plans, specifications, and
related documents in accordance with Chapter 223, Professional Fees;
or accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this article.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
B. Silvicultural activity.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than one acre and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
E. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved and is still in effect on or before the effective date of this
article.
F. Cemetery graves.
G. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
H. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property, or
natural resources.
I. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetables, and other plants primarily for use by that person
and his or her family.
§ 250-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-5
224:307
municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof,
filing an application for a land development activity subject to the provisions
of this article.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
BUILDING — The term "building" as defined in § 295-5 of the Village Code
now or as hereafter amended.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version, including applicable updates, that serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Green infrastructure approaches infiltrate,
evapotranspire or reuse stormwater, using soils and vegetation rather than
hardscape collection, conveyance and storage structures. Common green
infrastructure approaches include green roofs, trees and tree boxes, rain
gardens, vegetated swales, pocket wetlands, infiltration planters, vegetated
median strips, reforestation, and protection and enhancement of riparian
buffers and floodplains.[Added 1-18-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements, and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt, and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance, or placement of
§ 250-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-5
224:308
fill that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than 10,000 square
feet in area.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction and that provides for long-term maintenance of
stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal, and urban runoff sources.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
PERSON — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization, or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies, or subdivisions
thereof.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
QUALIFIED INSPECTOR — A person who is knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment control, such as a licensed
professional engineer, Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment
Control (CPESC), or registered landscape architect, or someone working
under the direct supervision of, and at the same company as, the licensed
professional engineer or registered landscape architect, provided that
person has training in the principles and practices of erosion and sediment
control.[Added 1-18-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
RECHARGE — The replenishment of undergroundwater reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold-water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SILVICULTURAL — Of or relating to the management and care of forests.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
§ 250-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-5
224:309
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the duly authorized municipal
authority that requires that all land development activity and other
construction activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt, and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources, and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized, and operating for the purpose
of controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee or officer
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board, and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or undergroundwaters), that are wholly or partially within or bordering the
state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment systems,
including treatment ponds or lagoons, that also meet the criteria of this
definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only to man-
§ 250-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-5
224:310
made bodies of water that neither were originally created in waters of the
state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from impoundment
of waters of the state.
TRAINED CONTRACTOR — An employee from the contracting
(construction) company, who has received four hours of Departmentendorsed
training in proper erosion and sediment control principles. After
receiving the initial training, the trained contractor shall receive four hours
of training every three years. It can also mean an employee from the
contracting (construction) company that meets the qualified inspector
qualifications.[Added 1-18-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
VILLAGE — The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, that gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 250-6. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement.
No application for approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed
until the appropriate approving authority has received a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the
specifications of this article.
§ 250-7. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
A. All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information,
erosion and sediment controls, and stormwater management measures:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type, and size of project.
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, at a scale no
smaller than one inch equals 50 feet, including a general location
map. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site area; all
improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will not be
disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface
water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be affected by
the construction activity; existing and final slopes; locations of offsite
material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas; and
location(s) of the stormwater discharges(s).
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site.
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with
the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and
Sediment Control (Erosion Control Manual), not more than five
§ 250-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-7
224:311
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP. The Village may opt to reduce the amount of land
that may be exposed at any one time.
(5) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control construction materials, chemicals, and debris from
becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff.
(6) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response.
(7) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to
be used for soil stabilization, runoff control, and sediment control
for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing
to project close-out.
(8) A site map/construction drawing(s), at a scale no smaller than one
inch equals 50 feet, specifying the location, size, and length of each
erosion and sediment control practice.
(9) Dimensions, material specifications, and installation details for all
erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and
sizing of any temporary sediment basins.
(10) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control
measures.
(11) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice will remain in place
until the site is stabilized.
(12) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice.
(13) Name(s) of the receiving water(s) and NYSDEC classifications, if
applicable.
(14) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site.
(15) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable.
(16) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
(17) An acknowledgment by the landowner granting to the Village and
other agencies having jurisdiction the right to enter the property at
§ 250-7 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-7
224:312
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection.
(18) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice, including documentation of the five-step planning process
for stormwater management using green infrastructure as outlined
in the Design Manual using the practices in Schedules A1, A2 and
A3.62 [Amended 1-18-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
(19) Site map/construction drawings, at a scale no smaller than one inch
equals 50 feet, showing the specific location(s) and size(s) of each
postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(20) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms, as per the manual specified in § 250-12.
(21) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with
predevelopment conditions.
(22) Dimensions, material specifications, and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(23) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
B. In addition to the requirements of Subsection A above, SWPPPs for land
development activities disturbing one or more acres and land
development activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired
waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for
which pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment, must provide the following water quantity and/or water
quality controls (post stormwater construction controls):
(1) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice, including documentation of the five-step planning process
for stormwater management using green infrastructure as outlined
in the Design Manual using the practices in Schedules A1, A2 and
A3.63 [Amended 1-18-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s), at a scale no smaller than one
inch equals 50 feet, showing the specific location and size of each
postconstruction stormwater management quality practice.
(3) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management quality system for the applicable
design storms, as per the manual specified in § 250-12.
62.Editor’s Note: Said schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
63.Editor’s Note: Said schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-7 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-7
224:313
§ 250-8. Plan certification.
The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape architect, certified
professional in erosion and sediment control, professional engineer, or other
professional deemed acceptable by the NYSDEC and must be signed by
the professional preparing the plan who shall certify that the design of all
stormwater management practices meets the requirements in this article.
§ 250-9. Contractor certification.
§ 250-10. Other environmental permits.
The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits
have been or will be acquired for the land development activity prior to
approval of the final stormwater design plan.
(4) Dimensions, material specifications, and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management quality practice.
(5) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
quality practice.
(6) Maintenance easements, where required, to ensure access to all
stormwater management practices at the site for the purpose of
inspection and repair. Easements shall be recorded and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property.
(7) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the on-site stormwater management
measures in accordance with §§ 250-12 and 250-13.
A. Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP and/or any
successor or substitute contractor or subcontractor who will be
involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice
installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification
statement before undertaking any land development activity: "I certify
under penalty of law that I understand and agree to comply with the
terms and conditions of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. I
also understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute
to a violation of water quality standards."
B. The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature; address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the
site; and the date the certification is made.
C. The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for the
land development activity and shall be retained on site.
§ 250-7 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-11
224:314
§ 250-11. Copy of permit at site.
A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land development
activity during construction from the date of initiation of construction
activities to the date of final stabilization.
§ 250-12. Standards for stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control.
For the purpose of this article, the following documents shall serve as the
official guides and specifications for stormwater management. Stormwater
management practices that are designed and constructed in accordance
with these technical documents shall be presumed to meet the standards
imposed by this article. Copies of the two manuals are on file the office of
the Stormwater Management Officer.
§ 250-13. Standards for water quality.
Any land development activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface
waters of the State of New York.
§ 250-14. Maintenance of stormwater facilities during construction.
A. The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most current
version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the "Design Manual").
B. New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2005, most current version or its successor, hereafter referred
to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
A. The owner, applicant, or developer of the land development activity
shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and
systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) that are
installed or used by the owner, applicant, or developer to achieve
compliance with the conditions of this article. Sediment shall be
removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their design
capacity has been reduced by 50%.
B. The owner, applicant or developer or their representative, one of which
must be a trained contractor, shall be on site at all times when
construction or grading activity takes place and shall inspect and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices. Inspection shall be conducted and inspection reports shall be
completed by a landscape architect, certified professional in erosion
and sediment control, professional engineer, or other professional
deemed qualified by the NYSDEC every seven days and within 24 hours
of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. The
reports shall be maintained in a site logbook and delivered to the
§ 250-11 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-14
224:315
§ 250-15. Maintenance easements.
Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a stormwater management
facility as one of the requirements, the owner, applicant, or developer must
execute an easement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners
served by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall be in
a form acceptable to the Village Attorney and shall provide for access to
the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the Village to
ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet
design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The
easement shall be recorded by the grantor in the office of the County Clerk
after approval by the Village Attorney.
§ 250-16. Maintenance after construction.
The owner or operator of permanent stormwater management practices
installed in accordance with this article shall operate and maintain the
stormwater management practices to achieve the goals of this article.
Proper operation and maintenance also includes, as a minimum, the
following:
§ 250-17. Maintenance agreements.
Stormwater Management Officer. Construction activities disturbing five
acres or more at any one time shall be inspected by a qualified
inspector every seven days. [Amended 1-18-2011 by L.L. No.
2-2011]
A. A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all facilities and
systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) that are
installed or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of this
article.
B. Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new
maintenance personnel.
C. Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause or
contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance with
§§ 250-12 and 250-13.
A. Prior to the issuance of any final plan approval, the owner, applicant, or
developer must execute a formal maintenance agreement for
stormwater management facilities binding on all subsequent
landowners. The maintenance agreement shall be in a form acceptable
to the Village Attorney and shall be recorded in the office of the County
Clerk as a deed restriction on the property. The maintenance
agreement shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of
Schedule B of this article entitled, "Sample Stormwater Control Facility
§ 250-14 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-17
224:316
§ 250-18. Construction inspection.
§ 250-19. As-built plans.
All applicants are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater
management practices located on site after final construction is completed.
The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater
Maintenance Agreement."64 [Amended 1-18-2011 by L.L. No.
2-2011]
B. The Village, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion,
may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements
of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
A. The Stormwater Management Officer may require such inspections as
necessary to determine compliance with this article and may either
approve that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant
when the work fails to comply with the requirements of this article and
the stormwater pollution prevention plan as approved. To obtain
inspections, the applicant shall notify the Stormwater Management
Officer at least 48 hours before any of the following as required by the
Stormwater Management Officer:
(1) Start of construction;
(2) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
(3) Completion of site clearing;
(4) Completion of rough grading;
(5) Installation of constructed stormwater improvements;
(6) Completion of final grading;
(7) Close of the construction season;
(8) Completion of final landscaping; and
(9) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
B. If any violations are found, the owner, applicant, and/or developer shall
be notified, in writing, of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted, except for site
stabilization, until any violations are corrected and all work previously
completed has received approval by the SMO.
64.Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-17 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-19
224:317
management facilities and must be certified by a New York State licensed
land surveyor or professional engineer.
§ 250-20. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project
completion.
§ 250-21. Submission of reports.
The SMO may require monitoring and reporting from entities subject to this
article as are necessary to determine compliance with this article.
§ 250-22. Right of entry for inspection.
When any new stormwater management facility is installed on private
property or when any new connection is made between private property and
the public stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the Village the
right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner
for the purpose of inspection.
§ 250-23. Performance guarantee.
A. The Village Stormwater Management Officer is responsible for
conducting inspections of stormwater management practices. The
Stormwater Management Officer may utilize a certified professional in
erosion and sediment control, a professional engineer, or other
professional deemed acceptable by the NYSDEC.
B. Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable basis,
including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections;
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible
violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higherthan-
typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants;
inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higherthan-
usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges
of a type that are more likely than the typical discharge to cause
violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the
SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village in its approval of
the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Village may require the
owner, applicant, or developer to provide, prior to construction, a
performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an
appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees
§ 250-19 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-23
224:318
§ 250-24. Recordkeeping.
Entities subject to this article shall maintain records demonstrating
compliance with this article.
§ 250-25. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
satisfactory completion of the project and names the Village as the
beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be determined by
the Village based on submission of final design plans, with reference to
actual construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee
shall remain in force until the surety is released from liability by the
Village, provided that such period shall not be less than one year
from the date of final acceptance or such other certification that the
facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications and that a one-year inspection has been
conducted and the facilities have been found to be acceptable to the
Village. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested
in the account until the surety is released from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Village with an irrevocable letter of credit from an
approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities, both during and after construction, and until the facilities are
removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly
operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control facilities, the Village may draw upon the account to
cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including
engineering and inspection costs.
A. Notice of violation. When the Village determines that a land
development activity is not being carried out in accordance with the
requirements of this article, it may issue a written notice of violation to
the landowner, applicant, contractor, subcontractor, and/or developer.
The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, contractor, subcontractor,
developer or applicant;
(2) The address when available or a description of the building,
structure, or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this article and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action; and
§ 250-23 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-25
224:319
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
B. Stop-work orders. The Village may issue a stop-work order for
violations of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be
required to halt all land development activities and other construction
activities, except those activities approved by the Village that address
the violations leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall
be in effect until the Village confirms that the land development activity
is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed.
Failure to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may result in
civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the
enforcement measures authorized in this article.
C. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
D. Penalties. In addition to any penalty provided herein or by other law,
any person who violates the provisions of article shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both for conviction of a first offense;
for conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within
a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $1,000 nor
more than $1,500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense,
all of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by
a fine not less than $2,000 or more than $2,500 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both. For the purposes of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this
article shall be deemed misdemeanors, and for such purpose only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
E. Withholding certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this article,
the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the occupancy of
said building or land.
F. Restoration of lands. In addition to any penalty provided herein, any
person in violation of this article may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition and/or mitigate on-site and off-site damage from
stormwater runoff, sediment, or pollutants resulting from the violator's
activities. In the event that restoration or mitigation is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the Village may take necessary
corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the
property until paid.
§ 250-25 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-26
224:320
§ 250-26. Fees for services.
Application fees established by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees
shall be submitted with the application. In addition, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 223 of the Village Code, any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this article shall reimburse the Village
for the cost of professional services incurred by the Village for the review
of SWPPPs and for the performance of inspections and/or maintenance
activities as provided in this article. The Village may establish escrow
accounts for these purposes as provided in Chapter 223 of the Village Code.
§ 250-26 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-26
224:321

ARTICLE II
Illegal Discharges and Illicit Connections to Separate Storm Sewer
System
§ 250-27. Legislative intent.
§ 250-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, that because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 250-31A of this article.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods
for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to
comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer Systems.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process, or discharge
nonstormwater wastes.
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this article.
§ 250-27 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-28
224:323
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, that allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including
but not limited to:
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA [or by
a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
PERSON — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization, or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies, or subdivisions
thereof.
POLLUTANT — Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants
may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
Any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge, including
but not limited to sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 that has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized agency.
B.
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. That is not a combined sewer; and
That is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined
at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
§ 250-28 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-28
224:324
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved
and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the NYSDEC
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of New York State.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt, and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the Village to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable Village board, and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
VILLAGE — Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 250-29. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 250-30. Administration and enforcement.
The Stormwater Management Officer (SMO) shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted or duties
imposed upon the SMO may be delegated by the SMO as may be authorized
by the Village Manager.
§ 250-31. Prohibition on illegal discharges and illicit connections;
exceptions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
as provided in this subsection. The commencement, conduct, or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless the NYSDEC or EPA or the Village
Board of Trustees by resolution has determined them to be
substantial contributors of pollutants: water line flushing or other
§ 250-28 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-31
224:325
§ 250-32. Use of best management practices required.
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
existing diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains
(not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl
space or basement sump pumps, air-conditioning condensation,
irrigation water, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming
pool discharges, residential street wash water, water from firefighting
activities, and any other water source not containing
pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved, in writing, by the Stormwater Management
Officer to protect life or property from imminent harm or damage
are permitted, provided that such approval shall not be construed
to constitute compliance with other applicable laws and
requirements, and further provided that such discharges may be
permitted for a specified time period and under such conditions as
the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such life and property
while reasonably maintaining the purpose and intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, provided that verbal notification is given to
the SMO at least 24 hours prior to the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nondischarge permitted
under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to
the discharger and administered under the authority of the
NYSDEC, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage or any other wastewater
discharge to the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue.
A. Where the Stormwater Management Officer has identified illegal
discharges, as defined in § 250-28, the Village may require
§ 250-31 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-32
224:326
§ 250-33. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse,
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 250-34. Suspension of access to MS4.
implementation of best management practices (BMPs) to control those
illegal discharges and activities.
B. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or
watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural
BMPs.
C. Any person responsible for a property or premises, that is or may be the
source of an illicit discharge or an activity contaminating stormwater
may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of
pollutant(s) to the MS4.
D. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section.
A. Emergency situations. The Stormwater Management Officer may,
without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The
SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable
time thereafter, in writing, of the reasons for the suspension. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or to waters of the United States or to
persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have its MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The SMO shall notify a violator, in writing, of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access and the reason for the termination. The
violator may petition the SMO for reconsideration. Access may be
§ 250-32 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-34
224:327
§ 250-35. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES or
NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of
such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Village prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
§ 250-36. Access to property; inspection; monitoring of discharges.
granted by the SMO, with or without conditions, if the SMO finds that
the illegal discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to
prevent its recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines,
in writing, that the illegal discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur.
C. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the SMO
has cause to believe there exists or potentially exists in or upon any
premises any condition that constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force that require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination,
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The Village shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to
this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the SMO
to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge.
(4) The Village has the right to require the facilities subject to this
article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary
to determine compliance with this article. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the SMO access to a facility
subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is
§ 250-34 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-36
224:328
§ 250-37. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials that are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Village in person or by telephone
or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or
by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the Village within three business days of the notice. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 250-38. Notice of violation; corrective measures; penalties for
offenses.
the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an offense if
the person denies the SMO reasonable access to the facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
article.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and the SMO is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the SMO may seek issuance of a
search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. When the SMO finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to
meet a requirement of this article, the SMO may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may
require without limitation:
(1) That violating discharges, practices, or operations cease and
desist;
(2) That illicit connections or illegal discharges be eliminated;
(3) That monitoring, analyses, and reporting be performed;
§ 250-36 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-38
224:329
§ 250-39. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for
(4) That stormwater pollution or contamination hazards be abated or
remediated and that any affected property be restored; and
(5) That source control or treatment BMPs be implemented.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by the Village or a
contractor designated by the Village and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, then the Village may enter upon the
property and take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate
the violation and/or restore the property.
D. Within 10 days after abatement of the violation by or under
authorization of the SMO, the owner of the property will be notified of
the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property
owner may file a written protest with the Village Board of Trustees
objecting to the amount of the assessment within 10 days of receipt of
the notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after the
disposition of any protests or the expiration of the time to file an appeal,
whichever is earlier, the charges shall become a lien on the property for
the amount of the assessment, to be collected in the same manner as
real estate taxes.
E. Penalties. In addition to any penalty provided herein or by other law,
any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not less than $500 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $1,000 nor more than $1,500 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $2,000 or more than
$2,500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
For the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 250-38 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-39
224:330
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
that would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 250-40. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 250-41. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the Village to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 250-42. Severability and effective date.
A. Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not
affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter.
B. Effective date. This chapter shall be effective upon filing with the office
of the Secretary of State.
§ 250-39 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 250-42
224:331
Chapter 252
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
Notification of defects — See Ch. 196.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
Signs — See Ch. 234.
Village property — See Ch. 287.
§ 250-42 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 250-42
224:332
ARTICLE I
Encumbrances and Encroachments
[Adopted 12-2-1913; amended in its entirety 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
4-2019]
§ 252-1. Permit required for placement of construction materials.
No person shall place or cause to be placed any stone, brick, lime, cement,
timber or other material for building, or to be used for any purpose in
connection with the construction of any building, in or upon any street, lane
or public place in the Village, without a written permit.
§ 252-2. Permit issuance; conditions; fee.
The Building Inspector is authorized to grant permits to place building
materials or other articles necessary in the construction of buildings in
any street, lane or public place in the Village, but no such permit shall be
for a longer period than two months, nor shall such permit authorize the
obstruction of any part of the sidewalk nor more than 1/3 of the driveway of
the street opposite the land on which it is proposed to erect a building. For
every such permit there shall be paid a sum to be determined by the Village
Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
§ 252-3. Receptacles stored on street or sidewalk.
No person shall place or cause to be placed, or keep or suffer to be kept, any
box, barrel, cask or other article on any street or sidewalk in the Village,
except that receptacles containing ashes or garbage may be so placed and
kept a reasonable time prior to the collection of same by the person or
persons designated by the Village authorities to collect the same.
§ 252-4. Washing vehicles on street or sidewalk.
No person shall wash or cause to be washed any vehicle on any street, lane,
sidewalk or other public place in the Village.
§ 252-5. (Reserved)
§ 252-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
§ 252-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-6
224:333

ARTICLE II
Recreational Use
[Adopted 12-2-1913; amended in its entirety 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
4-2019]
§ 252-7. (Reserved)
§ 252-8. Sliding on sidewalks.
No person shall slide upon any sidewalk in the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson on any sleigh, sled, board or other contrivance.
§ 252-9. Bicycles on sidewalk.
No person shall ride any bicycle on any sidewalk in the Village, except to
cross the same to go into or from an adjacent yard or lot.
§ 252-10. Skateboarding, roller-blading and roller-skating in
business district.
A. Roller-blading, roller-skating, skateboarding and similar activities are
prohibited on the following streets and sidewalks along those streets
and parking lots:
(1) Warburton Avenue, from Broadway to Washington Avenue.
(2) Main Street, from Broadway to Warburton Avenue.
(3) Spring Street, from Warburton Avenue to Maple Avenue.
(4) Maple Avenue, from Spring Street to North Street.
(5) North Street, from Warburton Avenue to Maple Avenue.
(6) Southside Avenue, from Spring Street to Washington Avenue.
B. In addition, roller-blading, roller-skating, skateboarding and similar
activities are prohibited in:
(1) VFW Park (on Warburton Avenue).
(2) Boulanger Plaza (on Main Street).
(3) Steinschneider Plaza Parking Lot (between West Main Street and
Spring Street).
(4) The Warburton Avenue Parking Lot (across from the Post Office).
(5) The Southside Plaza Parking Lot (Con Ed Parking Lot on Southside
Avenue).
§ 252-7 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-11
224:335
§ 252-11. Amusements injuring or endangering property or
persons.
No person shall indulge in any other amusement or practice in any street,
lane or public place which shall injure or endanger property or persons.
§ 252-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
§ 252-11 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 252-12
224:336
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)65
§ 252-13. through § 252-15. (Reserved)
65.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Trees, adopted 12-2-1913, was repealed 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
4-2019.
§ 252-13 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-13
224:337

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Obstructions and Curbs
[Adopted 3-4-1941; amended in its entirety 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
4-2019]
§ 252-16. (Reserved)
§ 252-17. Sidewalk obstructions.
§ 252-18. (Reserved)
§ 252-19. Crossing curbs and gutters.
Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be protected from damage by trucks
that may cross them, and no truck may cross any curb, gutter or sidewalk
without first obtaining a permit to do so. The fee for such permit shall be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
A deposit to guarantee that sidewalk or curb will not be damaged shall be
made as determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule.
A. The practice of encumbering Village sidewalks with air, water, gasoline
hose, water cans, produce, merchandise, vending machines and crates
is hereby declared a menace to public safety and health and is
prohibited.
B. Sidewalk doors. Sidewalk, vault or cellar doors shall be constructed to
safely sustain a load of 300 pounds per square foot. They shall be set
flush with the sidewalk surfaces and without any projecting or raised
surfaces. The upper surface shall be a nonslip-type metal. Before
proceeding with an installation, a full-size detail of type and one-andone-
half-inch-scale layout shall be submitted for the approval of the
Building Inspector.
§ 252-16 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-19
224:339

ARTICLE V
Care of Sidewalks
[Adopted 6-20-1944]
§ 252-20. Duty of owner to maintain sidewalk.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any lot or piece of land in the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson to keep the sidewalk in front of the premises owned by
him at all times in good repair and in safe condition for public use.
§ 252-21. Notice of required repair or improvement. [Amended
3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
In case any sidewalk shall at any time, in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Public Works, require repair or improvement, the
Superintendent of Public Works may serve a notice, either personally or by
mail, upon the owner or owners of the lot or piece of land in front of which
such sidewalk is out of repair or in an unsafe condition, requiring the owner
or owners thereof, within 10 days of the service of such notice, to repair or
improve such sidewalk so as to make the same in good repair and in a safe
condition.
§ 252-22. Failure to comply; authority of Superintendent of Public
Works. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
If any owner or owners shall neglect or refuse to repair or improve such
sidewalk within the time limited therefor, the Superintendent of Public
Works may forthwith make such repairs and improvements in such manner
as he shall deem proper and suitable and shall file with the Village Manager
a certificate of the expense thereof, together with a description of the
property in front of which such repairs or improvements are made.
§ 252-23. Billing of expense; assessment.
The Village Manager shall bill the expense of such repairs or improvements
to the owner or owners of such property, and in case said owner or owners
of such property shall refuse or neglect to pay the expense of said repairs or
improvements, said expense shall be assessed against the property on the
next completed assessment roll and collected in the same manner as other
taxes levied on the said roll.
§ 252-20 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-23
224:341

ARTICLE VI
Obstructions at Intersections
[Adopted 10-19-1959]
§ 252-24. Prohibited obstructions.
At all street intersections, no obstruction to vision which exceeds 30 inches
in height above curb level shall be erected or maintained on any lot within
the triangle formed by the street level of such lot and a line drawn between
points along such street lines 30 feet distant from their point of intersection.
§ 252-25. Presently existing obstructions.
All presently existing obstructions to vision, defined in § 252-24 above, are
hereby found to create a public nuisance inimical to the health, welfare and
safety of the village.
§ 252-26. Notice; abatement. [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No.
2-2005]
All such public nuisances shall be forthwith abated by notice given by the
Village Manager to the property owner upon whose property such public
nuisance is found to exist, to remove said public nuisance within 10 days
after notice is given. In the event of failure of the property owner to comply
therewith, the said public nuisance shall be removed by the Village at the
expense of the property owner. Notice to the property owner shall be by
registered or certified mail or any other method of delivery providing proof
of delivery and shall specifically direct the removal of the public nuisance
within 10 days and contain notice to the effect that upon failure to comply,
the same will be removed by the Village at the expense of the property
owner, who shall be billed therefor.
§ 252-27. Failure to comply; expense as lien.
In case the property owner shall fail within a reasonable time to pay to
the village the amount of said bill, the Board of Trustees shall cause to
be entered upon the next succeeding tax roll prepared for the village, an
assessment against such property equal to the amount of said bill, which
assessment shall become due at the same time and shall be collected in the
same manner as the real estate taxes for the village, and shall be a lien
against the property until paid.
§ 252-24 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-27
224:343

ARTICLE VII
Excavations
[Adopted 7-11-1960]
§ 252-28. Definitions and word usage.
§ 252-29. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel, opening or
excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street without first
securing a permit from the village for each separate undertaking; provided,
however, that any person maintaining pipes, lines or other underground
facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening
without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to
be done immediately, provided that the permit could not reasonably and
practically have been obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter
apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the office of the
Building Inspector is open for business, and said permit shall be retroactive
to the date when the work was begun.
A. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the
existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons
or property.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has
agreed to fulfill all terms of this article.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to an act of the Board
of Trustees. Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
STREET — Includes a public street, public easement, public right-ofway,
public highway, public alley, public way, public road or public
sidewalk accepted or maintained by the village.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person in charge of the Department of
Public Works or the highway operations in the Village, or his authorized
deputy, representative or inspector.[Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
4-2019]
VILLAGE — The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, New York, County of
Westchester, State of New York.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 252-28 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-30
224:345
§ 252-30. Street openings limited.
No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the
work authorized by such permit in any amount or quantity greater than that
specified in the permit, except that upon the prior approval of the Building
Inspector additional work may be done under the provisions of the permit
in any amount not greater than 10% of the amount specified in the permit.
Any deposit and bond posted in connection with the original permit shall be
deemed to cover any such additional work as may be approved pursuant to
this section within the limit mentioned herein.
§ 252-31. Commencement of work.
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 14 days
after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit
shall be automatically terminated. Permits thus terminated may be renewed
upon the payment of an additional permit fee as originally required.
§ 252-32. Permits nontransferable.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work shall
not be made in any place other than the locations specifically designated in
the permit.
§ 252-33. Expiration of permits.
Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be
set out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work
within the specified time, he shall, prior to the expiration of the permit,
present in writing to the Building Inspector a request for an extension of
time, setting forth therein the reasons for the requested extension. If in
the opinion of the Building Inspector such an extension is necessary and
not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be granted additional
time for the completion of the work.
§ 252-34. Municipal utility cuts.
All street openings required by utilities owned or operated by the village
shall be made and restored under the direction and supervision of the
Superintendent. The permit, fee, deposit, insurance and bond requirements
of this article shall not be applicable to any openings made by such
municipality owned or operated utilities.
§ 252-35. State and county highways.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances
where the highway is maintained by the State of New York or by the County
of Westchester.
§ 252-30 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 252-36
224:346
§ 252-36. Rights of village.
Every permit shall be granted subject to the right of the village or of any
other person entitled thereto to use the street for any purpose for which
such street may lawfully be used, not inconsistent with the permit.
§ 252-37. Revocation of permits.
§ 252-38. Duties and responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Building Inspector, after notice to the
permittee, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
article.
(2) Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work.
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others.
A permittee may be granted a period of three days from the date of
the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said
permit is revoked.
B. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain
a brief statement of the grounds relied upon for revoking the permit.
Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to
be notified or by certified or registered United States mail or any other
method of delivery providing proof of delivery addressed to the person
to be notified. [Amended 2-1-2005 by 2-2005]
C. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Superintendent shall do such work
as may be necessary to restore the street or part thereof to as good a
condition as before the opening was made. All expenses incurred by the
village shall be recovered from the deposit or bond the permittee has
made or files with the village.
A. Make a written application for such permit with the Building Inspector
on forms providing all information necessary for the administration and
enforcement of this article. No work shall commence until the Building
Inspector has approved the application and plan and issued a permit
and until the permittee has paid and provided all fees, deposits,
certificates and bonds required by this article.
§ 252-36 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-38
224:347
§ 252-39. Duties and responsibilities of permittees.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person receiving a permit to:
§ 252-40. Opening and excavation restrictions.
B. Furnish in duplicate a plan showing the work to be performed under
said permit. If approved by the Building Inspector, one copy of such
plan shall be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is granted.
C. Furnish a maintenance bond as required by § 252-43 of this article.
A. Pay a permit fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution
and set in the fee schedule;66 provided, however, that public utilities or
authorities shall be billed quarterly for such fees as they shall accrue.
[Amended 6-20-1966; 4-17-1972; 6-18-1973; 9-21-1999 by L.L.
No. 4-1999]
B. Make a deposit to cover the cost of restoring the street damaged by
such work. The amount of deposit shall be computed by the Building
Inspector as provided by § 252-42 of this article.
C. Furnish a performance bond as required by § 252-43 of this article.
D. Furnish a certificate of insurance as required by § 252-44 of this article.
E. Submit, when required by the Building Inspector, a list of owners and
tenants of all properties abutting the area where the work authorized
by the permit is to be performed.
F. Present evidence that all materials, labor and equipment which are
needed to complete such work as authorized by the permit are
available.
G. Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of the plan at
all times while such work is in progress at the location for which said
permit was granted, and show such permit and plan upon demand by
the village authorities.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored.
B. No more than 250 feet, measured longitudinally, shall be opened in any
street at any one time without special permission in writing from the
Village Manager, and only in instances where a special hardship can be
shown.
C. All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently ahead of trench
excavation work to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their
relocation, if necessary.
66.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the village offices.
§ 252-38 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 252-40
224:348
D. Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee.
E. In the event the permittee damages the property or facilities of another,
the permittee shall repair this damage within 12 hours in the case of a
utility, or 48 hours in the case of any other private party. If the damage
has not been repaired within these time limits, the party sustaining the
damage will undertake to have the repairs made at his own expense and
report to the village as soon as possible the amount of expense
incurred. This amount may be withheld from the permittee's deposit by
the Building Inspector, pending final determination and settlement of
any liability for this damage. Whenever damage occurs, the injured
party shall notify proper village authorities within 24 hours so that
steps can be taken to determine the extent of the damage and plans
made for its repair.
F. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision, or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey
bench mark with the village, shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained, in writing, from the Building Inspector. Permission shall be
granted only upon condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses
incident to the proper replacement of the monument.
G. When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee
to provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector.
H. When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll,
flow or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the same to be
removed from the street within eight hours after deposit. In the event
the earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not
removed, the Building Inspector shall cause such removal and the cost
incurred shall be paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
Such costs shall be determined by the village.
I. Safety devices.
(1) Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers,
barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be
determined by the Superintendent to be necessary for the
protection of the public. Additional safety requirements may be
prescribed by the Superintendent, and where applicable shall be in
conformance with the requirements set forth in the United States
Department of Army, Corps of Engineers, publication, Safety
Requirements (1941 Edition, revised 1951). Copies of this
publication shall be made available in the office of the Building
Inspector for inspection by the public.
(2) Whenever any person fails to provide or maintain the safety devices
required by the Superintendent, such devices may be installed and
§ 252-40 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-40
224:349
maintained by the village. The amount of the cost incurred shall
be paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit. Such costs
shall be determined by the village.
(3) No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed
or posted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
J. The permittee must notify all property owners who will be affected by
the work, at least 24 hours before the work begins, except in instances
where the work is of an emergency nature that will not permit such
advance notice. In emergencies where 24 hours' advance notice is
impossible, property owners will be given as much notice as possible.
Access to private driveways must be provided at all times when work is
not actually in progress. Temporary access to driveways must be
provided as needed by the property owners and their tenants at all
times. Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
K. Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench
and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible
to public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt
or dust nuisance, the Superintendent may require the permittee to
provide toe boards or bins; and if the excavated area is muddy and
causes inconveniences to pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks
shall be installed by the permittee as directed by the Superintendent. If
the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without
using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a
passageway, at least 1/2 the sidewalk width, open along such sidewalk
line.
L. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the
permittee obtains written consent from the Building Inspector to do the
work at an earlier or later hour. Such permission shall be granted only
in case of an emergency.
M. In granting any permit, the Building Inspector or Superintendent may
attach such other conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to
prevent damage to public or private property or to prevent the
operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or
property or in a manner likely to create a nuisance. Such conditions
may include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed;
(2) Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment;
(3) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported;
(4) The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials;
§ 252-40 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 252-40
224:350
§ 252-41. Backfilling and restoring opening.
(5) Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof; and
(6) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly made,
backfilled and temporarily surfaced by the permittee according to
village specifications.
B. The Building Inspector must be notified by the permittee during the
forty-eight-hour period preceding beginning of backfilling, of the date
and approximate time at which backfilling will be begun.
C. No backfilling shall be begun unless or until either the Building
Inspector, the Superintendent or a designated village inspector is
present.
D. The work of the permanent restoration, including both paving surface
and paving base, shall be performed by the permittee according to
village specifications.
E. If the Building Inspector finds that paving surfaces adjacent to the
street opening may be damaged where trenches are made parallel to
the street, or where a number of cross trenches are laid in close
proximity to one another, or where the equipment used may cause such
damage, the Village Manager may require a negotiated payment from
the permittee for the resurfacing in place of patching of such street if,
in his opinion, the damage will be so excessive it will require the
complete resurfacing of the street area involved. Such negotiations
shall be carried on and payment agreed upon prior to issuance of a
permit.
F. After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted and completed with due diligence.
G. The Building Inspector shall make daily inspections of all work
authorized by a permit.
H. Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions of the
permit, the permittee shall notify the Building Inspector in writing. A
certificate of final inspection shall be issued by the Building Inspector
to each permittee no sooner than one year after the permanent
restoration of the excavation has been made, provided the work
authorized by the permit has been performed according to village
specifications. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the Building
Inspector shall make a final inspection of the restoration to determine
whether village specifications have been adhered to.
§ 252-40 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-41
224:351
§ 252-42. Deposits.
I. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of one year
from the date of completion of the permanent restoration, any expense
incurred by the village in correcting such settlement shall be paid by
the permittee or recovered from his bond, unless the permittee submits
proof satisfactory to the Building Inspector that the settlement was not
due to defective backfilling.
J. In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the village or any of its officers or employees, and no
officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume any
jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of police
power, when it is necessary to protect life and property.
K. If any restoration completed by a permittee is not satisfactory to the
Superintendent, and the permittee shall fail to correct the work to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent, the Superintendent may cause such
work to be done to his satisfaction. All expenses incurred by the Village
shall be recovered from the deposit or bond provided by the permittee
under this article. [Added 6-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
L. If any excavation for which a permit has been issued hereunder exceeds
25 feet in length, the permittee shall be responsible for resurfacing the
street from curb to curb over the entire area in a manner and with
materials approved by the Superintendent. Where no curb exists, the
resurfacing shall extend to the existing pavement limits. [Added
6-16-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
A. Computation of deposits. The Building Inspector, upon receipt of a
properly completed application, shall determine the amount of the
deposit to be made by the permittee; provided, however, that the
deposit shall not be less than an amount to be determined by the Village
Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.67 The deposit shall be
paid at the time the permit is received, and the deposit shall be used to
reimburse the village for the cost of any work and materials furnished
by it in connection with the work authorized by the permit and for any
other purpose set forth in this article. [Amended 6-20-1966;
4-17-1972; 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
B. Form of deposit. The deposit may be either in the form of a certified,
treasurer's or cashier's check or in lawful money of the United States.
C. Insufficient deposit. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs,
the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the village an amount equal to
the deficiency. If the permittee refuses or fails to pay such deficiency,
the village may institute an action to recover the same in any court of
competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, no
additional permits shall be issued to such permittee.
67.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 252-41 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 252-42
224:352
§ 252-43. Bond requirements.
D. Yearly deposit. Whenever any public utility or authority shall anticipate
more than one street opening or excavation per calendar year, such
utility or authority may post one deposit in an amount and form as
provided above for the calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of
any and all work.
E. Deposit and cost schedules. The amount of deposit for street openings
shall be computed in accordance with the unit prices for pavements or
other areas to be disturbed or work to be done, as determined by the
Building Inspector and to be determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L.
No. 4-1999]
F. Decision on costs. The Building Inspector shall estimate the cost of any
work performed by the Street Department pursuant to the provisions of
this article. If, in the opinion of the permittee, the Building Inspector's
cost estimates are excessive, he may appeal the Building Inspector's
decision to the Village Manager. If, in turn, he is not satisfied with the
Village Manager's decision, he will have the right to final appeal of the
cost estimates to the Village Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees'
decision will be final in all cases.
G. Refund of deposit. Upon notification by the permittee that all work
authorized by the permit has been completed, and after restoration of
the opening and final inspection, the Building Inspector shall refund to
the permittee his deposit less all costs incurred by the village in
connection with said permit and any other expenses required by this
article, for which final settlement has not been made. In no event shall
the permit fee be refunded once work has been undertaken.
A. Maintenance bond requirements. Each applicant upon the receipt of a
permit shall provide the village with an acceptable corporate surety
bond to guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a
permit granted pursuant to this article. The amount of the bond shall be
100% of the estimated cost of restoring the street opening as
determined by the Building Inspector. The term of the bond shall begin
upon the date of posting thereof and shall terminate upon the receipt by
the permittee of a certificate of final inspection from the Building
Inspector. If the permittee anticipates requesting more than one permit
per year as required by this article, he may furnish one continuing
corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful performance in such
amount as the Building Inspector deems necessary. The amount of such
bond shall be in relation to the cost of restoring pavement cuts to be
made by the permittee throughout the year.
B. Default in performance. Whenever the Building Inspector shall find that
a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of
the permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to
the surety on the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the
§ 252-42 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-43
224:353
§ 252-44. Insurance requirements. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
4-2019]
Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the Village with
an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured against
claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims for property
damage which may arise from or out of the performance of the work. Such
insurance shall cover any and all possible hazards of whatsoever kind or
nature, and shall include protection against liability arising from completed
operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed in written
requirements by the Building Inspector.
§ 252-45. Openings in new streets.
§ 252-46. Map requirements.
estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the Building
Inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.
C. Completion of work. After receipt of such notice the surety must, within
the time therein specified, either cause the required work to be
performed or, failing therein, indemnify the village for the cost of doing
the work as set forth in the notice.
A. Notices of improvements. When the village shall improve or pave any
street, the Building Inspector shall first give notice to all persons
owning property abutting on the street about to be paved or improved,
and to all public utilities and authorities operating in the village, and all
such persons, utilities and governmental authorities shall make all
connections as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate
excavation of the street, within 30 days from the giving of such notice.
The time shall be extended if permission is requested, in writing, and
approved by the Village Manager after consultation with the
Superintendent and Village Engineer.
B. Restriction upon opening new streets. No permit shall be issued by the
Building Inspector which would allow an excavation or opening in a
paved and improved street surface less than five years old, unless the
applicant can clearly demonstrate that public health or safety require
that the proposed work be permitted or unless an emergency condition
exists.
C. Penalty for opening new streets. If, by special action of the Building
Inspector with approval of the Village Manager, a permit is issued to
open any paved and improved street surface less than five years old, a
penalty charge shall be made for the opening, except that the penalty
shall be waived in the event the work is of an emergency nature. The
penalty charge shall be on a sliding scale and shall be equal to 2% of the
cost of restoring the opening for each unelapsed month or fraction
thereof of the five-year restricted period.
§ 252-43 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 252-46
224:354
§ 252-47. Abandoned facilities.
§ 252-48. Notices to property owners and tenants.
A. Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulses, water or steam to or from the village or to or
from its inhabitants, or for any other purposes, shall file with the
Building Inspector such maps or sets of maps, drawn to a scale suitable
for the purposes required, showing the location, size and dimensions of
all such installation, whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
such maps are necessary for the safe and proper undertaking of street
opening work.
B. Each map herein required shall be accompanied by an affidavit,
endorsed thereon to the effect that the same reasonably exhibits the
details required to be shown by this section as of the time of filing to the
best of the permittee's knowledge and information.
A. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the
person owning, controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30
days after such abandonment, file with the Building Inspector a
statement, in writing, giving in detail the location of the structure so
abandoned.
B. Each map or set of maps filed pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall show in detail the location of all such structures abandoned
subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps.
C. When the village plans to pave or improve streets in which there are
abandoned facilities, the owner of such facilities shall be notified to
remove them if in the opinion of the Board of Trustees their removal is
in the best interest of the village. If the owner shall refuse to remove
such facilities, the village shall remove the abandoned facilities and the
owner shall reimburse the village for such removal.
A. If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect
the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, the Building
Inspector shall require the permittee to submit a list of the names and
addresses of the owners and tenants of such properties. Upon receipt of
such list, the Building Inspector shall notify the affected property
owners and tenants of the proposed work to be done.
B. If the work to be undertaken by a permittee will affect other subsurface
installations in the vicinity of the proposed opening, the Building
Inspector shall notify the owners of such facilities of the proposed work
and what it will involve to the extent of the information furnished by the
permittee.
§ 252-46 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 252-49
224:355
§ 252-49. Notices to police and fire authorities.
The Building Inspector shall notify, in writing, the village police and fire
authorities of all street opening permits he grants. Such notification shall
state the nature of the work to be done, proposed beginning and completion
dates and the location of such project.
§ 252-49.1. Traffic control for excavations. [Added 6-16-2015 by L.L.
No. 3-2015]
§ 252-50. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
4-2019]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
A. A Village police officer to direct traffic around the excavation shall be
provided by any permittee when any excavation hereunder shall be
likely to impede traffic. The Chief of Police shall determine whether the
excavation will impede the flow of traffic or constitute a safety hazard
so as to require a police officer.
B. The cost of said police officer shall be paid by the permittee.
§ 252-49 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 252-50
224:356
Chapter 257
TATTOOING
§ 257-1. Findings.
It has been the experience of other municipalities, including the City of New
York, that tattooing has led to increased cases of serum hepatitis. It has also
been their experience that regulatory measures have proved ineffective in
eliminating this health risk because of the inability to supervise tattooing
establishments at all times. The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson also lacks
the resources and personnel to supervise tattooing establishments on an
ongoing basis. Accordingly, the Board of Trustees finds that in this village,
as in other communities, a ban on tattooing except for medical purposes is
the only feasible means of protecting the public against disease from this
source.
§ 257-2. Prohibited activities; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo a human being within the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, except that tattooing may be performed
for medical purposes by a person licensed or otherwise pursuant to the
Education Law to practice medicine or osteopathy.
§ 257-3. Penalties for offenses.
An offense against the provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both.
Chapter 260
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessor — See Ch. 7.
§ 252-50 TATTOOING § 257-3
257:357

ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 9-26-1950 by L.L. No. 4-1950]
§ 260-1. Tax on furnishing of utility services.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 138-d of the Village Law of the State
of New York,68 a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the
first day of May 1950 is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business
in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, which is subject to the supervision of
the State Department of Public Service, which has a gross income for the
periods of 12 months ending on the 31st day of May of the year 1951 and
on the 31st day of May of each successive year thereafter in excess of $500,
except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Article
3-B of the Public Service Law,69 and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating
income from and after the first day of May 1950 is hereby imposed upon
every other utility doing business in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson,
which has a gross operating income for the periods of 12 months ending
on the 31st day of May of the year 1951 and on the 31st day of May
of each successive year thereafter in excess of $500, which taxes shall
have application only within the territorial limits of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson, and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees
imposed by any other provision of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed on
any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits
of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, notwithstanding that some act be
necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 260-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross
income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by
the purchaser in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, including cash, credits
and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made
or such service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom
on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of the materials used,
labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other
expense whatsoever; also profits from the sale of securities; also profits
from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership or use of or
interest in such property; also profit from the sale of personal property
(other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the
inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a
68.Editor's Note: See now Village Law § 5-530.
69.Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by L. 1970, c. 267, § 5.
See now Transportation Law § 240 et seq.
§ 260-1 TATTOOING § 260-2
257:359
return is made); also receipts from interest, dividends and royalties, derived
from sources within the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, other than such
as are received from a corporation a majority of whose voting stock is
owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any
expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof, and
also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson whatsoever; provided, however, that the
words "gross income" shall include, in the case of a utility engaged in
selling telephony or telephone service, only receipts from local exchange
service wholly consummated within the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, and,
in the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph service,
only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service in
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, including cash, credits and property of
any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost
of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other
costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality, and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business
of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating
railroads other than street-surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated
railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not such person
is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam, water,
refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy delivered through mains, pipes or
wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or
telegraphy service by means of mains, pipes or wires, regardless of whether
such activities are the main business of such person or are only incidental
thereto, or of whether use is made of the public streets.
§ 260-3. Records to be kept.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of
its business and in such form as the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson may require, and such records shall be preserved for
a period of three years, except that said Board of Trustees may consent to
their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer.
§ 260-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 260-4
257:360
§ 260-4. Returns to be filed.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before the
25th day of June in each year, a return for the 12 calendar months preceding
such return date or any portion thereof for which the tax imposed hereby
is effective; provided, however, that in lieu of the annual return required
by the foregoing provisions, any utility may, at its option, file quarterly, on
or before September 25, December 26, March 25 and June 25, a return
for the three calendar months preceding each such return date, and in
the case of the first such return, for all preceding calendar months in the
year during which the tax imposed hereby was imposable and effective.
Every return shall state the gross income or gross operating income for the
period covered thereby. Returns shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on
a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall contain such other
data, information or matter as shall be required to be included therein.
The Village Treasurer, in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed, may
require at any time a further or supplemental return, which shall contain
any data that may be specified by him, and he may require any utility
doing business in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson to file an annual return,
which shall contain any data specified by him, regardless of whether the
utility is subject to tax under this article. Every return shall have annexed
thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility making the same, or of the
owner or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation,
if such business be conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the
statements contained therein are true. Every return, other than that of
a corporation, shall set forth the name of the owner or owners, or, if a
copartnership, the names of all partners.
§ 260-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 260-6. Insufficient or unsatisfactory returns; determination of tax;
hearing; assessment of additional tax.
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice
from him, or if no return is made for any period, the Board of Trustees
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as it is
able to obtain, and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. The Village Treasurer shall give notice of
such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such
determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the
person against whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving
of notice of such determination, apply to the Board of Trustees, for a
§ 260-4 TATTOOING § 260-6
257:361
§ 260-7. Service of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return by him under this article, or, if no return has been filed,
then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice, shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 260-8. Penalty for failure to file return or pay tax.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof, within the time required by this article, shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first mouth, after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Village
Treasurer, for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return, but
for a period not exceeding 90 days from the date it was due, and if satisfied
that the delay was excusable, may, subject to the approval of the Board
hearing, or unless the Board of Trustees, of its own motion, shall reduce
the same. After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give notice of
the decision of the Board of Trustees to the person liable for the tax.
Such decision may be reviewed by a proceeding under Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Act of the State of New York70 if application therefor
is made within 90 days after the giving of notice of such decision. An
order to review such decision shall not be granted unless the amount
of any tax sought to be reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon,
if any, shall be first deposited with the Village Treasurer and an
undertaking filed with him, in such amount and with such sureties as a
Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such
proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay
all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such
proceeding or, at the option of the applicant, such undertaking may
be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and
charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required
to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the
granting of such order.
B. Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the
expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a
return; provided, however, that where no return has been filed as
required by this article the tax may be assessed at any time.
70.Editor's Note: See now Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 260-6 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 260-8
257:362
of Trustees, remit all or any portion of the penalty fixed by the foregoing
provisions of this section.
§ 260-9. Application for refund.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the Board of Trustees or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer, subject to the
approval of the Board of Trustees, shall refund the amount so determined.
For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so made
on the initiative of the Board of Trustees. However, no refund shall be
made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the Board
of Trustees as hereinbefore provided unless said Board, after a hearing
as hereinbefore provided, or of its own motion, shall have reduced the
tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding under
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act of the State of New York71 that such
determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of
moneys collected under this article. An application for a refund, made as
hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision of
any tax or penalty complained of and the Board of Trustees may receive
additional evidence with respect thereto. After making its determination,
the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and
he shall be entitled to an order to review such determination under said
Article 78, subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the
granting of such an order.
§ 260-10. Tax to be paid by utility.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 260-11. Action for enforcement.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by
this article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the direction of the Board of
Trustees, bring an action to enforce payment of the same. An action may
be maintained, as upon contract, by the Village to recover the amount of an
unpaid tax hereunder, together with 5% thereof for the first month after the
day upon which it is due and payable and an additional 1% for each month
and fraction thereof thereafter until paid. The proceeds of any judgment
obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer. Each such
tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to
pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and
penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
71.Editor's Note: See now Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 260-8 TATTOOING § 260-12
257:363
§ 260-12. Administration; rules and regulations.
In the administration of this article the Board of Trustees shall have the
power to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent
with law, as may be necessary for the exercise of the powers and the
performance of the duties of the Village Treasurer, and to prescribe the
form of blanks, reports and other records relating to the administration
and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony and proofs, under oath, with
reference to any matter under this article and to subpoena and require
the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and
documents.
§ 260-13. Confidential nature of returns; penalty.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer or any
agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson to
divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross income or
gross operating income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any
return under this article. The officer charged with the custody of such
returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of
anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court,
except on behalf of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on behalf of the State
Tax Commission in an action or proceeding under the provisions of the
Tax Law of the State of New York, or on behalf of any party to any action
or proceeding under the provisions of this article when the returns or
facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding,
in either of which events the court may require the production of, and
may admit in evidence, so much of said returns or of the facts shown
thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person,
or his duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return filed by
him, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to
prevent the identification of particular returns and the items thereof, or
the publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who
have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for
by this article, together with any relevant information which, in the
opinion of the Village Treasurer and Village Attorney, may assist in the
collection of such delinquent taxes; or the inspection by the Village
Attorney or other legal representatives of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson of the return of any person who shall bring action to set aside
or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action has been
instituted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson he shall be
dismissed from office, and shall be incapable of holding any office or
§ 260-12 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 260-13
257:364
§ 260-14. Disposition of funds.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
employment in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson for a period of five
years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer
with the approval of the Board of Trustees may exchange with the chief
fiscal officer of any city or any other Village in the State of New York
information contained in returns filed under this article, provided that
such city or other Village grants similar privileges to the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson, and provided that such information is to be used
for tax purposes only, and the Village Treasurer shall, upon request,
furnish the State Tax Commission with any information contained in
such returns.
§ 260-13 TATTOOING § 260-14
257:365

ARTICLE II
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 10-18-1976 by L.L. No. 5-1976]
§ 260-15. Amendment of statutory provisions.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Real Property Tax Law, Chapter 278,
§ 485-b, Business Investment Exemption, Subdivision 7, the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson hereby reduces to zero the real property per centum of
exemption from taxation, special ad valorem levies and service charges.
§ 260-15 TATTOOING § 260-15
257:367

ARTICLE III
Senior Citizen Exemption
[Adopted 9-2-1980 by L.L. No. 6-1980]
§ 260-16. Exemption granted. [Amended 11-15-1983 by L.L. No.
12-1983]
Pursuant to Chapter 816, §§ 467 and 467-d,72 of the New York Real Property
Tax Law, real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65
years of age or over, or real property owned by a husband and wife, either
of whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be exempt from real estate taxation
by the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson as hereinafter provided.
§ 260-17. Extent of exemption. [Added 11-15-1983 by L.L. No.
12-1983; amended 10-21-1986 by L.L. No. 8-1986; 11-6-1990 by L.L.
No. 4-1990; 12-15-1992 by L.L. No. 3-1992; 12-13-1994 by L.L. No.
10-1994; 11-21-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995; 2-23-1999 by L.L. No.
1-1999; 12-5-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000; 11-5-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002;
12-2-2003 by L.L. No. 7-2003; 12-5-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
10-6-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
The amount of the exemption shall be determined from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees in accordance with § 467 of the New
York State Real Property Tax Law.
§ 260-18. Conditions for exemption.
No exemption shall be granted:
A. If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making application for exemption exceeds the sum of the maximum
income exemption eligibility level for the granting of partial exemption
from real property taxation as provided herein. "Income tax year" shall
mean the twelve-month period for which the owner or owners filed a
federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is filed, the
calendar year. Where title is vested in either the husband or the wife,
their combined income may not exceed such sum. Such income shall
include social security and retirement benefits, interest, dividends, net
rental income, salary or earnings and the net income from selfemployment,
but shall not include gifts or inheritances. [Amended
11-15-1983 by L.L. No. 12-1983]
B. Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or
all of the owners of the property for at least 24 consecutive months
prior to the date of making application for exemption; provided,
however, that in the event of the death of either a husband or wife in
whose name title of the property shall have been vested at the time of
72.Editor's Note: Former § 467-d of the Real Property Tax Law was repealed 1-2-1986 by L.
1985, c. 440, § 3.
§ 260-16 TATTOOING § 260-18
257:369
§ 260-19. Application for exemption. [Amended 12-15-1992 by L.L.
No. 2-1992]
death and then becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue of devise
or descent from the deceased husband or wife, the time of ownership
of the property by the deceased husband or wife shall be deemed
also a time of ownership by the survivor, and such ownership shall
be deemed continuous for the purposes of computing such period of
24 consecutive months, and provided further that where property of
the owner or owners has been acquired to replace property formerly
owned by such owner or owners and taken by eminent domain or other
involuntary proceeding, except a tax sale, the period of ownership of
the former property shall be combined with the period of ownership
of the property for which application is made for exemption, and such
period of ownership shall be deemed to be consecutive for purposes of
this section.
C. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes.
D. Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the owner or by all of the owners of the property.
A. Application for such exemption must be made by each owner of the
property on forms prescribed by the State Board of Equalization and
Assessment73 to be furnished by the Assessor's office and shall be
executed and the signature or signatures verified at such Assessor's
office during the period commencing December 1 and ending
December 31, or within such other times as may hereafter be fixed by
law.
B. Notwithstanding Subdivision 5 of § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, an
application for such exemption may be filed with the Assessor after the
appropriate taxable status date, but not later than the last date on
which a petition with respect to complaints of assessments may be filed,
where failure to file a timely application results from a death of the
applicant's spouse, child, parent, brother or sister or an illness of the
applicant or of the applicant's spouse, child, parent, brother or sister,
which actually prevents the applicant from filing on a timely basis, as
certified by a licensed physician. In such case the Assessor shall
approve or deny such application as if it had been filed on or before the
taxable status date.
C. The Village Assessor is hereby authorized to accept applications for
renewal of exemptions granted under this article after the taxable
status date. In the event that the owner or all of the owners of the
property which have received an exemption pursuant to this article on
the preceding assessment roll shall fail to file an application for renewal
on or before the taxable status date, such owner or owners may file the
73.Editor's Note: The State Board of Equalization and Assessment is now the State Board of
Real Property Services.
§ 260-18 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 260-19
257:370
§ 260-20. Responsibility of Assessor.
§ 260-21. Penalties for offenses.
Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the application
for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000
and shall disqualify the application, or applicants, from further exemption
for a period of five years.
application, executed as if such application had been filed on or before
the taxable status date, with the Village Board of Tax Assessors on or
before the date for the hearing of complaints.
A. The Assessor may require any applicant to furnish such other and
further information as may be reasonably necessary for him to establish
the qualifications for exemption of said applicant. He may establish
such rules and procedures and take such other steps as may be
necessary to implement the provisions of this article.
B. At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the
assessing authority shall mail to each person who was granted
exemption pursuant to this section on the latest completed assessment
roll an application form and a notice that such application must be filed
on or before taxable status date and be approved in order for the
exemption to be granted. Failure to mail any such application form and
notice or the failure of such person to receive the same shall not
prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of the payment of the taxes
on property owned by such person.
§ 260-19 TATTOOING § 260-21
257:371

ARTICLE IV
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 9-25-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984; amended in its entirety
1-3-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
§ 260-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set forth that the exemptions from real
property taxes pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the
State of New York shall apply to properties located within the Village, and
to increase the maximum allowable real property tax exemptions provided
for in § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law that is effective in the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson. All definitions, terms and conditions of such statute
shall apply to this article.
§ 260-23. Maximum allowable exemption.
The maximum exemptions allowable in Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of
Subdivision 2 of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law are hereby set as
$54,000, $36,000 and $180,000, respectively.
§ 260-23.1. Inconsistent laws.
Pursuant to New York Municipal Home Rule Law § 22, the provisions of this
article are intended to supersede the provisions of Real Property Tax Law
§ 458-a to the extent that this article and Real Property Tax Law § 458-a are
inconsistent.
§ 260-22 TATTOOING § 260-23.1
257:373

ARTICLE V
Collection of Property Taxes
[Adopted 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 8-1994]
§ 260-24. Continuation of property tax collection procedures.
Pursuant to Section 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by
a chapter of the Laws of 1994, as proposed in legislative bill number S.
8560-A,74 the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson hereby acts by local law, not
subject to referendum, to provide that the collection of property taxes shall
continue to be enforced pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property
Tax Law, as in effect on December 31, 1994.75
§ 260-25. Filing with Board of Equalization and Assessment.
Upon adoption, and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this article shall
be filed with the New York State Board of Equalization and Assessment.76
§ 260-26. When effective.
This article shall take effect on the same day as a chapter of the Laws of
1994 takes effect as proposed in legislative bill number S. 8560-A, except
if S. 8560-A shall become a law prior to adoption of this article, this article
shall take effect immediately.77
74.Editor's Note: See now L. 1994, c. 532.
75.Editor's Note: Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law was effective until
1-1-1995; for savings provisions, see the note in said Title 3.
76.Editor's Note: The State Board of Equalization and Assessment is now the State Board of
Real Property Services.
77.Editor's Note: S. 8560-A was signed into law 8-26-1994 as L. 1994, c. 532.
§ 260-24 TATTOOING § 260-26
257:375

ARTICLE VI
Installment Payments of Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 7-21-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
§ 260-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELIGIBLE DELINQUENT TAXES — The delinquent taxes, including interest,
penalties and charges, which have accrued against a parcel as of the date
on which an installment agreement is executed.
ELIGIBLE OWNER — An owner of real property who is eligible to or has
entered into an installment agreement.
INSTALLMENT AGREEMENT — A written agreement between an eligible
owner and the enforcing officer providing for the payment of eligible
delinquent taxes in installments pursuant to the provisions of § 1184 of the
Real Property Tax Law and this article.
§ 260-28. Installment agreements authorized; copy to be kept on
file.
The Village Manager/Treasurer and/or the enforcing officer of the Village
is authorized to enter into an installment agreement, providing for the
payment of eligible delinquent taxes in installments, with property owners.
Such installment payment of eligible delinquent taxes shall be made
available to each eligible owner on a uniform basis pursuant to the
provisions of the New York State Real Property Tax Law and this article.
Such installment payments of eligible delinquent taxes shall commence
upon the signing of an agreement between the Hastings-on-Hudson Village
Manager/Treasurer and the eligible owner(s). The agreement shall be kept
on file in the office of the Receiver of Taxes.
§ 260-29. Terms of agreement.
The term of the installment agreement shall be 24 months; the payment
schedule shall be monthly, quarterly or semiannually; the required initial
down payment shall be 25% of the eligible delinquent taxes plus penalties
and interest; and eligible properties shall include all properties within the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 260-30. Conditions for eligibility.
A property owner shall not be eligible to enter into an agreement pursuant
to this section where:
A. There is a delinquent tax lien on the same property for which the
application is made or on another property owned by such person and
such delinquent tax lien is not eligible to be made part of the agreement
pursuant to this section;
§ 260-27 TATTOOING § 260-30
257:377
§ 260-31. Time frame to enter into agreement.
A property owner shall be eligible to enter into an agreement pursuant to
this section no earlier than 30 days after the delivery of the return of unpaid
taxes to the enforcing officer.
§ 260-32. Determination of amount due; payments.
The amount due under an installment agreement shall be the eligible
delinquent taxes plus the interest that is to accrue on each installment
payment up to and including the date on which each payment is to be made.
The agreement shall provide that the amount due shall be paid, as nearly
as possible, in equal amounts on each payment due date. Each installment
payment shall be due on the last day of the month in which it is to be paid.
§ 260-33. Interest and penalties.
Interest on the total amount of eligible delinquent taxes, less the amount
of the down payment made by the eligible owner, if any is required, shall
be that amount as determined pursuant to New York State Real Property
Tax Law § 924-a. The rate of interest in effect on the date the agreement
is signed shall remain constant during the period of the agreement. If an
installment is not paid on or before the date it is due, interest shall be added
at the rate prescribed by New York State Real Property Tax Law § 924-a for
each month or portion thereof until paid.
§ 260-34. Default.
B. Such person is the owner of another parcel within the tax district on
which there is a delinquent tax lien, unless such delinquent tax lien is
eligible to be and is made part of the agreement pursuant to this
section; or
C. Such person was the owner of property on which there existed a
delinquent tax lien and which lien was foreclosed within three years of
the date on which an application is made to execute an agreement
pursuant to this section.
A. The eligible owner shall be deemed to be in default of the agreement
upon:
(1) Nonpayment of any installment within 30 days from the payment
due date;
(2) Nonpayment of any tax, special ad valorem levy or special
assessment which is levied subsequent to the signing of the
agreement of the tax district, and which is not paid prior to the
expiration of the warrant of the collecting officer; or
(3) Default of the eligible owner on another agreement made and
executed pursuant to this section.
§ 260-30 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 260-34
257:378
§ 260-35. Notification of potential eligible owners.
§ 260-36. Effect of article on tax liens.
The provisions of this section shall not affect the tax lien against the
property except that the lien shall be reduced by the payments made
under an installment agreement, and that the lien shall not be foreclosed
during the period of installment payments, provided that such installment
payments are not in default.
B. In the event of a default, the Village shall have the right to require the
entire unpaid balance, with interest and late charges, to be paid in full.
The Village shall also have the right to enforce the collection of the
delinquent tax lien pursuant to the applicable sections of law, special
tax act, charter or local law.
C. Where an eligible owner is in default and the Village does not either
require the eligible owner to pay in full the balance of the delinquent
taxes or elect to institute foreclosure proceedings, the Village shall not
be deemed to have waived the right to do so.
A. Within 45 days after receiving the return or unpaid taxes from the
collecting officer, the enforcing officer shall notify, by first class mail, all
potential eligible owners of their possible eligibility to make installment
payments on such tax delinquencies. The enforcing officer shall add an
amount to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in
the fee schedule78 to the amount of the tax lien for each such mailing.
[Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
B. The failure to mail any such notice, or the failure of the addressee to
receive the same, shall not in any way affect the validity of taxes or
interest prescribed by law with respect thereto.
C. The enforcing officer shall not be required to notify the eligible owner
when an installment is due.
78.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 260-34 TATTOOING § 260-36
257:379

ARTICLE VII
Tax Abatement for Rent-Controlled and Rent-Regulated Property
Occupied by Senior Citizens or Persons with Disabilities
[Adopted 3-21-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
§ 260-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISABLED PERSON — A person currently receiving social security
disability insurance (SSDI) benefits, or disability pension or disability
compensation benefits provided by the United States Department of
Veterans Affairs, or must be a person who previously received SSI or SSDI
disability benefits and is currently receiving medical assistance benefits
based on a determination of disability pursuant to Social Services Law
§ 366.
§ 260-38. Statutory provisions adopted; application of provisions.
[Amended 6-2-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson hereby adopts the provisions of § 467-b,
as amended, of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
Hereinafter, there shall be provided a tax abatement in rent-regulated
apartments where the combined income of members of the household
containing senior citizens (62 years of age or older) or disabled persons
does not exceed $50,000, and provided that, pursuant to § 467-b of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, the benefits of such abatement
are passed on to such senior citizens or disabled persons.
§ 260-37 TATTOOING § 260-38
257:381

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Members of Volunteer Fire Department and
Ambulance Corps
[Adopted 4-15-2008 by L.L. No. 2-200879]
§ 260-39. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to § 466-d of the New York Real Property Tax Law, an exemption
of 10% of the assessed value of residential property owned by an eligible
person (or an eligible person and his/her spouse), as defined in § 260-40, is
hereby granted with respect to Village taxes. This exemption shall not apply
to special assessments.
§ 260-40. Eligibility.
Such exemption shall be granted to an enrolled member of the Hastings-on-
Hudson Volunteer Fire Department or Volunteer Ambulance Corps only if:
§ 260-41. Permanent eligibility.
Any enrolled member of the Hastings-on-Hudson Volunteer Fire
Department or Volunteer Ambulance Corps who accrues more than 20 years
of active service and is so certified by the Hastings-on-Hudson Fire Chief
shall be granted the 10% exemption as authorized by this article for the
remainder of his/her life, as long as the other requirements of § 260-39 are
met.
§ 260-42. Permanently disabled volunteer.
Any volunteer firefighter or volunteer ambulance worker who receives the
exemption provided by this article who becomes permanently disabled due
to the exercise of his or her duties as such firefighter or ambulance worker
A. The member has been certified by the Hastings-on-Hudson Fire Chief
as an enrolled member of the Hastings-on-Hudson Volunteer Fire
Department or Volunteer Ambulance Corps for at least five years.
B. The member resides in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
C. The property is located in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and is the
primary residence of the member.
D. The property is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for the member's residence but is used for other purposes,
such portion shall not be exempt and the remaining portion only shall
be entitled to the exemption provided by this article.
79.Editor's Note: This Local Law also provided that this exemption shall be in lieu of any
exemption currently granted to members of the Volunteer Fire Department or Volunteer
Ambulance Corps and shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable
status dates occurring after 1-1-2009.
§ 260-39 TATTOOING § 260-42
257:383
and who is therefore prevented from being certified as an active service
member shall be entitled to the annual certification during the period of his
or her disability.
§ 260-43. Application for exemption.
Application for the Volunteer Firefighter/Ambulance Worker exemption
shall be filed with the Village Assessor on or before December 31 of each
calendar year.
§ 260-42 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 260-43
257:384
Chapter 262
TAXICABS AND TAXICAB DRIVERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 193. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 282.
§ 262-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter the
following words shall have the meaning indicated below:
MAYOR — The chief elected official of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson or
his authorized designee.
OWNER — Any person owning or having control of the use of one or more
taxicabs used for hire regularly upon the streets of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of fewer than 10 persons and
not operated on a fixed route.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab.
TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE — Written permission granted by the Village
as provided in this chapter to any individual to drive a licensed taxicab upon
the streets of such Village.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Written permission granted by the Village as
provided in this chapter to any person to operate a specified taxicab for hire
upon the streets of the Village.
TAXICAB STAND — Any public place alongside the curb of a street or
elsewhere in the Village which is exclusively reserved for the use of
taxicabs.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 262-2. Taxicab license required; determination of number of
taxicab licenses.
A. No person, operator or owner shall operate or permit a taxicab owned
or controlled by such person to be operated regularly for hire upon the
streets of the Village unless a taxicab license under the provisions of
this chapter has first been obtained for the taxicab and is then in force.
Such license shall be issued as of the first day of January each year and
shall expire on the following December 31, unless sooner suspended or
revoked.
B. In recognition of the fact that it is necessary to provide for adequate
service, the Board of Trustees shall determine the number of taxicab
§ 260-43 TATTOOING § 262-2
257:385
§ 262-3. Application for taxicab license.
Application for a taxicab license shall be made by the owner of the taxicab
upon a form supplied by the Chief of Police, which shall contain such
information as the Board of Trustees shall require. Each such application
shall be presented to and filed with the Village Clerk.
§ 262-4. Inspection of taxicabs.
licenses to be issued. Such determination shall be based on the
population of the Village, the number of persons boarding trains and
arriving by trains at the Village railroad stations and the general need
for taxicab service in the Village. When, in any year, the number of
applications for such licenses shall exceed the number authorized by
the Board of Trustees, the Chief of Police shall determine which
applicants shall be licensed, such determination being made on the
previous record, if any, of the applicants with respect to conditions
of vehicles, observance of laws affecting their operation, character of
service, if any, rendered by each applicant and the number of years
that the licensees shall have continuously rendered safe and adequate
taxicab service in the Village. The determination of the Chief of Police
with respect to each application shall be subject to review by the
Board of Trustees upon application, in writing, made by the prospective
licensee within 10 days of notice received by him, in writing, signed by
the Chief of Police disapproving the license application.
A. No taxicab shall be licensed hereunder until it has been thoroughly
inspected by a competent mechanic designated by the Chief of Police to
conduct such examination, certified by such mechanic, in writing, to be
in thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers and
also found to be clean, fit and of good appearance. A fee to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule80 shall be paid for each vehicle inspected by the applicant for
the license. The report of such inspection shall be filed with the Chief of
Police before a taxicab license is issued. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L.
No. 4-1999]
B. After a taxicab license has been issued for a particular taxicab, the
Chief of Police may at any time inspect such taxicab or cause it to be
inspected by a competent mechanic. Any such inspection may be made
on the initiative of the Chief of Police or upon written or oral complaint
by any person. A report of each such inspection shall be kept on file by
the Chief of Police in his office.
C. All taxicabs inspected shall meet mechanical and emissions standards
of the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles inspection
regulations.
80.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 262-2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 262-5
257:386
§ 262-5. Taxicabs license fee. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999]
For the issuance of a taxicab license, whether for one year or a portion
thereof, the license fee shall be as determined by the Village Board by
resolution and set in the fee schedule.81
§ 262-6. Issuance of taxicab licenses.
After passing the examination provided for in § 262-4 of this chapter, and
upon recommendation and advice of the Chief of Police, a taxicab shall be
licensed by delivering to the owner a license issued and signed by the Mayor
indicating payment of the required fee, which license shall at all times be
kept in the taxicab for which it was issued. The license shall be in the
form of a card issued to the owner of the taxicab containing the name and
address of the licensee, the expiration date of the license and the signature
of the Mayor and impressed with the seal of the Village. The license and
taxi inspection certificate must be posted conspicuously on the dashboard.
If a license or inspection certificate shall be defaced or changed in any
respect, the licensee shall report this fact immediately to the Chief of Police,
who may thereupon cancel the old license, which shall be surrendered by
the licensee, and issue a new license and inspection certificate in the form
prescribed in this section.
§ 262-7. Suspension or revocation of taxicab license.
A. A taxicab license may be revoked or suspended at any time for cause by
the Board of Trustees after a hearing. Any such suspension shall be for
such period as such Board shall prescribe. In addition to any other
existing grounds for the revocation or suspension of taxicab license,
such Board may revoke or suspend such license if it finds that such
taxicab has been used by the owner thereof or by any agent or
employee of the owner for any illegal business or purpose or in any
respect in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or that any
statement in the application is false. If the license is suspended or
revoked, it shall be surrendered to and be retained by the Chief of
Police and, in case of suspension, shall be returned to the owner after
the expiration of the suspension period.
B. If the Chief of Police shall at any time determine, after an inspection as
provided for in § 262-4B of this chapter, that a taxicab licensed under
the provisions of this chapter is unsafe, unsatisfactory for the transport
of passengers, unclean or not of good appearance, he may temporarily
suspend the license of such taxicab for a period not exceeding 30 days
or until the next meeting of the Board of Trustees, whichever is the
shorter period. The license may be revoked or suspended or continued
by the Board of Trustees.
81.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 262-5 TATTOOING § 262-8
257:387
§ 262-8. Taxicab driver's license required.
No person shall drive a taxicab regularly for hire upon the streets of the
Village and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so
driven and no taxicab licensed by the Village shall be so driven at any time
for hire unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained and shall
have then in force a taxicab driver's license or a temporary license issued
under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 262-9. Application for taxicab driver's license.
A. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall satisfy the following
requirements:
(1) Hold a New York State chauffeur's license.
(2) Be of the age of 18 or over and a citizen of the United States or a
declarant.
(3) Be of sound physique, with good eyesight and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or
mind which might render such applicant unfit for the safe operation
of a motor vehicle.
(4) Be able to speak, read and write the English language.
(5) Be clean in dress and not addicted to the use of drugs or
intoxicating liquor.
(6) Produce, on forms to be provided by the Chief of Police, driving and
any conviction records, affidavits of the applicant's good character
from two responsible citizens of the Village and a recommendation
to the applicant's good character from the applicant's last
employer, unless, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, sufficient
reason is given for the omission of such affidavits or
recommendation.
B. Contents of application.
(1) Each application for a taxicab driver's license must be filed with the
Chief of Police and must be accompanied by the required license
fee. Such application shall be on a form provided by the Chief of
Police and must be sworn to before a notary public and contain,
among other things, the following information:
(a) The applicant's full name, residence, place of residence for five
years previous to the applicant's present address, date and
place of birth, color, height and color of eyes and hair;
(b) The length of time the applicant has resided at said address;
(c) Whether a citizen of the United States and, if a naturalized
citizen, the place and date of securing such citizenship;
§ 262-8 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 262-9
257:388
§ 262-10. Photograph of taxicab driver.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must file three two-inch-bytwo-
inch photographs of the applicant, in such pose as the Chief of Police
may direct, taken within 30 days preceding the filing of application. One
photograph shall be attached to the application and one to the license when
issued. One photograph shall be filed with each application for renewal of
a taxicab driver's license, which shall be attached to the renewal license is
(d) The names and addresses of previous employers for the past
five years;
(e) Whether single or married;
(f) All felonies or misdemeanors with which the applicant has
been charged and the disposition of each such charges;
(g) What, if any, taxicab driver's licenses or chauffeur's licenses
issued by any state, municipality or other public authority have
previously been held by the applicant;
(h) All instances in which any such licenses may have been
revoked or suspended and the details thereof;
(i) The details set forth in the applicant's chauffeur's license
issued by the State of New York; and
(j) Any other information of similar nature that may reasonably be
required.
(2) No license shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of a
felony.
C. If the Chief of Police so requires, the applicant shall furnish a
physician's certificate as to the applicant's physical condition showing
that the applicant is free of any infirmity of body or mind which might
render the applicant unfit for the safe operation of a motor vehicle.
D. Each applicant shall be examined by a person designated by the Chief
of Police as to the applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this
chapter, the traffic regulations and the geography of the Village. If the
Chief of Police determines that the result of the examination is
unsatisfactory or if any statement of the applicant in the application is
determined to be false or if the applicant's physical or mental condition
is such that, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, it would be unsafe for
the applicant to operate a taxicab in the Village or if, in the opinion of
the Chief of Police, based upon the facts set forth in the application and
supporting affidavits and examination, the applicant is for any reason
deemed not to be a proper person to drive a taxicab in the Village, the
Chief of Police shall make a written report of his findings and his
recommendation to the Board of Trustees, which, in its discretion, may
deny such application.
§ 262-9 TATTOOING § 262-10
257:389
denied, two of the photographs shall be returned to the applicant by the
Chief of Police.
§ 262-11. Fingerprints of taxicab driver. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L.
No. 6-2019]
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall be fingerprinted by a
third-party agency under contract with the New York State Division of
Criminal Justice Services (DCJS). Applicants shall be responsible for the
fingerprinting fee, the processing fee, and all other associated
fingerprinting fees. The third-party agency will then submit the fingerprints
to the DCJS for a criminal background investigation.
§ 262-12. Issuance of taxicab driver's license.
If the applicant satisfactorily meets the foregoing requirements for the
issuance of a taxicab driver's license and if the Mayor deems the applicant
to be fit and proper to drive a taxicab in the Village, the Mayor shall issue to
the applicant a taxicab driver's license over his signature showing receipt
by him of the license fee.
§ 262-13. Form of taxicab driver's license.
The form, size and content of the taxicab driver's license shall be prescribed
by the Chief of Police and shall contain a photograph and a signature of
the licensee and blank spaces upon which a record of any arrest. A portion
of the photograph on each license shall be impressed with the seal of the
Village. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued
and shall contain the name and place of residence of the licensee and the
dates of issuance and expiration of the license. No licensee shall deface,
remove, change or obliterate any official entry made upon said license in
any respect whatsoever; and if such official license card shall be defaced,
obliterated or changed in any respect, the licensee shall report the same
immediately to the Chief of Police, who may issue a new official license and
cancel the old license surrendered by the licensee.
§ 262-14. Period of taxicab driver's license.
A taxicab driver's license shall be dated as of the first day of January and
shall expire on the following 31st day of December, unless suspended or
revoked prior to the expiration of such period.
§ 262-15. Renewal of taxicab driver's license. [Amended 3-5-2019 by
L.L. No. 6-2019]
The Mayor, upon payment of the fee prescribed for renewal, may renew
a taxicab driver's license from year to year by appropriate endorsement
thereon, subject to the same requirements for the issuance of such license
as are provided in § 262-9 and § 262-11 of this chapter. A taxicab driver, in
applying for a renewal of such license, shall make such application not less
than 30 days next preceding its expiration, upon a form to be supplied by
§ 262-10 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 262-15
257:390
the Chief of Police and containing such information as the Chief of Police
may require.
§ 262-16. Fees for taxicab driver's license. [Amended 9-21-1999 by
L.L. No. 4-1999]
Fees for the issuance, renewal or replacement of a taxicab driver's license
shall be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule.82
§ 262-17. Appeals.
Upon refusal to grant a taxicab license or a taxicab driver's license, an
applicant may appeal to the Board of Trustees by filing a written notice with
the Village Manager within 14 days from the date notice of such refusal,
signed by the Chief of Police, is mailed to the applicant.
§ 262-18. Record of licenses.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all taxicab licenses and taxicab
driver's licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter and of the
amount of fee paid therefor. The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept, in
the office of the Police Department, copies of applications for licenses of all
licensed taxicabs and taxicab drivers and any other related information.
§ 262-19. Suspension or revocation of taxicab driver's license.
§ 262-20. Taxicab service and conduct of taxicab drivers.
A. A taxicab driver's license or temporary license may be revoked or
suspended at any time for cause by the Board of Trustees after a
hearing. Any such suspension shall be for such period as the Board of
Trustees shall prescribe. In addition to any other existing grounds for
the revocation or suspension of such taxicab driver's license, the Board
may revoke or suspend such license if it finds that the holder thereof
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. If the license or
temporary license of the taxicab driver is revoked or suspended after
such hearing, such driver shall immediately surrender such license;
and, if the license is revoked, it shall be surrendered to the Chief of
Police without rebate of the fee paid therefor. A taxicab driver whose
license has been revoked under the provisions of this chapter shall
again be licensed only upon approval of the Board of Trustees.
B. If the Chief of Police shall at any time determine that the physical or
mental condition of a licensed taxicab driver is such that said driver is
not capable of operating with safety a taxicab upon the streets of the
Village, he may suspend the license of such taxicab driver.
82.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 262-15 TATTOOING § 262-20
257:391
A. Owners of taxicabs and taxicab drivers licensed by the Village shall
comply with the following regulations:
(1) All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the Village,
operating under the provisions of this chapter, shall render service
to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of taxicab licenses
shall maintain a central place of business, which shall be open to
the public for business every day, for the purpose of receiving calls
and dispatching cabs. They shall answer all calls received by them
for services inside the corporate limits of the Village as soon as they
can do so; if such services cannot be rendered within a reasonable
time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it
will be before the call can be answered and give the reason
therefor. Any holder of a taxicab license who shall refuse to accept
a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the Village at any time
when such holder has available cabs, or who shall fail or refuse to
give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this chapter and
the license granted to such holder shall be revoked at the
discretion of the Board of Trustees. [Amended 6-17-2008 by L.L.
No. 19-2008; 3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(2) No taxicab shall occupy any taxicab stand unless the taxicab driver
is in attendance and ready to accept and transport passengers.
(3) No taxicab cruising shall be permitted.
(4) All taxicabs shall be available for public use during the morning
and evening commuting hours.
(5) Articles left in taxicabs must be delivered to the Police Department
headquarters promptly after finding any such articles.
(6) Taxicabs shall not have installed therein or use any unusual horn or
other sounding device or any noisier horn or sounding device than
on ordinary private passenger cars and shall not sound their horns
unnecessarily.
(7) Taxicabs shall at all times be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition.
(8) Every owner shall furnish suitable chains for the drive wheels, or
snow tires, or all-weather tires on each taxicab owned by him and,
if opting to use chains, the driver of each taxicab shall use these
chains on such wheels whenever snow or ice conditions make it
advisable to do so or at the direction of a law enforcement official.
[Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(9) All taxicabs shall be kept in good operating condition.
(10)No taxicab shall remain unattended with the motor running, and, if
left unattended, the motor must be stopped and brakes applied.
§ 262-20 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 262-20
257:392
§ 262-21. Taxicab stands. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to establish taxicab stands upon
the streets of the Village in such places as, in its discretion, it deems proper
for the convenience of passengers.
§ 262-22. Posting of rates.
Every owner of a taxicab license shall post the rates to be charged for
taxicab use in the Village, including local, long distance and airport trips,
with the Village Manager and the Chief of Police not less than 30 days
before the effective date of such rates.
§ 262-23. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-5-2019 by L.L. No.
6-2019]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-13 of the Village Code.
(11)No gasoline shall be carried, except in the regular gasoline tank of
the taxicab. Each taxicab must be equipped with windshield
wipers, at least two rearview mirrors and suitable rear and front
bumpers. No taxicab shall be fueled while containing passengers or
when the engine is running, and the interior must be kept free of
smoke, fumes and gases.
(12)No taxicab shall be loaded beyond its rated capacity, which shall be
stated in the license issued for such taxicab.
(13) Taxicab drivers in the course of their business shall conduct
themselves at all times in an orderly manner and shall not use
offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting language.
They shall not solicit passengers unduly or in a noisy manner and
shall refrain from acting in such a way as to annoy, disturb,
interfere with, obstruct or be offensive to prospective or actual
passengers or other drivers or other persons. Taxicab drivers may
stand and solicit passengers only in such place or places as may be
designated by the Chief of Police.
(14) All taxicabs will meet mechanical and emissions standards of the
New York State Department of Motor Vehicles Motor Vehicle
Inspection Regulations, as well as requirements of the New York
State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
B. In the event of a violation of any of the subsections of this section, the
Chief of Police may temporarily suspend the license of any taxicab or
taxicab driver for a period not to exceed 30 days or until the next
meeting of the Board of Trustees, whichever is the shorter period, and
thereupon such license may be revoked, suspended or continued by the
Board of Trustees.
§ 262-20 TATTOOING § 262-23
257:393
Chapter 267
(RESERVED)
Chapter 270
(RESERVED)
Chapter 273
TREE PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 224.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 252, Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 295.
§ 273-1. Purpose.
The destruction or damage to shade, ornamental and evergreen trees and
plants and the indiscriminate and excessive cutting of these trees in
subdivisions and on private property causes barren and unsightly
conditions, creates increased surface drainage problems, increases
municipal costs to control drainage, impairs the stability and value of
improved and unimproved real property and causes deterioration to the
community which adversely affects the health, safety, environment,
ecosystems and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson. This chapter seeks to correct these conditions.
§ 273-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
dbh (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) — The diameter or caliper of a tree
measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground.
DESIGNATED TREE — Any tree as defined in this chapter which has a dbh
of 12 inches or more.
INJURY TO TREES — Any act which weakens the tree or which significantly
alters its form. This may be injury to the stems, trunk or roots of the tree
and may include the following acts: removal of significant numbers of the
branches (over-pruning), girdling or partial girdling of the tree trunk, large
excavations near (within 25 feet) the tree, compaction of the roots such as
caused by heavy construction equipment near (within 25 feet) a tree and
poisoning (such as by addition of brine, oil, gasoline, etc., to the ground
around a tree).
§ 262-23 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 273-2
257:394
PERSON — Any person, persons, firm, partnership, association, fiduciary,
corporation, company or organization of any kind including employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors.
TREE — A living woody plant with a clearly formed crown of foliage and
with one or more trunks.
TREE PRESERVATION MAP — A plan of the property in question indicating
the location, species, dbh and condition of all designated trees, as defined
above.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — A written authorization to remove one or more
designated trees pursuant to this chapter.
§ 273-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to any lot of one acre or more or combination of
adjoining lots of an aggregate size of one acre or more owned by the same
person, family or entity.
§ 273-4. Tree removal permits; when required.
§ 273-5. Responsibility for contractors.
Under this chapter, all persons shall be held responsible for any actions of
their contractors or subcontractors.
§ 273-6. Tree preservation maps.
All applicants for subdivision. site plan review or other development
requiring tree removal shall be required to submit to the Building Inspector
a tree preservation map identifying all designated trees on portions of the
site to be developed.
§ 273-7. Procedure for permit application.
A. No person shall, without a tree removal permit, cut down, otherwise
destroy or injure any designated tree.
B. No person shall intentionally, carelessly or negligently cause
petrochemicals, herbicides or other substances to penetrate or be
introduced into the soil in or about a designated tree's root system so as
to effectively kill or injure that tree.
C. No person shall, without a tree removal permit, undertake construction,
alteration, addition, demolition or grading where such actions will
occur within 25 feet of any designated tree and which would kill or
injure that tree.
A. Application for permit.
§ 273-2 TATTOOING § 273-7
257:395
(1) Application for a tree removal permit shall be made in writing to
the Building Inspector who, after consultation with the Tree
Preservation Board, shall issue or deny the permit.
(2) The applicant shall file three copies of the tree removal permit
application with the Building Inspector. The application shall
include the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The address and Village Tax Map designation of the property
on which the tree(s) is/are located.
(c) The total land area of the parcel and total land area involved in
the cutting operations.
(d) The number of trees to be removed and the size (dbh and
approximate height) and species of each.
(e) The reason for the tree removal of each tree.
(f) The method by which the proposed tree(s) will be removed.
(g) The name of the individual or entity that will effectuate the
removal.
(h) Tree survey.
[1] In the case of site plans and subdivisions, the tree survey
shall be submitted to the Planning Board with a report
filed by the Tree Preservation Board as a part of the site
plan or subdivision construction plans; a survey of that
section to be disturbed and the adjacent twenty-fiveperimeter
not to be disturbed showing the location of all
trees regulated herein to an accuracy of one foot,
indicating those trees to be preserved, their species and
their dbh; or
[2] Where no subdivision or site plan is involved, the survey
requirement may be eliminated and a simple sketch drawn
by the applicant may be sufficient. This sketch should
include the location of the trees requested for removal in
relation to the property's benchmarks and other
information as may be necessary.
(i) Proof that neighbors (properties adjacent to the property on
which the tree grows or which lie within 50 yards of the tree in
question) have been notified at least two weeks earlier that a
permit application for tree removal is being filed.
(j) Any additional information as may be required by the
approving agency.
§ 273-7 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 273-7
257:396
§ 273-8. Permit application fees.
A tree removal permit application for tree removal shall be accompanied by
a fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule.83
B. A tree removal permit shall normally be issued if any of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The location of the tree(s) clearly endangers the health, safety,
welfare or property of the general public, the property owner or an
adjoining property owner.
(2) The location of the designated tree(s) prevents compliance with
state, county or local standards for sight lines, driveways or
intersections.
(3) The location of the tree(s) prevents the property owner from
undertaking otherwise approved construction or alteration because
the location of the designated tree(s) substantially interferes with a
permitted use of the property and the construction or alteration
cannot be reasonably modified to accommodate the designated
tree(s); written explanation may be required describing how the
designated tree(s) interferes with construction or alteration and
why the construction or alteration cannot be modified reasonably
to accommodate the designated tree(s).
(4) The designated tree(s), due to death, disease, blight, infestation,
storm damage, accident or other condition, causes undue hardship
for the property owner to maintain.
(5) The tree is dead or so substantially diseased that it constitutes a
danger to persons, property or other trees.
(6) The removal of the tree is consistent with good horticultural or
vegetation management and will not have an adverse effect on an
ecological system.
C. The request for a tree removal permit of the designated tree(s) should
include proposed mitigation measures by the planting of one or more
new trees.
D. Appeals from the Building Inspector's denial of a tree removal permit
shall be made to the Village Manager within 30 days after denial.
E. A tree removal permit may be revoked by the Building Inspector if it is
determined that the permitted work has exceeded the terms or scope of
the tree removal permit.
83.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 273-7 TATTOOING § 273-9
257:397
§ 273-9. Tree removal and restoration requirements.
Removal of any designated tree shall require the following actions:
§ 273-10. Street trees. [Added 3-5-2019 by L.L. No. 4-201984]
Trees on the Village streets shall not be removed or disturbed without
permission of the Board of Trustees, and any tree removed for any reason
shall be replaced with new trees in the nearest practical location designated
be either the Board of Trustees or Superintendent of Public Works. The cost
of replacement shall be borne by the one desiring the removal or the one
benefiting thereby. The size and variety of new trees shall be as required by
the Village. No poplar trees shall be planted within 50 feet of any sewer or
sewer branch.
§ 273-11. Tree removal in cases of immediate threat.
If a designated tree poses an immediate threat to the health, safety or
welfare of a person or property, that tree may be removed without a tree
removal permit. In the event that any designated tree is removed pursuant
to this section, within three days after such removal, the person on whose
property the tree is located shall submit to the Building Inspector a letter or
other documentation explaining and confirming the nature and extent of the
immediate threat. The Building Inspector may require, in his/her discretion,
documentation from a certified arborist.
§ 273-12. Penalties for offenses.
A. The tree trunk, limbs, stump and any roots remaining above grade shall
be completely removed.
B. The disturbed area shall be restored by backfilling, replanting and/or
reseeding.
C. Tree removal and restoration shall conform to guidelines promulgated
by the Board of Trustees pursuant to this chapter.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense punishable by a fine of no less than $250 and not
exceeding $5,000.
B. Each violation to an individual designated tree shall constitute a
separate offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
required, in addition to any penalty imposed under Subsections A and B
above, to replace any tree removed with a tree of the same species, size
and/or value, as may be determined by the Building Inspector. The
Building Inspector may permit the new planting to differ from the size
84.Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former §§ 273-10 through 273-13 as
§§ 273-11 through 273-14, respectively.
§ 273-9 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 273-12
257:398
§ 273-13. Creation and membership of Tree Preservation Board.
[Amended 7-15-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
§ 273-14. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
Chapter 282
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 209. Taxicabs and taxicab drivers — See Ch. 262.
and number of the removed tree(s), particularly in cases where the
removed tree was too large to feasibly be replaced by one of equal size.
D. No building permit, demolition permit or certificate of occupancy shall
be granted until all provisions of this chapter have been satisfied.
A. There is hereby created a Tree Preservation Board which shall serve in
an advisory capacity to the Superintendent of Public Works, Building
Inspector and Planning Board.
B. The Tree Preservation Board shall consist of three members appointed
by the Village Manager. The members of the Tree Preservation Board
shall elect one of their members as Chairperson.
C. Members of the Tree Preservation Board shall serve for a term of two
years. Members of the Tree Preservation Board shall serve without
compensation.
§ 273-12 TATTOOING § 273-14
257:399

Part 1
M[Audnoicpitpeadl 1P1a-r1k5in-1g9 L5o8t]s
ARTICLE I
Parking Limited in Certain Lots
§ 282-1. Parking in Zinsser Plaza and Southside Plaza Parking Lots
limited.
No person shall park a vehicle in Zinsser Plaza or Southside Plaza Parking
Lots between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Sundays and legal
holidays excepted, unless such person:
§ 282-2. Permit period.
The permit mentioned in § 282-1B shall be issued for the period from
December 15, 1958, until January 31, 1960, and thereafter said permit shall
be issued for the period commencing February 1 and ending January 31
next in each year. Said permit shall be displayed on the parked vehicle in
the manner authorized by the Chief of Police.
§ 282-3. Zinsser Plaza and Southside Plaza Parking Lots described.
A. Is a resident of or is regularly employed in the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson; and
B. Possesses a permit authorizing such parking, obtained from the Village
Manager; and
C. Puts a fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in
the fee schedule85 into the appropriate parking meter for each two
hours and 15 minutes that the vehicle stands in said Zinsser Plaza
Parking Lot; or [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
D. Puts a fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in
the fee schedule into the appropriate parking meter for each two hours
that the vehicle stands in said Southside Plaza Parking Lot. [Amended
9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of Subsections A and B
shall not apply to parking in Zinsser Plaza or Southside Plaza Parking
Lots on Saturdays and legal holidays. [Added 5-1-1972]
A. Zinsser Plaza Parking Lot is that area of land owned by the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson bounded and described as follows: The property
hereinafter described as belonging to the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson is bounded on the west by the easterly line of Southside
Avenue; on the north, proceeding from west to east, by properties
owned now and formerly by Jack Weiss and Paul Turowski; on the east
by additional Village-owned property currently being leased to the
85.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 282-1 TATTOOING § 282-3
257:401
§ 282-4. Police officers authorized to remove illegally parked
vehicles. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999; 6-17-2008 by L.L.
No. 22-2008]
The Village police are hereby authorized to remove or provide for the
removal of vehicles parked illegally on the Village parking lots described in
§ 282-3 to an automobile pound, garage or other area. After removal of any
vehicle, the Police Department may arrange to have such vehicle stored at a
tow/storage facility at the expense of the owner. The owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of such vehicle may be charged with a
reasonable cost for the removal and storage, payable to the tow/storage
company before the vehicle is released.
§ 282-5. Determination of regular employment; effect on permit.
A person shall be deemed regularly employed in the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson if his term of employment in the Village is indefinable or is to
exceed 30 days. A nonresident's permit shall terminate with the termination
of said nonresident's employment in said Village.
§ 282-6. Adoption and filing of rules and regulations.
The Village Manager or his authorized representative (such designation not
to be effective until filed in the office of the Village Manager) shall issue
rules and regulations to implement this Part 1. This power shall be broadly
and liberally construed to effectuate the purpose of this Part 1. No rule or
regulation shall be effective until filed in the office of the Village Manager.
Anaconda Wire and Cable Company; and on the south, proceeding
from east to west, by properties owned now and formerly by William
Orlovich and wife, Eleven Washington Avenue Hastings Corp., Nicholas
Antoszyk and wife, and additional Village-owned land, with a house
erected thereon, now and formerly known as the "Scott House," the
land herein described to be known as "Zinsser Plaza."
B. Southside Plaza Parking Lot is that area of land owned by the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson bounded and described as follows: Beginning at a
point on the easterly line of Southside Avenue where the same is
intersected by the division line between the property hereinafter
described as belonging to the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, New York,
and property now and formerly of Mary Yetnovich, and which point is
south 30° 58' west 166 feet more or less from the intersection of said
line of Southside Avenue with the southerly line of Spring Street if both
said lines were projected in straight lines until they intersected;
running thence south 65° 53' 32" east 75 feet, along the northern
boundary of the land herein described; thence south 19° 37' 10" west
150 feet more or less; thence north 70° 22' 50" west 57 feet more or
less; thence north 20° 44' 10" west 107 feet more or less; thence 67° 36'
2" east 56 feet more or less; thence north 30° 58' west 37 feet to point
or place of beginning.
§ 282-3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-7
257:402
§ 282-7. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of this Part 1 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $5.
Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 282-7 TATTOOING § 282-7
257:403

Part 2
Gen[eArdaol pTtreadffi1c2 R-3e-g1u9l6a2t]ions
ARTICLE II
Words and Phrases Defined
§ 282-8. Definitions.
A. The words and phrases used in this Part 2 shall, for the purposes of this
Part 2, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purpose
of the traffic ordinances of this Village:
BUS ZONE — An area of a street reserved for the stopping and/
or standing of buses while they take on or discharge passengers, as
authorized by the Board of Trustees.[Added 9-2-1969]
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, President's
Day, Columbus Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
General Election Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas
Day.[Amended 2-6-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
LOADING ZONE — An area of a street reserved for the loading and
unloading of merchandise or other property, between designated hours
and for a period of time never to exceed 30 minutes.[Added 9-2-1969;
amended 12-17-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984]
OFF-STREET METER ZONE — Any parking area owned or leased by
the Village upon which parking meters have heretofore been installed
and are in operation or which are to be hereafter installed and
operated.
PARKING METER — A mechanical device placed or erected for the
regulation of parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — That area designated by markings or
otherwise allocated to the parking of a motor vehicle.
PARKING METER ZONE — Any street or portion of a street upon which
parking meters have heretofore been installed and are in operation or
which are to be hereinafter installed and operated.
SCHOOL SPEED ZONE — That portion of the highway passing a school
building and extending not more than 1,320 feet along such highway
in front of the entrance to any school building.[Added 9-2-1969;
amended 9-4-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
TAXI ZONE — An area of a street reserved for the parking of taxicabs,
as authorized by the Board of Trustees.[Added 9-2-1969]
§ 282-8 TATTOOING § 282-8
257:405
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION — To apply and lock a vehicle
immobilization device to the exterior of a motor vehicle.[Added
11-4-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE — A vehicle boot or wheel clamp
designed to immobilize a parked vehicle and prevent its movement until
the device is unlocked and removed.[Added 11-4-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014]
§ 282-8 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-8
257:406
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)86
§ 282-9. (Reserved)
86.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Traffic Control Devices, was repealed 6-17-2008 by L.L. No.
22-2008.
§ 282-9 TATTOOING § 282-9
257:407

ARTICLE IV
Traffic Control Signals
§ 282-10. Location of traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated as
follows:
A. A semiactuated traffic control signal which may be manually set at the
option of the Police Chief, on such sequences as the Police Chief may
determine, at the intersection of Warburton Avenue with Washington
Avenue, consisting of the following: [Amended 12-20-1965;
6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 22-2008]
(1) A three-section, four-face signal head.
(2) Vehicle detectors on Washington Avenue.
(3) Sequence of operation: green on Warburton Avenue until signal on
Washington Avenue is actuated.
B. A fixed-time traffic control signal at the intersection of Warburton
Avenue with Main Street, consisting of the following:
(1) A three-section, three-face signal head.
C. A manually operated on-demand traffic control signal on Main Street in
front of the Fire House.87 [Added 5-20-2008 by L.L. No. 8-2008]
87.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding the intersection of Spring Street with
Warburton Avenue, and former Subsection E, regarding the intersection of Farragut
Avenue and Mount Hope Boulevard, added 12-17-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984, which
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 22-2008.
§ 282-10 TATTOOING § 282-10
257:409

ARTICLE V
One-Way Roadways
§ 282-11. Location of one-way roadways.
A. The following highways are hereby designated for one-way traffic in an
easterly direction:
(1) Villard Avenue, between its intersection with Warburton Avenue
and its intersection with Broadway, Route U.S. 9.
(2) Circle Drive, between its westerly intersection with Chestnut Drive
and its easterly intersection with Chestnut Drive.
(3) Garland Drive, between its intersection with Overlook Road and its
intersection with Stanley Avenue. [Added 9-2-1969]
B. The following highways are hereby designated one-way traffic in a
southwesterly direction: [Amended 12-20-1965]
(1) Green Street, between its intersection with Farragut Parkway and
its intersection with Prince Street.
C. The following highways are hereby designated one-way traffic in a
southeasterly direction: [Added 3-22-1971]
(1) Jefferson Avenue from Mount Hope Boulevard to Cochrane Avenue.
§ 282-11 TATTOOING § 282-11
257:411

ARTICLE VI
Turning Movements
§ 282-12. Prohibition of left turns.
The turning of vehicles is hereby prohibited as follows:
§ 282-13. Prohibition of U-turns.
The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction is hereby
prohibited at the following locations:
§ 282-14. Prohibition of right turns. [Added 11-15-1976 by L.L. No.
6-1976]
Right turns are hereby prohibited in the following locations:
§ 282-15. Prohibition of right turns on red light signal. [Added
11-15-1976 by L.L. No. 6-1976]
Right turns on red light signal are prohibited and no-turn-on-red signs shall
be posted at the following intersections:
A. Vehicles proceeding north on Broadway, Route U.S. 9, at the northwest
entrance to business property at the corner of Broadway, Route U.S. 9,
and Main Street.
B. Vehicles exiting from the business property at the corner of Broadway,
Route U.S. 9, and Main Street to Broadway, Route U.S. 9. [Amended
12-20-1965]
C. Vehicles exiting from the off-street meter zone known as "Warburton
Avenue Parking Lot" on Warburton Avenue. [Added 9-2-1969]
D. Vehicles proceeding westbound on Villard Avenue at Terrace Drive.
[Added 6-30-1986 by L.L. No. 5-1986]
E. Vehicles proceeding westbound on Hillside Avenue at Farragut Avenue
during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on
school days. [Added 4-16-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
A. Warburton Avenue, between North Street and Washington Avenue.
B. At all intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic signals.
C. Main Street, between Warburton Avenue and Broadway, Route U.S. 9.
A. Trucks proceeding north on Broadway, Route U.S. 9, at the corner of
Broadway and Farragut Avenue.
A. Southeast corner of Main Street at its intersection with Broadway.
B. Northeast corner of Broadway at its intersection with Farragut Avenue.
§ 282-12 TATTOOING § 282-15
257:413
C. Broadway at its intersection with Chauncey Lane (Broadway bypass at
the American Legion Monument location).
D. Northeast corner of Fraser Place at its intersection with Broadway.
E. Northeast corner of Edgars Lane at its intersection with Broadway.88
88.Editor’s Note: Former Subsections F and G, which immediately followed and prohibited
right turns on red from Washington Avenue on to Warburton Avenue, were repealed
12-4-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012.
§ 282-15 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-15
257:414
ARTICLE VII
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 282-16. Through highways.
A. The following are through highways.
(1) Broadway and Old Broadway, Route U.S. 9, is hereby designated as
a through highway, and:
(a) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
[1] Flower Avenue from the east.
[2] Minturn Street from the east.
[3] Riverview Place from the west.
[4] 89Elm Place from east.
[5] Travis Place from the east.
[6] Baker Lane from the east.
[7] Olinda Avenue from the east.
[8] Washington Avenue from the west.
[9] Burnside Drive from the east.
[10] Devon Way from the east.
[11] Pinecrest Drive from the west.
[12]Windsor Road from the east.
[13] High Street from the east.
[14]Warren Street from the east.
[15] Hudson Street from the east. [Added 5-19-1975 by L.L.
No. 2-1975]
[16] Goodwin Street from the east.90 [Added 5-19-1975 by
L.L. No. 2-1975]
(2) Farragut Parkway is hereby designated as a through highway, and:
(a) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
89.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(a)[3], [4], [5] and [8], listing Edgars Lane, Fraser
Place, Warburton Avenue (north leg) and Villard Avenue, respectively, as entrances with
stop signs, were repealed 11-6-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012. This local law also redesignated
former Subsection A(1)(a)[7] as Subsection A(1)(a)[4] and Subsection A(1)(a)[9] through
[20] as Subsection A(1)(a)[5] through [16], respectively.
90.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(b), which immediately followed and listed
entrances with yield signs, was repealed 11-6-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012.
§ 282-16 TATTOOING § 282-16
257:415
[1] Hillside Avenue from the east.
[2] Olinda Avenue from the west.
[3] Mount Hope Boulevard from the east.
[4] Merril Street from the east.
[5] Burnside Drive from the west.
[6] Ravensdale Road from the east.
[7] Saunders Street from the west.
[8] The Fenway from the east.
[9] High Street from the west.
[10] Curry Road from the south.
[11] Farragut Avenue from the east. [Added 11-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 3-201291]
(3) Warburton Avenue is hereby designated as a through highway, and:
(a) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
[1] North Street from the west.
[2] William Street from the east.
[3] Division Street from the east.
[4] Nodine Street from the east.
[5] Pinecrest Drive from the east.
(4) Ravensdale Road is hereby designated as a through highway, and:
(a) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances there to:
[1] Southgate Avenue from the north.
[2] Kent Avenue from the north and south.
[3] South Clinton Avenue from the south.
[4] Clinton Avenue from the north.
[5] Stanley Avenue from the south.
[6] Branford Road from the south.
[7] Rosedale Avenue from the north.
91.Editor’s Note: This local law also repealed former Subsection A(2)(b), which immediately
followed and listed entrances with yield signs.
§ 282-16 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-16
257:416
[8] Ravensdale Road going east at the intersection with Kent
Avenue. [Added 11-16-1981 by L.L. No. 12-1981]
(5) Villard Avenue is hereby designated as a through highway between
Broadway and its easterly terminus, and:
(a) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
[Amended 11-6-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
[1] Croton Avenue from the south.
[2] Euclid Avenue from the north.
[3] Darwin Avenue from the south.
[4] Calumet Avenue from the north.
[5] South Calumet Avenue from the south.
[6] Terrace Drive from the south.
[7] Circle Drive from the east.
[8] Summit Drive from the west.
[9] Ravine Drive from the west.
(6) Farragut Avenue is hereby designated as a through highway, and:
(a) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
[Amended 11-6-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
[1] Ashley Road from the east.
[2] Nepperhan Avenue from the south.
[3] Columbia Avenue from the south.
[4] Clunie Avenue from the south.
[5] Stanley Avenue from the north.
[6] Nepera Place from the south.
(7) Mount Hope Boulevard is hereby designated as a through highway,
and:
(a) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
[1] School Street from the north.
[2] Rosedale Avenue from the north and south.
[3] Overlook Road on the southeast corner. [Added
12-1-1987 by L.L. No. 5-1987]
§ 282-16 TATTOOING § 282-16
257:417
[4] Lincoln Avenue on the southeast corner. [Added 5-4-1993
by L.L. No. 2-1993]
[5] Valley Place from the north. [Added 11-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 3-2012]
[6] Cochrane Avenue from the south. [Added 11-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 3-2012]
[7] Lefurgy Avenue from the north and south. [Added
11-6-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
[8] Lincoln Avenue from the north and south. [Added
11-6-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
[9] Southgate Avenue from the south. [Added 11-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 3-2012]
[10] Dorchester Avenue from the north. [Added 11-6-2012 by
L.L. No. 3-2012]
[11] Overlook Road from the north and south. [Added
11-6-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
[12] Cliff Street from the north. [Added 11-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 3-2012]
(b) Yield signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
[1] 92Hamilton Avenue from the north and south.
(8) Tompkins Avenue is hereby designated as a through highway, and:
(a) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
[1] James Street from the north.
[2] Oxford Road from the east.
(9) High Street is hereby designated as a through highway, and:
(a) Stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
[1] Amherst Drive from the south.
[2] Harvard Lane from the south.
[3] Brandt Street from the west.
[4] James Street from the north and south.
[5] Rose Street from the north and south.
92.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(7)(b)[1] and Subsection A(7)(b)[3] through [10],
listing entrances with yield signs, were repealed 11-6-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012. This local
law also redesignated former Subsection A(7)(b)[2] as Subsection A(7)(b)[1].
§ 282-16 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-16
257:418
[6] Prince Street from the north and south.
[7] Hudson Street from the west. [Added 11-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 3-2012]
[8] Warren Street from the west. [Added 11-6-2012 by L.L.
No. 3-2012]
(10) The intersection of Edgars Lane with Flower Avenue is hereby
designated as a stop intersection and stop signs shall be erected on
Edgars Lane at its entrances to said intersection from the north and
south.
(11) The intersection of Villard Avenue and Whitman Street is hereby
designated as a stop intersection and a stop sign shall be erected
on Whitman Street at its entrance to said intersection from the
south.
(12) The intersection of Clarence Avenue and Clinton Avenue is hereby
designated as a stop intersection and stop signs shall be erected on
Clarence Avenue at its entrance to Clinton Avenue. [Added
12-20-1965]
(13) The intersection of The Fenway, Fenwick Road and Branford Road
is hereby designated as a four-way stop intersection and a stop sign
shall be erected on each street where they intersect. [Added
12-20-1965; amended 12-5-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
(14) Oxford Road at its intersection with James Street and Tompkins
Avenue is hereby designated at a stop intersection and a stop sign
shall be erected on Oxford Road at its intersection with James
Street and Tompkins Avenue. [Added 12-20-1965]
(15) The intersection of Tompkins Avenue and Jordan Road (near
Broadway) is hereby designated as a stop intersection and a stop
sign shall be erected on Jordan Road at its intersection with
Tompkins Avenue. [Added 12-20-1965]
(16) The intersection of the Elementary School driveway and that of
Lefurgy Avenue and that of Edgewood Avenue are all designated as
stop intersections and stop signs shall be erected on each street or
driveway where the same intersects the other. [Added 1-3-1967]
(17) The northeast corner of Tompkins Avenue and Broadway shall be
designated a stop intersection and stop signs shall be erected for
vehicles proceeding in a westerly direction on Tompkins Avenue.
[Added 1-3-1967]
(18) The intersection of Green Street and Prince Street is hereby
designated as a stop intersection and stop sign shall be erected on
Prince Street at its entrance to Green Street. [Added 1-2-1968]
§ 282-16 TATTOOING § 282-16
257:419
(19) The intersection of Scenic Drive and Ferndale Driveway is hereby
designated a stop intersection and a stop sign shall be erected on
Scenic Drive at its entrance to Ferndale Driveway. [Added
1-2-1968]
(20) The intersection of Ferndale Driveway and Circle Driveway is
hereby designated as a yield intersection and a yield sign shall be
erected on Ferndale Driveway at its entrance to Circle Driveway.
[Added 1-2-1968]
(21) The intersection of Edgewood Avenue and Lefurgy Avenue is
hereby designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be
erected at Edgewood Avenue at its entrance to Lefurgy Avenue and
on Lefurgy Avenue at its intersection with Edgewood Avenue.
[Added 1-2-1968]
(22) The intersection of Chauncey Lane, South Drive and Farlane Drive
is hereby designated a stop intersection and a stop sign shall be
erected on Farlane Drive at its intersection with Chauncey Lane
and another sign shall be erected on South Drive at its intersection
with Chauncey Lane. [Added 12-2-1968]
(23) The intersection of Farlane Drive, Hillside Avenue and that of
Hillside Park Driveway is hereby designated a stop intersection,
and stop signs shall be erected on Farlane Drive at its intersection
with Hillside Avenue and on Hillside Park Driveway at its
intersection with Hillside Avenue. [Added 12-2-1968]
(24) The intersection of Maple Avenue and North Street is hereby
designated a stop intersection, and stop signs shall be erected on
the southeasterly and the northwesterly corners of Maple Avenue
at its intersection with North Street and on the northwesterly
corner of North Street at its intersection with Maple Avenue.
[Added 12-2-1968; amended 5-20-1974]
(25) The intersection of South Clinton Avenue and Stanley Avenue is
hereby designated as a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be
erected on Stanley Avenue at its entrance to South Clinton Avenue.
[Added 9-2-1969; amended 7-6-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
(26) The intersection of School Street and Hillside Avenue is hereby
designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be erected at
the northeast corner of School Street. [Added 9-2-1969]
(27) The intersection of Fairmont Avenue and Lefurgy Avenue is hereby
designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be erected on
the northwest corner of Lefurgy Avenue at its intersection with
Fairmont Avenue. [Added 10-17-1977 by L.L. No. 5-1977]
(28) The intersection of Cochrane Avenue and Fairmont Avenue is
hereby designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be
erected on the northwest corner of Cochrane Avenue at its
§ 282-16 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-16
257:420
intersection with Fairmont Avenue. [Added 10-17-1977 by L.L.
No. 5-1977]
(29) The intersection of Kent Avenue with Fenwick Road is hereby
designated as a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be erected
on Kent Avenue at the north corner of its intersection with Fenwick
Road. [Added 6-20-1978 by L.L. No. 2-1978]
(30) Five-way stop sign: intersection of Hamilton Avenue, Merrill Street
and Rosedale Avenue. [Added 11-16-1981 by L.L. No. 12-1981]
(31) Stop sign at Ferndale Drive and Circle Drive. [Added 8-22-1983
by L.L. No. 8-1983]
(32) The intersection of Spring Street and Maple Avenue is hereby
designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be erected on
the northeast corner of Spring Street at its intersection with Maple
Avenue. [Added 12-17-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984]
(33) Stop sign at the northwest corner of Horner Avenue at its
intersection with Lincoln Avenue. [Added 5-5-1987 by L.L. No.
2-1987]
(34) Stop signs at the northeast and southwest corners of Southgate
Avenue at its intersection with Fairmont Avenue. [Added 5-5-1987
by L.L. No. 2-1987]
(35) Stop sign at the southeast corner of Garland Drive at its
intersection with Overlook Road. [Added 12-1-1987 by L.L. No.
5-1987]
(36) Stop sign at the southwest corner of Overlook Road at its
intersection with Garland Drive. [Added 12-1-1987 by L.L. No.
5-1987]
(37) Yield sign at the southwest corner of Fairmont Avenue at its
intersection with Overlook Road. [Added 12-1-1987 by L.L. No.
5-1987]
(38) Stop sign at the northwest corner of Hollywood Drive at its
intersection with Scenic Drive. [Added 12-6-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988]
(39) Stop sign at the northwest corner of Belair Drive at its intersection
with Euclid Avenue. [Added 12-6-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
(40) Stop sign at the southeast corner of Spring Street at its
intersection with Warburton Avenue. [Added 12-6-1988 by L.L.
No. 4-1988]
(41) Stop sign at the southwest corner of Stanley Avenue at its
intersection with Farragut Avenue. [Added 5-16-1989 by L.L. No.
4-1989]
§ 282-16 TATTOOING § 282-16
257:421
(42) Stop sign at the southeast corner of Lefurgy Avenue at its
intersection with Mount Hope Boulevard. [Added 8-15-1989 by
L.L. No. 5-1989]
(43) Stop sign at the northwest corner of Lefurgy Avenue at its
intersection with Mount Hope Boulevard. [Added 8-15-1989 by
L.L. No. 5-1989]
(44) Stop sign on the south side of Jefferson Avenue at its intersection
with Cochrane Avenue. [Added 2-20-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
(45) Stop sign on the north side of Wagner Place at its intersection with
Broadway. [Added 1-22-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
(46) Stop signs at the southwest corner of Hamilton Avenue at its
intersection with Merrill Street, and the northeast side of Hamilton
Avenue at its intersection with Merrill Street. [Added 3-15-1994
by L.L. No. 3-1994]
(47) Stop signs on the northwest corner of Green Street at its
intersection with Rose Street, and the northeast corner of Rose
Street at its intersection with Green Street. [Added 3-15-1994 by
L.L. No. 3-1994]
(48) Stop signs at the northeast and northwest sides of Edgars Lane at
its intersection with Minturn Street, and the southwest corner of
Minturn Street at its intersection with Edgars Lane. [Added
3-15-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994]
(49) Stop sign at Hillside Avenue heading west at the intersection of
Chemka Pool Road. [Added 1-3-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
(50) Stop sign at Hillside Avenue heading east at the intersection of
Farlane Drive and Chemka Pool Road. [Added 1-3-1995 by L.L.
No. 1-1995]
(51) Stop sign at the southwest corner of Valley Place and Mount Hope
Boulevard. [Added 1-3-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
(52) Three-way stop sign at the intersection of Euclid Avenue and
Pleasant Avenue. [Added 1-7-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
(53) Stop sign at the northeast corner of Oakdale Drive at its
intersection with Scenic Drive. [Added 12-16-1997 by L.L. No.
9-1997]
(54) Three-way stop sign at the intersection of Farragut Avenue and
Olinda Avenue. [Added 5-4-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
(55) Two-way stop sign both east and west of the crosswalk entrance to
Reynolds Field on Hillside Avenue. [Added 12-2-2003 by L.L. No.
8-2003]
§ 282-16 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-16
257:422
(56) Stop sign at Tompkins Avenue controlling eastbound traffic at the
intersection of James Street. [Added 3-1-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
(57) The intersection of Fenwick Road and Kent Avenue is hereby
designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be erected on
the southwest corner of Fenwick Road at its intersection with Kent
Avenue. [Added 2-20-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(58) The intersection of Branford Road and Kent Avenue is hereby
designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be erected on
the southwest corner of Branford Road at its intersection with Kent
Avenue. [Added 2-20-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(59) The intersection of eastbound Clarence Avenue and Stanley Avenue
is hereby designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be
erected on the southwest corner. [Added 7-6-2010 by L.L. No.
5-2010]
(60) The intersection of South Drive and Terrace Drive is hereby
designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be erected on
South Drive at its intersection with Terrace Drive. [Added
2-18-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
(61) The intersection of Washington Avenue and Aqueduct Lane is
hereby designated a stop intersection, and a stop sign shall be
erected on northbound Aqueduct Lane at its intersection with
Washington Avenue. [Added 9-1-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015]
(62) Yale Road at Warren Street and Amherst Drive are hereby
designated stop intersections, and stop signs shall be erected
northbound on Yale Road at the intersection with Amherst Drive
and southbound on Yale Road at the intersection with Warren
Street. [Added 2-20-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 282-16 TATTOOING § 282-16
257:423

ARTICLE VIII
Speed Regulations
§ 282-17. Maximum speed limits.
A. Twenty-five miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed
at which vehicles may proceed within the corporate limits of this
Village, except on the following highways: [Amended 9-5-1978 by
L.L. No. 5-1978; 6-30-1986 by L.L. No. 5-1986]
(1) Saw Mill River Road, Route 9A.
B. Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed within the corporate limits of this Village
on the following highways: [Amended 9-5-1978 by L.L. No. 5-1978]
(1) Broadway, Route U.S. 9.
C. Fifteen miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed in the school speed zone on Farragut
Avenue on school days between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. [Added
9-2-1969; amended 11-2-1970; 5-4-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993;
9-4-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
§ 282-17 TATTOOING § 282-17
257:425

ARTICLE IX
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 282-18. Application of article.
§ 282-19. Parallel parking.
Except where angle parking is authorized, every vehicle stopped, standing
or parked upon a highway where there are no adjacent curbs shall be so
stopped, standing or parked parallel to the edge of the roadway, headed in
the direction of lawful traffic.
§ 282-20. Angle parking.
Where angle parking is authorized and so designated by road markings,
all vehicles shall park with front wheels or wheel touching the curblines in
accordance with painted angle lines. All such vehicles shall park completely
within the allotted marked area, except that a vehicle which is too large to
be parked within a single designated parking space shall be parked so that
either the right or left side of said vehicle will extend as little as possible
into the adjoining space to either the right or left, appropriately.
§ 282-20.1. No parking for more than 14 days. [Added 9-9-2008 by
L.L. No. 26-2008]
No vehicle shall be parked or allowed to remain upon any street in the
Village or any Village controlled parking area for more than 14 consecutive
days without being moved.
§ 282-21. Loading zones; parking in front of driveways and access
roads. [Added 9-2-1969; amended 6-19-1972; 6-7-1982 by L.L. No.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or other official control device.
B. The provisions of this article which affect parking adjacent to and in the
vicinity of places of worship may be temporarily suspended when, in the
discretion of the Chief of Police of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson,
additional on-street parking for official activities of such places of
worship is necessary and such temporary suspension shall not be
detrimental to the public safety. [Added 3-22-1971]
A. Angle parking is hereby authorized for the westerly side of Maple
Avenue, from Spring Street to North Street.
B. Angle parking is authorized on the north side of Mount Hope Boulevard,
between Farragut Avenue and Rosedale Avenue. [Added 1-3-1967]
C. Angle parking is hereby authorized for the easterly side of Maple
Avenue, from Spring Street to North Street. [Added 12-17-1984 by
L.L. No. 6-1984]
§ 282-18 TATTOOING § 282-21
257:427
4-1982; 12-17-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984; 12-3-1985 by L.L. No.
4-1985; 8-15-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989; 1-7-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
10-20-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009; 10-15-2019 by L.L. No. 11-2019]
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length
of time other than for expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a loading zone during the
hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
unless otherwise provided in this article. In no case shall the stop for
loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
B. Loading zones are designated as follows:
(1) The east side of Warburton Avenue starting at a point 265 feet
south of Villard Avenue, and extending for 45 feet south of that
point.
(2) The west side of Warburton Avenue starting at a point
approximately 42 feet south of West Main Street and extending
south for approximately 45 feet from that point.
(3) The south side of Washington Avenue starting at a point 75 feet
east of Southside Avenue and extending for 43 feet east of that
point.
(4) The east side of Warburton Avenue starting at a point 241 feet
southeast of the corner of Division Street and extending for 55 feet
south of the southern edge of the existing driveway.
(5) The east side of Southside Avenue, starting at the corner of Spring
Street and extending for 50 feet south of that point.
(6) The west side of Warburton Avenue, directly in front of 577
Warburton Avenue, for a length of 20 feet.
(7) The north side of Spring Street, 110 feet west of Warburton
Avenue, for a length of 20 feet east.
(8) At Steinschneider Plaza Parking Lot from Hastings Prime Meats
north to the Hastings Laundromat (15 minutes only).
(9) A five-minute loading zone on the south side of Washington Avenue,
from the intersection of Ridge Street for a distance of 40 feet going
east.
C. Parking in front of driveways and access roads. Parking in front of any
driveway or access road which prevents free entry and egress to any
public or private building, garage, park or public place is prohibited.
D. When responding to an emergency, firefighters of the Protection Engine
Company No. 1 may park at the marked loading zones identified in
§ 282-21B(1) and (6) above for the duration of the emergency call.
§ 282-21 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-22
257:428
§ 282-22. Bus zones. [Added 7-27-1970; amended 11-2-1981 by L.L.
No. 7-1981]
Bus stop zones are hereby established:
A. Warburton Avenue.
(1) On the east side of Warburton Avenue, at the rear entrance of the
Graham School (55 feet in length; county road).
(2) On the west side of Warburton Avenue, opposite the rear entrance
of the Graham School (55 feet in length; county road).
(3) On the east side of Warburton Avenue, in front of 196 Warburton
Avenue (55 feet in length; county road).
(4) On the west side of Warburton Avenue, opposite 196 Warburton
Avenue (55 feet in length; county road).
(5) On the east side of Warburton Avenue, south of Pinecrest Drive (55
feet in length; county road).
(6) On the west side of Warburton Avenue, north of Pinecrest Drive (55
feet in length; county road).
(7) On the east side of Warburton Avenue, at its intersection with
Spring Street, in front of the VFW Building (55 feet in length;
county road).
(8) On the west side of Warburton Avenue, 75 feet north from the
intersection with Spring Street (55 feet in length; county road).
[Amended 12-3-1985 by L.L. No. 4-1985]
(9) On the east side of Warburton Avenue, north of Division Street (55
feet in length; county road). [Added 5-17-1982 by L.L. No.
2-1982]
(10)On the west side of Warburton Avenue, in front of 405 Warburton
Avenue (55 feet in length; county road). [Added 5-17-1982 by
L.L. No. 2-1982]
(11)On the west side of Warburton Avenue, 45 feet south from West
Main Street (55 feet in length; county road). [Added 12-3-1985 by
L.L. No. 4-1985]
B. Broadway.
(1) On the east side of Broadway, north of Edgars Lane (55 feet in
length; state road).
(2) On the west side of Broadway, north of Riverview Place (55 feet in
length; state road).
§ 282-22 TATTOOING § 282-22
257:429
(3) On the east side of Broadway, between the northerly curbside of
Flower Avenue and the Dobbs Ferry Village Line (55 feet in length;
state road).
(4) On the west side of Broadway, opposite Flower Avenue (55 feet in
length; state road).
(5) On the east side of Broadway, between the northerly curbside of
Olinda Avenue and the Five Corners (55 feet in length; state road).
(6) On the west side of Broadway, south of the southerly driveway of
445 Broadway and Washington Avenue (55 feet in length; state
road).
(7) On the east side of Broadway, north of Burnside Drive (55 feet in
length; state road). [Amended 5-17-1982 by L.L. No. 2-1982]
(8) On the west side of Broadway, by 271 Broadway (55 feet in length;
state road). [Amended 5-17-1982 by L.L. No. 2-1982]
(9) On the east side of Broadway, between the southerly curbside of
Warren Street and Hudson Street (55 feet in length; state road).
(10)On the east side of Broadway, north of Tompkins Avenue (55 feet in
length; state road).
(11)On the west side of Broadway, south of the North Yonkers
Community Church driveway (55 feet in length; state road).
(12)On the east side of Broadway, north of the Yonkers City line,
opposite the Graham School entrance (55 feet in length; state
road).
(13)On the west side of Broadway, south of the Graham School
entrance and the Yonkers City line (55 feet length; state road).
C. Main Street.
(1) On the north side of Main Street, east of the entrance to the A & P
Supermarket (55 feet in length).
(2) On the south side of Main Street, opposite the A & P Supermarket,
between 64 Main Street and Broadway (55 feet in length).
D. Farragut Avenue.
(1) On the east side of Farragut Avenue, south of Mt. Hope Boulevard
(55 feet in length).
(2) On the west side of Farragut Avenue, opposite Mt. Hope Boulevard
(55 feet in length).
(3) On the east side of Farragut Avenue, south of Ravensdale Road (55
feet in length).
§ 282-22 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-22
257:430
§ 282-23. Parking, standing and stopping. [Added 11-16-1981 by
L.L. No. 11-1981; amended 10-2-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
The parking and/or standing of vehicles is prohibited in the following
locations:
(4) On the west side of Farragut Avenue, north of Burnside Drive (55
feet in length). [Amended 2-4-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
(5) On the east side of Farragut Avenue, south of the Fenway (55 feet in
length).
E. Farragut Parkway.
(1) On the west side of Farragut Parkway, between 510 and 514
Farragut Parkway (55 feet in length; county road).
F. High Street.
(1) On the north side of High Street, east of Rose Street (55 feet in
length).
(2) On the south side of High Street, east of Rose Street (55 feet in
length).
(3) On the north side of High Street, at the curve near 68 High Street
(55 feet in length).
(4) On the south side of High Street, west of Warren Street (55 feet in
length).
(5) On the north side of High Street, in front of 152 High Street (55
feet in length).
(6) On the south side of High Street, west of Harvard Lane (55 feet in
length).
G. Saw Mill River Road.
(1) On the west side of Saw Mill River Road, north of Ravensdale Road
(55 feet in length; state road).
(2) On the west side of Saw Mill River Road, south of Holly Place (55
feet in length; state road). [Added 5-17-1982 by L.L. No.
2-1982]
(3) On the west side of Saw Mill River Road, south of Farragut Avenue
(55 feet in length; state road). [Added 5-17-1982 by L.L. No.
2-1982]
A. On the west side of Route 9A from the north curbline of Holly Place for a
distance of 160 feet, plus or minus, northerly therefrom.
§ 282-22 TATTOOING § 282-23
257:431
§ 282-24. Parking time limited in designated locations.
B. Hillside Avenue, on the south side between Valley Place and Farragut
Avenue. [Added 12-2-2003 by L.L. No. 8-2003]
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
locations for a period of longer than one hour between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and holidays: [Amended
12-20-1965]
(1) On the north side of Villard Avenue between its intersection with
Whitman Street and its intersection with Broadway, Route U.S. 9.
(2) East side of Maple Avenue from a point 125 feet north of Spring
Street to the intersection of North Street.
B. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
locations for a period longer than two hours between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and holidays:
(1) 93On the west side of River Street, beginning at the entrance of the
Waterfront Park and going south for a length of 80 feet. [Added
2-18-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
(2) On the south side of Washington Avenue, between Warburton
Avenue and Southside Avenue.
(3) On the north side of Washington Avenue, between Warburton
Avenue and Southside Avenue.
(4) On the east side of Farragut Avenue from Mount Hope Boulevard
south for approximately 750 feet to Walk Way and both sides of the
separating island. [Added 11-2-1970]
C. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the parking meter
zones designated in § 282-35 and all off-street meter zones designated
in § 282-36 of this Part 2 for a period of time longer than that
designated on the parking meter for that location. [Amended
12-2-1968]
D. Parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following locations
for a period longer than 15 minutes: [Added 1-2-1968]
(1) On the north side of High Street, west of Rose Street for a distance
of 45 feet, beginning 15 feet from the intersection of Rose Street
and High Street.
E. Parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on the south side of Mount
Hope Boulevard between Farragut Parkway and a point on Mount Hope
Boulevard opposite School Street on school days between the hours of
93.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), which contained an entry for Warburton Avenue,
was repealed 5-19-1975 by L.L. No. 2-1975.
§ 282-23 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-24
257:432
8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. for a period longer than one hour. [Added
1-2-1968]
F. (Reserved)94
G. Olinda Avenue. [Added 3-22-1971]
(1) The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on the north side of
Olinda Avenue for a period of longer than two hours between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. on the day following, seven days a
week.
(2) The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited between the hours of
3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the north side of Olinda Avenue, seven
days a week.
H. Hopke Avenue. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on both
sides of Hopke Avenue between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
seven days a week. [Added 6-19-1972]
I. 95Maple Avenue. [Added 6-21-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983]
(1) No parking on the east side of Maple Avenue from the intersection
of North Street to the end of Maple Avenue between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Mondays.
(2) No parking on the west side of Maple Avenue from the intersection
of North Street to the end of Maple Avenue between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Thursdays.
J. Whitman Street. No parking on the west side of Whitman Street from
Villard Avenue to Main Street between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00
a.m. on Thursdays. [Added 6-21-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983]
K. Mount Hope Boulevard. No parking on either side of Mount Hope
Boulevard between Farragut Avenue and School Street, except during
school functions. [Added 10-7-1986 by L.L. No. 7-1986]
L. Villard Avenue. No parking 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on the south side of
Villard Avenue from the Broadway intersection east to the intersection
with South Calumet Avenue. [Added 1-17-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995;
amended 2-6-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
M. Parking is limited to three hours on the west side of River Street from
the southerly line of the Hudson Valley Tennis Club to the northerly
property line for a length of 330 feet. [Added 4-4-1995 by L.L. No.
5-1995]
94.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, which contained an entry for Broadway, added
12-7-1970, was repealed 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 22-2008.
95.Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, Edgewood Avenue, added 6-17-1980 by L.L. No.
4-1980, expired 9-30-1981.
§ 282-24 TATTOOING § 282-24
257:433
§ 282-25. Parking prohibited in designated locations. [Added
12-20-1965; amended 6-20-1966]
N. Villard Avenue. No parking 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. on Mondays on the
north side of Villard Avenue from Warburton Avenue east to the
intersection of Broadway. [Added 6-4-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
O. Villard Avenue. No parking 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. on Thursdays on the
south side of Villard Avenue from Warburton Avenue east to the
intersection of Broadway. [Added 6-4-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
P. Edgewood Avenue. From March 1 through September 30, no parking
between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the north and south sides of
Edgewood Avenue. [Added 5-23-2005 by L.L. No. 6-2005]
Q. Sunset Street. From March 1 through September 30, no parking
between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the east and west sides of Sunset
Street. [Added 5-23-2005 by L.L. No. 6-2005]
R. William Street. No parking 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. on Thursdays on the
south side of William Street, between Aqueduct Lane and Warburton
Avenue. [Added 8-9-2011 by L.L. No. 9-2011]
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
locations:
(1) 96Chauncey Lane, on the south and east sides between Broadway
and Croton Avenue.
(2) Edgars Lane, on either side from Broadway easterly 100 feet.
(3) Edison Avenue, on the east side between Holly Place and the
Yonkers City line.
(4) Fraser Place, on the south side from Broadway to the aqueduct.
[Added 1-15-1973]
(5) Green Street, on the north side between Prince and Rose Streets,
and on its south side between Farragut Avenue and Prince Street.
[Amended 1-3-1967]97
(6) High Street, on the south side between Farragut Parkway and Old
Broadway.
(7) Hudson Street, on both sides for a distance of 60 feet from its
intersection with High Street.
(8) Holly Place, on the south side between Saw Mill River Road and
Marion Avenue.
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1), regarding Broadway, was repealed 12-7-1970.
97.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding Hillside Avenue, which immediately
followed this subsection was repealed 12-2-2003 by L.L. No. 8-2003; subsequent
Subsections A(7) through A(90) were renumbered A(6) through A(89).
§ 282-24 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-25
257:434
(9) Jefferson Avenue, on the west side between Mount Hope Boulevard
and Cochrane Avenue.
(10) James Street, on the east side between Tompkins Avenue and High
Street.
(11) James Street, on the west side between High Street and the deadend
terminus. [Added 11-2-1970]
(12) Main Street, on the north side between Warburton Avenue and
Broadway.
(13) Minturn Avenue, on the north side between Sheldon Place and
Broadway.
(14) Nodine Street, both sides, from Warburton Avenue to the end
thereof. [Added 1-2-1968]
(15) North Street, on either side between Maple Avenue and Warburton
Avenue.
(16) Nichols Drive, on the north side between Rosedale Avenue and
Nichols Drive terminus.
(17) Nepera Place, on the east side between Farragut Road and the
Nepera Place terminus.
(18) Nepperhan Avenue, on the east side between Farragut Road and
the Nepperhan Avenue terminus.
(19) Olinda Avenue, on the south side between Broadway and Farragut
Avenue.
(20) Pinecrest Drive, on the southerly and westerly sides between
Warburton Avenue and Broadway.
(21) Prince Street, on the west side between Green Street and the
Prince Street terminus.
(22)Railroad Avenue, on either side between Washington Avenue and
the Harshaw Bridge.
(23) East side of Ridge Street.
(24)Ravine Drive, on both sides between Villard and Summit Avenue,
and on the south side of Ravine Drive between Summit Avenue and
Buena Vista Drive. [Amended 6-20-1966]
(25) Rose Street, on the east side between Green Street and the Rose
Street terminus.
(26) Except for parking meters, Southside Avenue, on the west side
between the south end of the sidewalk adjacent to the Metro North
platform extending south for approximately 90 feet from that point
and Washington Avenue, and also on the east side from Commuter
§ 282-25 TATTOOING § 282-25
257:435
(Zinsser) Plaza north for a distance of 60 feet. [Amended
3-16-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(27) South Drive, on the west side for its entire length.
(28) Spring Street, on the south side between Steinschneider Plaza
entrance and Warburton Avenue.
(29) School Street on the east side between Hillside Avenue and Mount
Hope Boulevard.
(30) Summit Street, up the west side between Fulton Street and Warren
Street.
(31) Stratford Lane, on the west side between Burnside Drive and the
Stratford Lane terminus.
(32) Terrace Drive, on the west side between Villard Avenue and the
Terrace Drive terminus.
(33) Tompkins Avenue, on the north side from its intersection of Jordan
Road easterly a distance of 150 feet. [Added 1-2-1968]
(34) Villard Avenue, on the north side between Warburton Avenue and a
point 100 feet east; also on both sides east of Broadway for a
distance of 40 feet.
(35)Washington Avenue, on the south side between Ridge Street and
Warburton Avenue; also Washington Avenue, on the south side west
of Aqueduct Lane for a distance of 150 feet. [Amended 1-2-1968]
(36)William Street, on the north side between Warburton Avenue and
Aqueduct Lane.
(37) Whitman Street, on the east side between Villard Avenue and Main
Street.
(38)Warburton Avenue, on either side of Warburton Avenue bridge.
(39)Warburton Avenue, on the west side between Spring Street and
theater, between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 6:30 p.m.
(40)Warburton Avenue, on the west side between North Street and a
point 240 feet, more or less, north of the intersection formed by the
northerly side of North Street and the westerly side of Warburton
Avenue, said point being located by a pole of the New York
Telephone Company now in place.98
(41) 99Farragut Avenue, on the east side between Mount Hope
Boulevard to a point 185 feet north of Hillside Avenue, during all
98.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(39), regarding Warburton Avenue, as amended
9-2-1969, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-2-1970.
99.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(41), regarding Warburton Avenue, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 10-20-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009.
§ 282-25 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-25
257:436
times school is in session. [Added 1-3-1967; amended
11-7-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
(42) Farragut Avenue, on the west side between a point opposite the
Mount Hope Boulevard intersection and a point opposite the
Hillside Avenue intersection, during all times school is in session.
[Added 1-3-1967]
(43) Croton Avenue, both sides north from Chauncey Lane for 100 feet.
[Added 12-2-1968]
(44) Farlane Drive, on its east, northeast side for its entire length
between Chauncey Lane and Hillside Avenue. [Added
12-2-1968]100
(45) Prescott Place, on its north side where it intersects with Rosedale
Avenue, east to the Prescott Place terminus. [Added 9-2-1969]
(46) Garland Drive, on the north side between its intersection with
Overlook Road and its intersection with Stanley Avenue.101102
[Added 9-2-1969]
(47) Parking meters to be removed. Two from the west side of
Warburton Avenue by the Hastings House. All meters from the west
side of Warburton Avenue between the south side of Spring Street
to the north side of Main Street. [Added 7-27-1970]
(48) River Street, easterly and westerly sides between Railroad Bridge
and northerly terminus. [Added 11-2-1970]
(49)Warburton Avenue, on the east a distance of 20 feet north, starting
from the corner of Williams Street, and a distance of 20 feet south,
starting from the corner of William Street. [Added 11-2-1970]
(50) Division Street, both sides, between Warburton Avenue and
Aqueduct Lane. [Added 12-7-1970]
(51) Broadway, both east side and west side, from the Dobbs Ferry-
Hastings-on-Hudson line to the Yonkers line. [Added 12-7-1970;
amended 6-17-2008 by L.L. No. 22-2008]
(52) Maple Avenue, on the east side a distance of 20 feet north starting
from the corner of North Street. [Added 12-7-1970]
(53) Marble Terrace, on the east side between Division Street and its
southerly terminus. [Added 7-6-1971]
100. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(46), regarding Broadway, added 12-2-1968, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-7-1970.
101. Editor's Note:
102. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(48), regarding Villard Avenue, added 9-2-1969, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-20-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009.
§ 282-25 TATTOOING § 282-25
257:437
(54) Marble Terrace, on the west side from a point beginning 107 feet
south of Division Street and extending south for a distance of 20
feet. [Added 7-6-1971]
(55) Marble Terrace, on the west side from a point beginning 157 feet
south of Division Street and extending south for a distance of 20
feet. [Added 7-6-1971]
(56) Chauncey Lane, on the south side for its entire length between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., September through June, and
between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. during June, July and August,
seven days per week. Parking shall be permitted for scheduled
recreation events. [Added 8-7-1972]
(57)Wilson Place, on the north side of the street. [Added 5-21-1973]
(58)Washington Street, on the north side from its intersection with
Broadway for a distance of 200 feet. [Added 5-19-1975 by L.L.
No. 2-1975]
(59) Lefurgy Avenue, on the east side between Edgewood Avenue and
Mount Hope Boulevard. [Added 7-18-1978 by L.L. No. 4-1978]
(60) Riverview Place, on the south side for its entire length. [Added
6-7-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982]
(61) High Street, on the east side for a distance of 175 feet south of its
intersection with Hall Place; and High Street, on the north side for
a distance of 200 feet west of its intersection with Hall Place.
[Added 6-7-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982; amended 11-1-1982 by
L.L. No. 7-1982]
(62) Circle Drive, on the west side, beginning at a point located at the
intersection of Villard Avenue and Circle Drive and running thence
for a distance of 132 feet in a southerly direction. [Added
8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 8-1983]
(63) Farragut Avenue, on the east side for a distance of 134 feet,
starting at its intersection with Ravensdale Road going north.
[Added 6-19-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
(64) Cedar Street, on the east side. [Added 6-19-1984 by L.L. No.
1-1984]
(65) Circle Drive, in the east side, beginning at its intersection with
Villard Avenue, and running thence in a southerly direction until its
intersection with Ferndale Drive. [Added 8-14-1984 by L.L. No.
2-1984]
(66) Saunders Street, on the north and south sides, at its intersection
with Farragut Avenue, for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the
street. [Added 12-17-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984]
§ 282-25 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-25
257:438
(67) Villard Avenue, on the northerly side, at its intersection with
Warburton Avenue for a distance of 52 feet in an easterly direction.
[Added 12-17-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984]
(68) Flower Avenue, on the northerly side, starting at the driveway of
No. 11 Flower Avenue for a distance of 215 feet in a westerly
direction. [Added 12-17-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984]
(69) Chauncey Lane, on the west and north sides between Broadway
and South Calumet Avenue. [Added 10-1-1985 by L.L. No.
2-1985; amended 12-3-1985 by L.L. No. 4-1985]
(70)No parking on the south side of the entrance to Hall Place cul-desac.
[Added 8-15-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
(71)No parking on the south side of Warren Street between Old
Broadway and Summit Street. [Added 2-20-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
(72)No parking on the north side of Warren Street at its intersection
with Summit Street. [Added 2-20-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
(73)No parking on the south side of Lefurgy Terrace. [Added
2-18-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
(74) North side of High Street, opposite Harvard Lane, between the
driveways of 152 and 160 High Street, for a distance of
approximately 100 feet. [Added 5-4-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
(75)No parking on the north side of High Street between James Street
and Warren Street for a distance of approximately 125 feet.
[Added 3-1-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(76)No parking on the south side of Edgewood Avenue between Sunset
Street and Lefurgy Avenue. [Added 3-1-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
(77)No parking on the south side of Flower Avenue from the driveway
at 2 Flower Avenue for 40 feet in an easterly direction and for 84
feet in the westerly direction. [Added 3-1-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994; amended 12-1-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
(78)No parking on Warren Street between Brandt Street and High
Street. [Added 3-1-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(79)No parking on Flower Avenue between Sheldon Place and Edgars
Lane. [Added 3-1-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(80)No parking from here to corner for a length of 50 feet on the
northerly side of Hillside Avenue to Chemka Pool Road. [Added
1-3-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
(81)No parking on the south side of Washington Avenue from the
intersection of Broadway for a length of 40 feet west. [Added
§ 282-25 TATTOOING § 282-25
257:439
1-17-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995; amended 3-4-1997 by L.L. No.
2-1997]
(82)No parking for 25 feet east and west of the Washington Avenue
driveway of 445 Broadway. [Added 6-4-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
(83)No parking on the northerly side of Pinecrest Drive, beginning at
Pinecrest Parkway and going west for a distance of 319 feet; then
on the east side of Pinecrest Drive going north for a distance of 238
feet. [Added 1-7-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
(84)No parking on the entire east side of Ridge Street. [Added
7-15-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
(85)No parking on the west side of Warburton Avenue between the curb
cuts of the entrance and exit in front of 1 Warburton Avenue.
[Added 12-16-1997 by L.L. No. 9-1997]
(86)No parking from here to corner for a length of 40 feet on the west
side of Columbia Avenue to North End Avenue. [Added 5-19-1998
by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(87)No parking on the east side of Columbia Avenue beginning at a
point 130 feet south of the intersection of North End Place and
Columbia Avenue for a distance of 25 feet. [Added 4-16-2002 by
L.L. No. 2-2002]
(88)No parking on the west side of Ridge Street beginning at the no
parking zone at the south end in a northerly direction for a length
of 40 feet. [Added 5-18-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
(89)No parking on the southern extension of Ridge Street along both
sides of the gravel road. [Added 7-6-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
(90)No parking on the west side of Farragut Parkway beginning at a
point 59 feet south of the intersection with Green Street and
extending southbound for 70 feet. [Added 1-18-2011 by L.L. No.
1-2011]
(91)No parking on the south side of Washington Avenue beginning at
the Draper Park driveway and extending eastbound for 260 feet.
[Added 1-18-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
(92)No parking on the south side of Fulton Street between Summit
Street and Pine Street. [Added 1-18-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
(93)No parking on the north side of Fulton Street between Summit
Street and Brandt Street. [Added 1-18-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
(94)No parking on the east side of the service road along Broadway
beginning at Chauncey Lane and extending northbound for 52 feet.
[Added 11-6-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 282-25 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-25
257:440
§ 282-26. Alternate parking. [Added 9-15-1969]
(95)No parking on the east side of Brandt Street between Hudson
Street and Warren Street, and no parking on the west side of
Brandt Street from the driveway at 31 Brandt Street to Warren
Street. [Added 9-3-2019 by L.L. No. 9-2019]
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited at the following locations
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on the following days of
the week, except if a legal holiday falls on one of those days:
(1) Warburton Avenue, on the east side on Thursday, from the
intersection of Main Street and extending south to the Village line.
(2) Warburton Avenue, on the west side on Monday, from the
intersection of West Main Street and extending south to the Village
line.
(3) Warburton Avenue, on the west side on Monday, from the
intersection of North Street and extending south to Spring Street.
[Added 8-19-1980 by L.L. No. 5-1980]
(4) Warburton Avenue, on the west side on Monday, from West Main
Street extending south to Washington Avenue. [Added 8-19-1980
by L.L. No. 5-1980]
(5) Warburton Avenue, on the east side on Thursday, from the
intersection of Villard Avenue and extending south to Washington
Avenue. [Added 8-19-1980 by L.L. No. 5-1980]
(6) Washington Avenue, on the south side on Monday. [Added
8-19-1980 by L.L. No. 5-1980]
(7) Washington Avenue, on the north side on Thursday. [Added
8-19-1980 by L.L. No. 5-1980]
(8) Main Street, on the south side on Thursday. [Added 8-19-1980 by
L.L. No. 5-1980]
B. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited at the following locations
between the hour of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following days of the
week, except if a legal holiday falls on one of those days:
(1) Southside Avenue, on the east side on Monday, from the
intersection of Washington Avenue and extending north to Spring
Street.
(2) Southside Avenue, on the west side on Thursday, from the
intersection of Maple Avenue and extending south to the Penn
Central Railroad Station.
(3) Maple Avenue, on the east side on Monday, from the intersection of
Spring Street and extending north to North Street.
§ 282-25 TATTOOING § 282-26
257:441
(4) Maple Avenue, on the west side on Thursday, from the intersection
of Southside Avenue and extending north to a point opposite North
Street.
(5) North end of Warburton Avenue bridge, on the east side of
Warburton Avenue north to Broadway on Monday through Friday.
[Added 11-2-1970]
(6) Warburton Avenue, on the west side from County Trust exit
driveway north to North Street on Monday through Friday. [Added
11-2-1970]
(7) Main Street, on the north and south sides between Warburton
Avenue and Broadway on Monday through Friday. [Added
11-2-1970]
(8) Spring Street, on the north and south sides between Maple Avenue
and Southside Avenue intersection and Warburton Avenue on
Monday through Friday. [Added 11-2-1970]
(9) Maple Avenue, on the east side on Monday, north of North Street
extending to the dead end of Maple Avenue. [Added 8-19-1980 by
L.L. No. 5-1980]
(10) Maple Avenue, on the west side on Thursday, north of North Street
extending to the dead end of Maple Avenue. [Added 8-19-1980 by
L.L. No. 5-1980]
C. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited at the following locations
between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following days of
the week, except if a legal holiday falls on one of those days: [Added
3-8-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982]
(1) Monday (public streets).
(a) Warburton Avenue, from its intersection with Main Street to its
intersection with North Street.
(b) Spring Street.
(2) Tuesday (public streets).
(a) Main Street.
(3) Thursday.
(a) Steinschneider Parking Lot.
(b) Warburton Avenue Parking Lot.
(c) Main Street.
(4) Friday.
(a) Boulanger Plaza.
§ 282-26 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-26
257:442
§ 282-27. Handicapped parking. [Added 8-15-1989 by L.L. No.
5-1989; amended 7-24-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
The following areas of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson are hereby
designated as places for parking for handicapped persons, as provided for
in Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-c, and parking in said areas by other
persons is hereby prohibited:
(b) Warburton Avenue, from its intersection with Main Street to its
intersection with North Street.
(c) Spring Street.
D. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited at the following locations
between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the following days of
the week, except if a legal holiday falls on one of those days: [Added
6-20-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995]
(1) Tuesday.
(a) Zinsser Commuter Lot, all areas north of Cropsey Lane.
(2) Friday.
(a) Zinsser Commuter Lot, all areas south of Cropsey Lane.
(b) Con Ed Lot.
A. In front of 37 Edison Avenue.
B. In front of 20 Maple Avenue.
C. On Whitman Street, across from St. Matthew School.
D. In front of 586 Warburton Avenue.
E. In front of 5 Rose Street.
F. On School Street, opposite 66 Hillside Avenue. [Amended 12-4-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
G. In front of 568 Warburton Avenue.
H. Opposite 15 William Street.
I. In front of 15 Marble Terrace.
J. In front of 22A Main Street.
K. On the west side of Maple Avenue, north of the crosswalk at Spring
Street. [Added 10-7-2008 by L.L. No. 27-2008]
L. Three spaces on the south side of Main Street, west of the passenger
pickup/dropoff zone. [Added 10-7-2008 by L.L. No. 27-2008]
M. In front of 41 Marion Avenue. [Added 12-1-2015 by L.L. No. 8-2015]
§ 282-26 TATTOOING § 282-27
257:443
§ 282-27.1. Taxi parking. [Added 8-9-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
The following locations are designated as places for parking for taxicabs
only, and parking in said areas by other vehicles is prohibited:
§ 282-27.2. Restrictions on idling of motor vehicles. [Added
12-3-2019 by L.L. No. 13-2019]
N. One space on the west side of Warburton Avenue in front of Riverview
Park, 337 Warburton Avenue. [Added 8-23-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
O. In front of 34 Maple Avenue. [Added 12-17-2019 by L.L. No.
15-2019]
A. On the north side of Main Street starting at a point 70 feet east of the
exit/entrance to 87 Main Street and extending eastward for a length 66
feet.
A. No person shall allow or permit the engine of a motor vehicle to idle for
more than one minute when the motor vehicle is not in motion, except
that this provision shall not apply when:
(1) A motor vehicle is forced to remain motionless because of traffic
conditions over which the operator thereof has no control;
(2) Regulations adopted by a federal, state or local agency having
jurisdiction require the maintenance of a specific temperature for
passenger comfort, in which case the idling time may be increased
to the extent necessary to comply with such regulations;
(3) An engine is being used to directly provide power for an essential
auxiliary purpose, such as loading, discharging, mixing or
processing of cargo; controlling cargo temperature; lumbering; oil
or gas well servicing; farming operations; or when operation of the
engine is required for the purpose of maintenance; or
(4) The motor vehicle is not powered by a diesel engine and the
ambient air temperature is 32° F. (0° C.) or less; and
(5) The motor vehicle is an electric vehicle.
B. No person shall operate, allow or permit the operation of a diesel
engine or vehicle propelled by a diesel engine in such a manner as to
emit exhaust emissions equal to or greater than 20% opacity for a
continuous period of more than five seconds as determined by a trained
certified observer.
C. This section shall apply to any person who owns, operates, leases,
supervises or who otherwise has charge, supervision or control of such
vehicle and to any person who owns leases or occupies land and has
actual or apparent domain or control over such vehicle or engine which
is present on such land.
§ 282-27 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-27.2
257:444
D. This section shall not apply to fire trucks, police, emergency medical
services and other emergency vehicles and equipment while
performing in the scope of their duties.
E. Any person who violates this § 282-27.2 shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $35 per violation.
§ 282-27.2 TATTOOING § 282-27.2
257:445

ARTICLE X
Regulation of Certain Motor Vehicles
[Added 1-2-1968]
§ 282-28. Definitions. [Amended 10-15-2019 by L.L. No. 10-2019]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUS — Every motor vehicle designated for carrying more than 10
passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor
vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of
persons for compensation.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every vehicle or combination of vehicles
(including trucks, tractors, semitrailers and trailers), that is designed, used,
or maintained primarily for the transportation of goods or property for
commercial purposes.
PARKING or PARKED — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise, property or passengers.
SCHOOL BUS — Every motor vehicle owned either by a public
governmental agency or private school operated for the transportation
of pupils, teachers and other persons acting in a supervisory capacity to
or from school or school activities, or privately owned or operated for
compensation for the transportation of pupils, teachers and other persons
acting in a supervisory capacity to or from school or school activities.
SEMITRAILER — Any trailer which is so designed that when operated the
forward end of its body or chassis rests upon the body or chassis of the
towing vehicle.
TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of
the vehicle and load so drawn.
TRAILER — Any vehicle not propelled by its own power drawn on the public
highways by a motor vehicle, except cycle sidecars, vehicles being towed
by a nonrigid support and vehicles designed and primarily used for other
purposes and only occasionally drawn by such a motor vehicle.
TRUCK — Any vehicle or combination of vehicles designed for the
transportation of property that has the following characteristics:
§ 282-29. Parking of heavy vehicles restricted.
No bus, school bus, truck, trailer, semitrailer or tractor shall be parked
on any public street or highway within the boundaries of any one- or two-
A. Two axles and six tires; or
B. Three or more axles.
§ 282-28 TATTOOING § 282-29
257:447
family or multiple residential district delineated as such by Chapter 295,
Zoning, except for the purpose of discharging or picking up passengers or
the loading or unloading of merchandise or property.
§ 282-30. Use of street by commercial vehicles restricted.
[Amended 9-2-1969; 11-2-1970; 1-15-1973; 1-23-1990 by L.L. No.
1-1990; 10-15-2019 by L.L. No. 10-2019]
No commercial vehicles shall be permitted on the following streets in the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, except for the purpose of repairs, delivery
or service to the residents of such streets:
Name of Street Location
High Street Between Broadway and Farragut
Parkway
James Street Between High Street and Tompkins
Avenue
Maple Avenue Between Spring Street and North
Street
North Street Between Maple Avenue and
Warburton Avenue
Olinda Avenue Between Farragut Avenue and
Broadway
Pinecrest Drive Between Warburton Avenue and
Broadway
Washington Avenue Between Southside Avenue and
Broadway
§ 282-31. Use of street by buses prohibited.
No buses shall be permitted on the following streets in the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson:
Maple Avenue Between Spring Street and North
Street
North Street Between Maple Avenue and
Warburton Avenue
Olinda Avenue Between Farragut Avenue and
Broadway
Washington Avenue Between Southside Avenue and
Broadway
§ 282-32. Vehicles prohibited in parklands. [Added 11-2-1970]
No vehicles shall enter upon parklands except those authorized by the
Village Manager and/or Chief of Police. Parking shall be permitted only in
authorized parking lots adjacent to recreation areas.
§ 282-29 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-32
257:448
ARTICLE XI
Restriction on Certain Streets on School Days
[Added 11-17-1975 by L.L. No. 3-1975; amended 9-7-1976 by L.L.
No. 4-1976]
§ 282-33. Streets closed during school hours.
§ 282-34. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately and shall continue in effect
through each succeeding school year.
A. Fairlane Drive shall be closed to all through traffic in both directions
during the school year between the hours of 7:45 a.m. and 8:45 a.m.
and between 2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday,
inclusive, excluding days on which Hillside School is officially closed.
§ 282-33 TATTOOING § 282-34
257:449

ARTICLE XII
Parking Meters and Permit Parking Zones
§ 282-35. Parking meter zones. [Amended 12-20-1965]
Parking meter zones are hereby established on the following streets and
portions thereof where parking is otherwise established or permitted:
A. Both sides of Warburton Avenue between Route U.S. 9 and Division
Street.
B. North side of Spring Street.
C. Maple Avenue: [Amended 11-18-1980 by L.L. No. 8-1980]
(1) West side of Maple Avenue, from the Municipal Building Driveway,
north, to be designated as minimum of three-hour to maximum of
six-hour parking meters.
(2) Maple Avenue, west side, from the Municipal Building to its
intersection with Spring Street and Southside Avenue to be
designated as minimum of one-hour to maximum of two-hour
parking meters.
D. West side of Southside Avenue between the intersection of Spring
Street and Southside Avenue to Railroad Station Plaza to be designated
as minimum of one-hour to maximum of two-hour parking meters.
[Amended 11-18-1980 by L.L. No. 8-1980]
E. East side of Southside Avenue between southerly terminus of Maple
Avenue and Washington Avenue.
F. South side of Main Street between Warburton Avenue and the bus stop.
[Amended 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 25-2008]
G. 103North side of Washington Avenue between Warburton Avenue and
Southside Avenue.
H. South side of Washington Avenue between Warburton Avenue and
Ridge Street.
I. On the east side of Warburton Avenue between the north side of Main
Street and the south side of Spring Street. [Added 7-27-1970]
J. North side of Main Street adjacent to 45 Main Street. [Added
8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 25-2008104]
K. Six one-hour meters: east side of Southside Avenue between Southside
Parking Lot and Zinsser Commuter Parking Lot. [Added 3-8-1982 by
L.L. No. 1-1982]
103. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding River Street, was repealed 11-2-1970.
104. Editor's Note: This Local Law also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections J,
K and L as Subsections K, L and M, respectively.
§ 282-35 TATTOOING § 282-35
257:451
§ 282-36. Off-street meter and permit parking zones. [Amended
12-2-1968; 12-2-1974 by L.L. No. 2-1974; 11-18-1980 by L.L. No.
8-1980]
L. Two two-hour meters: west side of Southside Avenue between the taxi
stand and railroad station turnaround. [Added 3-8-1982 by L.L. No.
1-1982]
M. Seven two-hour meters: west side of Whitman Street starting at the
intersection of Main Street north. [Added 3-8-1982 by L.L. No.
1-1982]
N. North side of Villard Avenue starting at a point approximately 81 feet
east of Warburton Avenue and extending east for approximately 90 feet
from that point. [Added 10-20-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
O. East side of Warburton Avenue starting at a point approximately 156
feet north of Villard Avenue and extending north for approximately 44
feet from that point. [Added 10-20-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
P. East side of Warburton Avenue starting at a point approximately 220
feet north of Villard Avenue and extending north for approximately 45
feet from that point. [Added 10-20-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
Q. West side of Southside Avenue, starting at the south end of the sidewalk
adjacent to the Metro North platform and extending south for
approximately 90 feet from that point. [Added 3-16-2010 by L.L. No.
2-2010]
A. Off-street meter and permit parking zones. [Amended 11-2-1981 by
L.L. No. 8-1981; 6-3-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986]
(1) Off-street meter parking zones are hereby established and
designated at an amount per hour to be determined by the Village
Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule:105 [Amended
5-7-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991; 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
(a) Boulanger Plaza parking lot, including one space at the east
side of Boulanger Plaza parking lot for handicapped parking.
(b) Steinschneider Plaza parking lot, including two spaces
designated for electric vehicle parking. [Amended 7-2-2019
by L.L. No. 8-2019]
(c) Ridge Street parking lot.
(d) Warburton Avenue parking lot.
(2) The following off-street meter parking zones are hereby established
and designated as an amount per 12 hours to be determined by the
105. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 282-35 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-36
257:452
§ 282-37. On-street parking meter fees. [Amended 12-2-1974 by
L.L. No. 2-1974; 11-18-1980 by L.L. No. 8-1980; 6-3-1986 by L.L. No.
3-1986; 5-7-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991; 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
On-street parking meter fees are hereby established and designated to be
determined by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.107
§ 282-38. Violations. [Amended 12-2-1968; 12-2-1974 by L.L. No.
2-1974]
Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule: [Amended
9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
(a) Southside Plaza parking lot.
(b) Zinsser Plaza parking lot.
B. Off-street permit parking zones. Off-street permit parking zones are
hereby established and designated in the following areas: [Amended
6-21-1983 by L.L. No. 6-1983; 6-3-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986;
11-17-1987 by L.L. No. 4-1987]
(1) Zinsser Plaza parking lot.
(a) Prepaid parking permit.
[1] Residents only: annual parking prepaid permits and
quarterly parking prepaid permits shall be as determined
by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule.106 [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
(2) River Street parking lot.
(a) Prepaid parking permit. [Amended 6-7-1988 by L.L. No.
2-1988; 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
[1] Residents: annual parking prepaid permits and quarterly
parking prepaid permits shall be as determined by the
Village Board by resolution and set in the fee schedule.
[2] Nonresidents: annual parking prepaid permits and
quarterly parking prepaid permits shall be as determined
by the Village Board by resolution and set in the fee
schedule.
C. There shall be no charge for meter parking in the following parking lots
on Saturday: [Added 3-8-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982]
(1) Southside Avenue parking lot.
(2) Zinsser Plaza parking lot.
106. The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
107. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 282-36 TATTOOING § 282-38
257:453
A. No person shall park a vehicle in any zone designated "Permit Parking
Zone" on any day except Sunday or legal holidays unless such vehicle
shall have been issued a permit for the period of time during which such
vehicle is parked in said zone and such permit shall be prominently
affixed in the manner and at the place designated by the Village
Manager.
B. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking meter space during the
days and hours prescribed in this article, except Sunday or legal
holidays, while the parking meter for such space indicates by signal
that the lawful parking time in such space has expired. [Amended
2-6-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
C. When markings upon the pavement designate a parking space, no
person shall park a vehicle in such designated parking space so that any
part of such vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes
beyond the markings designating such space, except that a vehicle
which is too large to be parked within a single designated parking space
shall be parked with the front bumper at the front of the space with the
rear of the vehicle extending as little as possible into the adjoining
space to the rear.
D. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter any
slug, button or any other device or substance as a substitute for coins of
United States currency.
E. No person shall park a truck or commercial vehicle weighing more than
two tons or more than 20 feet gross length in the off-street meter zones
or in the off-street permit parking zones at any time, except in case of
emergency.
F. No person shall do or permit to be done any repair work on any motor
vehicle in any parking meter zone, off-street meter zone or permit
parking zone.
G. All vehicles parked in any metered parking space or in any permit
parking zone shall be parked with the front of the vehicle facing the
parking meter or the front curb or curbline in such permit parking zone.
H. A parking permit issued to one person may be transferred to and used
by any vehicle registered in the name of such person's immediate family
(parent, spouse, child, brother or sister) who resides in the same
household. The use of such parking permit by any other vehicle shall
render said permit void.
I. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than an electric
vehicle while charging within any space marked or signed as "Electric
Vehicle Charging Station." [Added 7-2-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
§ 282-38 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-39
257:454
§ 282-39. Installation, maintenance and operation of meters and
parking permits. [Added 12-20-1965; amended 12-2-1968;
12-2-1974 by L.L. No. 2-1974]
The Village Manager shall provide for the installation, maintenance, timing,
charges and operation of parking meters and for the creation of permit
parking zones and the fees to be charged for such permits and the rules
and regulations governing the issuance of such permits in order to control
parking and traffic for the good and welfare of the Village and its residents
and for the promotion of public safety, in such areas and in such zones as
are designated in this article.
§ 282-40. Definitions. [Added 12-20-1965]
For the purpose of this Part 2, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — Any vehicle that operates, either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored on
board for motive purpose.[Added 7-2-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION — A public parking space that
is served by battery-charging-station equipment that has as its primary
purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means)
to a battery or other energy storage device in an electric vehicle.[Added
7-2-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
OFF-STREET METER ZONE — Any parking area owned or leased by the
Village upon which parking meters have been heretofore installed and are
in operation or which are to be hereinafter installed or operated.
PARKING METER — A mechanical device placed or erected for the
regulation of parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — That area designated by markings or otherwise,
allocated to the parking of a vehicle.
PARKING METER ZONE — Any street or portion of a street upon which
parking meters have been heretofore installed and are in operation or which
are to be hereinafter installed and operated.
PERMIT PARKING ZONE — Any parking area owned or leased by the
Village upon which parking is prohibited, except to vehicles duly issued
parking permits for the period of time in which such vehicle is parked, and
which zones are designated by signs or other markings or enclosures. All
permit parking zones shall be clearly identified by a sign at the entrance to
such permit parking zone.[Added 12-2-1974 by L.L. No. 2-1974]
§ 282-39 TATTOOING § 282-40
257:455

ARTICLE XIII
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 282-41. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 282-42. Storage and charges. [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999; 5-18-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
After removal of any vehicle as provided by this article, the Police
Department may arrange to have such vehicle stored at a tow/storage
facility at the expense of the owner. The owner or other person legally
entitled to the possession of such vehicle may be charged with a reasonable
cost for the removal and storage, payable to the tow/storage company
before the vehicle is released.
§ 282-43. Notice of removal.
The Police Department shall without delay ascertain to the extent possible
the owner of the vehicle or person having the same in charge, and notify
him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which
will be required to redeem the same.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which
affects that portion of the public highway upon which said vehicle is
parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be removed by the Police
Department.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within this
Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, said
vehicle may be removed by the Police Department.
C. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
Village where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, said vehicle
may be removed by the Police Department.
D. When any vehicle is parked or allowed to remain upon any street or
Village controlled parking area in the Village for more than 14
consecutive days without being moved, said vehicle may be removed by
the Police Department. [Added 9-9-2008 by L.L. No. 26-2008]
§ 282-41 TATTOOING § 282-43
257:457

ARTICLE XIV
Penalties
§ 282-44. Penalties for offenses.
Unless otherwise provided by the Vehicle and Traffic Law, the penalty for
each violation of any of the articles herein shall be a fine not exceeding
$100.
§ 282-44 TATTOOING § 282-44
257:459

ARTICLE XV
Repeal of Prior Ordinances
§ 282-45. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of this Village in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Part 2 are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this Part 2.
§ 282-45 TATTOOING § 282-45
257:461

ARTICLE XVI
When Effective
§ 282-46. Time to take effect.
A. This Part 2 shall take effect 10 days after publication and posting in
accordance with the Village Law, except those parts, if any, which are
subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and § 46
of the Highway Law of the State of New York.
B. Any part or parts of this Part 2 which are subject to approval under
§ 1684 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and § 46 of the Highway Law of
the State of New York shall take effect from and after the day on which
approval, in writing, is received from both the New York State Traffic
Commission and the New York State Department of Public Works.
§ 282-46 TATTOOING § 282-46
257:463

ARTICLE XVII
Immobilization of Vehicles
[Added 11-4-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
§ 282-47. Authorization; responsibility for expense.
§ 282-48. Notice and warning to owner.
When an immobilization device is used, the Police Department or its agents
shall attach a notice to the vehicle containing the following information:
§ 282-49. Tampering with or attempted removal of immobilization
devices.
No person shall attempt to or shall tamper with, deface, remove or destroy
an immobilization device or move an immobilized vehicle as herein
provided.
§ 282-50. Release of vehicle to owner.
A. The Chief of Police hereby is authorized to provide for the
immobilization of any vehicle against which any number of parking
summonses have been issued for a violation of this chapter for which
fines and penalties totaling equal to or in excess of $500 remain unpaid,
and/or vehicles that have been deemed parking scofflaws by the State
of New York. [Amended 3-6-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
B. Such vehicles may be immobilized where located, secured by the use of
an immobilization device or, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, be
impounded and towed pursuant to Article XIII of this chapter.
C. Such immobilization or impound will be at the sole expense of the
owner of the vehicle.
A. The location and identifying characteristics of the vehicle.
B. The date and time of placement of the immobilization device and
signature of the installer.
C. Notice that the vehicle will be towed if it remains in the same location
for 72 hours from the immobilization.
D. Notice that any person tampering with the device or the vehicle will be
subject to criminal prosecution and liable for any loss to the Village.
E. The steps which must be taken by the owner of the vehicle to obtain the
release of the vehicle from the Village Justice Court.
F. Such other information, statements, notices and warnings as the Chief
of Police may, from time to time, determine to be appropriate.
§ 282-47 TATTOOING § 282-50
257:465
§ 282-51. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any immobilized vehicle, as herein provided, shall be released to its
owner upon payment of the expenses of immobilization and all
outstanding parking fines against the immobilized vehicle. A vehicle
release must be obtained from the Village Justice Court during normal
business hours. Once the release is obtained from the Village Justice
Court, it may be presented to the Police Department, during normal
business hours, in order to have the Police Department remove the
immobilization device or release the vehicle from impound.
B. In rare instances where the owner of the vehicle may be unavailable, an
original notarized letter from the registered owner or title holder may
be submitted authorizing a particular person to receive custody of the
vehicle. Photocopies of letters or faxed or electronic letters will not be
accepted. A clearly legible copy of the registered owner's driver's
license or other government-issued form of photo identification must be
submitted with the notarized letter. The authorized person must have
no unpaid summonses in his or her own name or in relation to a vehicle
owned by him or her and must possess a valid driver's license.
C. The owner of the vehicle is responsible for all towing charges and
storage fees associated with towing and impound of the vehicle. Fees
associated with towing and storage will be paid directly to the two
company.
D. New parking summonses may be issued to an illegally parked vehicle
which is immobilized, and penalties will continue to accrue until
payment is made.
E. Expired registrations must be renewed and any suspended registration
must be reinstated prior to the release of an immobilized or impounded
vehicle.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both.
B. The fee to release a vehicle immobilization device shall be $150.
C. The fee to replace a damaged vehicle immobilization device shall be
$600.
D. All the above penalties and fees shall be in addition to the payment of all
outstanding parking fines and penalties.
§ 282-50 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 282-51
257:466
Chapter 287
VILLAGE PROPERTY
§ 287-1. Damaging Village property.
No person shall cut, break, mark, injure, destroy or molest any tree, shrub,
grass plot, wall, fence, guard rail, post, pole, culvert, drain, bulletin board,
public notice, street sign or street light in or upon any street, park or other
public place in the Village or any other property belonging to the Village or
under its control or in its possession.
§ 287-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of violating § 287-1 shall be liable and subject to
a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each violation. In
addition, that person may be required to reimburse the cost of repairing or
replacing the damaged property.
Chapter 295
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 45.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 76.
Publication of zoning laws — See Ch. 79.
Building construction — See Ch. 101.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 131.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 146.
Signs — See Ch. 234.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 249.
Tree preservation — See Ch. 273.
§ 282-51 TATTOOING § 287-2
257:467

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 295-1. Intent; statutory authority; title.
§ 295-2. Purposes.
The comprehensive plan of land use, type, location and development
intensity for the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson set forth in the text, map and
schedule that constitute this chapter is adopted for the purposes set forth
in the Village Law and is intended in general:
§ 295-3. Objectives.
The following specific objectives are hereby established in support of, and
in addition to, the purposes stated above:
A. This chapter is a local law establishing zoning and planning regulations
for the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and providing for the
administration and enactment thereof, pursuant to Article 7 of the
Village Law of the State of New York, as amended.
B. The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, by
virtue of the power and authority vested in it by law, ordains and enacts
the following local law, which shall be known and may be cited as the
"Local Zoning and Planning Law of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson,
New York."
A. To promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
community;
B. To regulate, control and restrict the type, intensity, density and location
of land and building use in relation to, but not limited to, such matters
as height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures,
the percentage of lots that may be occupied, the size of lots, courts and
other open spaces, the density of population and the limits and use of
buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other
purpose and other factors; and
C. To provide a Board of Appeals to determine and vary the application of
those zoning regulations in harmony with the general purpose and
intent, and in accordance with general and specific objectives and
rules, herein contained.
A. To guide the future development of the Village in accordance with a
comprehensive plan designed to represent and promote the most
beneficial and convenient relationship among the residential,
commercial, industrial and public areas of the Village, considering the
suitability of each area for such uses, as indicated by existing
conditions, trends and development and changing modes in living, and
having due regard for the use of land, building development and social,
§ 295-1 TATTOOING § 295-3
257:469
cultural and economic activity, both within the Village and with respect
to the relationship of the Village to areas outside of it.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers.
C. To provide adequate light, air and privacy and to preserve solar access.
D. To prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of
population.
E. To promote the most beneficial relationship between the use of land and
buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the Village, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion of streets and
provision of safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic
movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings
throughout the Village.
F. To facilitate and support the adequate provision and maintenance of
roads, driveways, traffic, and transportation facilities, water, schools,
parks and other public requirements and facilities.
G. To protect, maintain, conserve and enhance the value of land and
buildings and the social, economic, aesthetic and environmental
stability and viability of all parts of the Village.
H. To prevent the pollution of watercourses and wetlands; to safeguard the
water table; to preserve the beneficial effects of wetlands; to avoid
hazardous conditions and excessive damage resulting from stormwater
runoff and flooding; and to encourage the appropriate use and sound
management of natural resources throughout the Village.
I. To preserve and maintain the natural beauty of the physiography,
geography and plant material of the Village; to preserve significant
views and vistas of natural and man-made beauty or interest; to protect
the Village against unsightly, obtrusive and obnoxious land uses and
operations; to enhance the aesthetic aspect of the natural and manmade
elements of the Village; and to ensure appropriate development
with regard to those elements.
J. To redevelop and revitalize the Hastings Riverfront to provide for a
sound balance of residential, recreational and commercial uses, and to
preserve waterfront views, public access and the ecology of the river.
K. To promote the preservation, maintenance and enhancement of the
existing historic character of the Village; and to encourage the
development of uses that would add to or be in harmony with that
character, through such facilities as building and structure design,
color and texture, signs, lighting, landscaping and other site plan
elements.
L. To assist in the provision of adequate and suitably located areas for
recreation activities and the preservation of appropriate open spaces.
§ 295-3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-3
257:470
§ 295-4. Rules of construction.
M. To bring about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings
throughout the Village to the adopted comprehensive zoning plan and
to minimize conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
A. Interpretation.
(1) The provisions of this chapter, as interpreted and applied, shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare,
and, more particularly, for the purposes and objectives set forth in
§§ 295-2 and 295-3 above, and for the provision of a gradual
remedy for existing conditions that are detrimental thereto.
(2) It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or
annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties;
provided, however, that when this chapter imposes a greater
restriction on the use of buildings or land or on the heights of
buildings or requires larger open spaces, or makes any other
greater requirements than any imposed or required by any
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
(3) Whenever any provision of this chapter differs from any other
provision of this chapter or from any provision of any other law,
ordinance or resolution of any kind, that provision which is the
more restrictive, or which imposes a higher standard, shall govern.
B. Common meaning. The words in this chapter shall be construed in
accordance with their common meaning unless their context requires a
different interpretation or unless they are otherwise defined in this
chapter.
C. Headings. Headings and subheadings in this chapter are for
identification only and shall not be construed in interpreting the text of
this chapter, the schedule or the Zoning Map.108
D. Designation of officials. Wherever the Village Manager, Building
Inspector or other Village official is designated in this chapter, that
designation shall be deemed to include an Acting Village Manager,
Acting Building Inspector or other person duly appointed to act in the
place and stead of the designated person.
E. Specific rules of construction. The following rules of construction apply
to the text of this chapter:
(1) The particular shall control the general.
108. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-3 TATTOOING § 295-4
257:471
(2) In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table or
illustrative table, the text shall control.
(3) Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words stated in the
present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural
and the plural includes the singular.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory and not discretionary
and do not indicate mere futurity unless the context clearly so
requires. The word "may" is permissive.
(5) The word "building" includes "structure"; the word "structure"
includes "building"; a "building" or "structure" includes any part
thereof.
(6) The word "used" includes the word "occupied"; the word
"occupied" includes the word "used"; and the words "used" and
"occupied" shall be construed to include the words "intended,
arranged, maintained or designed to be used or occupied," unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(7) The word "person" includes individuals, corporations, firms,
partnerships, associations, joint ventures, any combination thereof
and organizations of any type, and anyone acting on their behalf.
(8) The word "premises" shall include land and the buildings thereon.
(9) The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel."
(10) The words "he," "she" and "it" include each other.
(11) Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events
connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
(a) "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
(b) "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
(c) "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
(12) The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.
(13) Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, all distances in this
chapter shall be measured horizontally.
§ 295-4 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-5
257:472
§ 295-5. Definitions. [Amended 3-21-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995;
2-17-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998; 1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a permitted one-family
residence, including the principal dwelling and any other building on the
lot, which is subordinate to the principal one-family dwelling unit in terms
of size, location and appearance, and provides complete housekeeping
facilities for one family, including independent cooking, bathroom and
sleeping facilities, with physically separate access from any other dwelling
units.
ACTIVE ADULT/INDEPENDENT LIVING HOUSING — Handicappedadaptable
individual or multifamily dwelling units with individual kitchens
and bathrooms where, because of age and either disability or infirmity of
the residents, the following services are provided to residents within the
dwelling unit or in common facilities on site: dining, laundry, security and
housekeeping. Residents may have the option of cooking for themselves,
being provided with meals in their rooms, or eating in a common dining
facility on-site. An active adult/independent living facility does not require
licensure or oversight by the New York State Health Department. Any inhome
care, doctors' visits, or other health-related services are arranged for
privately by the resident.[Added 12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT — Each of the following is an affordable
housing unit:[Added 1-8-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
ALTER — To change or rearrange the walls, roof, ceiling, floors, supporting
beams, columns or other structural parts, the interior plan or layout, the
exterior architectural features or the exit facilities of a building or
structure, or the moving of a building from one location to another.
AMI — Area median income for Westchester County as defined annually
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).[Added
1-8-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A for-purchase housing unit that must be sold to a household whose
income does not exceed 80% of the AMI and for which the annual
housing cost of a unit, including common charges, principal, interest,
taxes and insurance, does not exceed 33% of 70% of the AMI, adjusted
for household size, and that must be marketed in accordance with
the requirements, policies and protocols established by the County of
Westchester, as amended from time to time.
A.
A rental unit that must be leased to a household whose income does
not exceed 60% of the AMI and for which the annual housing cost of
the unit, defined as rent plus any tenant-paid utilities, does not exceed
30% of 60% of the AMI, adjusted for household size, and that must be
marketed in accordance with the requirements, policies and protocols
established by the County of Westchester, as amended from time to
time.
B.
§ 295-5 TATTOOING § 295-5
257:473
ANTENNA — A device used in communications that converts radio
frequency electrical energy to radiated electromagnetic energy and vice
versa; in a transmitting station, an antenna is the device from which radio
waves are emitted.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Village boards, agencies, officers,
employees and officials whose approval is required for an action.
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD — The Architectural Review Board of
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
ARTIST STUDIO — A building or portion of a building used by an artist or
artists for the development, display, and sale of art and the instruction in a
personal artistic skill such as fine arts, performing arts, martial arts, crafts,
dance, and music.
ASSISTED LIVING HOUSING — A residential facility for individuals who
require some assistance with daily living, with units that may contain
kitchenettes, that is operated by an entity licensed by the State of New
York Department of Health to operate an adult home (as defined in 18
NYCRR 487), enriched housing program (as defined in 18 NYCRR 488),
or residence for adults (as defined in 18 NYCRR 490), including any such
adult care facility offering services through an assisted living program (as
defined in 18 NYCRR 494) or licensed as an assisted living residence,
enhanced assisted living residence and/or special needs assisted living
residence pursuant to 10 NYCRR 1001. The facility will combine dwelling
units with provision of services, including, but not limited to, communal
dining, medication supervision, personal care, physical therapy, and
assistance with the activities of daily living, such as bathing, dressing,
grooming, eating and/or ambulation for persons who do not need the skilled
medical care provided by a nursing home or convalescent care
facility.[Added 12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019]
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade but that
has 1/2 of its height or more, measured from floor to ceiling, above the
average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A building intended, designed, and used as a
single-family dwelling within which rooms are rented from time to time for
the overnight accommodation of transient guests. A bed-and-breakfast shall
not be construed to be a "boardinghouse" or a "rooming house."
BILLBOARD — A sigh, including the type commonly known as a "billboard,"
that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or
attraction sold, offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where
the sign is displayed.
BOARDER or ROOMER — A person who permanently occupies a room in a
dwelling unit for sleeping purposes for which he or she pays compensation
to the property owner.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
§ 295-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-5
257:474
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The sum of the area of coverage or footprint of
all buildings on the site.[Added 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008; amended
8-21-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
BUILDING; PRINCIPAL BUILDING; ACCESSORY BUILDING —
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade
and that has more than 1/2 of its height measured from floor to ceiling
below the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground
adjoining the building.
COLLOCATION — The mounting of personal wireless service facilities used
by two or more persons, firms or corporations on the same equipment
mounting structure.
CONTINUUM OF CARE FACILITY — A residential facility that provides
a combination of the features and amenities of active adult/independent
living housing, assisted living housing and/or a nursing home and provides
residential units or beds for more than one of those levels of care within
the same building or buildings on a single development site.[Added
12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019]
COURT — An open, uncovered and unoccupied space bounded on three or
more sides by the walls of a principal building. An inner court is a court
entirely within the exterior walls of a building. All other courts are outer
courts.
DEVELOPMENT COVERAGE — The sum of the area of coverage or footprint
of all buildings, structures, driveways, parking areas, and impervious
surfaces on the site.[Added 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008]
DRIVE-THROUGH — Physical facilities or procedures that encourage or
permit customers to receive services, obtain goods or be entertained while
remaining in their motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A path for vehicles leading from a street or road to a garage,
parking area, residence or business.[Added 8-5-2008 by L.L. No.
24-2008]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
by walls and intended for shelter, housing, protection or enclosure of
persons, animals or property.
A.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the primary
or principal use of the lot on which the building is situated.
B.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the principal
building on the same lot and occupied by, or devoted to, an accessory
use or to purposes customarily incidental to that of the principal
building.
C.
§ 295-5 TATTOOING § 295-5
257:475
DRY LAND — All land, landfill areas and deck or platform surfaces lying
inland of the shoreline, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
chapter.
DWELLING; MULTIFAMILY DWELLING; SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING;
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY DWELLING —
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or entirely self-contained portion thereof,
containing complete housekeeping facilities for only one family (including
any domestic servants employed on the premises) living independently of
any other family and containing no enclosed space (other than vestibules,
entrance or other hallways or porches), cooking facilities or sanitary
facilities in common with any other such building or portion thereof. A
unit in a tourist home, hotel, motel, automobile court, rooming house,
boardinghouse, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, nursing home,
convalescent home or other similar house shall not be deemed to constitute
a dwelling unit.
EQUIPMENT MOUNTING STRUCTURE — Any structure used primarily to
support reception or transmission equipment, including but not limited to
antenna support structures, towers and monopoles.
FACADE — Any face of a building facing a street or other public
space.[Added 11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
FAMILY —
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as living
quarters for one or more families. The term shall not be deemed to
include a camping trailer, mobile home, trailer, tourist home, tent,
hotel, motel, automobile court, inn, rooming house, boardinghouse,
dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, nursing home, convalescent
home or similar house.
A.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing one dwelling unit
only.
C.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing two dwelling units
only.
D.
THREE-FAMILY DWELLING — A multifamily dwelling containing three
dwelling units only.
E.
A householder plus one or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption living together in a family-like arrangement as a single, notfor-
profit housekeeping unit sharing kitchen facilities; or
A.
A householder living with a reasonable number of individuals in a
family-like arrangement that is the functional equivalent of a family of
related persons.
B.
§ 295-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-5
257:476
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — A business enterprise primarily engaged in
the sale of preprepared or quickly prepared food and beverages in
disposable containers or wrappers, selected by patrons from a limited line
of specialized items such as hamburgers, chicken, pizza, tacos or hot dogs,
for consumption either on or off the premises, in a facility in which a major
portion of the ordering by patrons and sales to patrons is at a drive-in
or stand-up type counter. A delicatessen or a restaurant selling food and
beverages for consumption off the premises is not a fast-food restaurant,
provided that such sale as described above is not the principal business of
the establishment.
FINISHED GRADE — The final elevation of the ground surface after
completion of any change to it resulting from filling, excavating, or similar
activity, and which shall conform to any approved site or subdivision plan.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors
of a building or buildings, measured to the interior of the inside walls of
such buildings, but not to include unfinished attached or built-in garages,
unfinished porches or terraces, unfinished basements or cellars or
unfinished areas having a clear headroom of less than seven feet.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided
by the area of such lot, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
chapter.
FRONTAGE, LOT — The distance along which a property line of a lot adjoins
a public or private street or a river.
GREENHOUSE — A building constructed mainly of glass and used as a
conservatory for the growing and protection of flowers and plants and for
the propagation and culture thereof.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total horizontal area of all stories of a building
or buildings measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or, in the
case of a common wall separating two buildings, from the center line of
such common walls and including any basement used for the principal use
or for a dwelling unit by other than a janitor or watchman, but excluding
porches, terraces and balconies.
GROUND FLOOR STORY — The lowest story of a building, not including
basements or cellars.
HEALTH OR SPORTS CLUB — Facilities designed and used principally for
sports or body conditioning and rehabilitation.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — [Amended 12-16-2008 by L.L. No. 29-2008]
With the exception of the CC and MR-C Districts, the maximum height
of a structure shall be measured vertically from the existing grade to
an imaginary place located at the allowed number of feet above and
parallel to the existing grade. See diagram of side views below.
A.
§ 295-5 TATTOOING § 295-5
257:477
Within the CC and MR-C Districts:
An imaginary Plane A shall be created, starting at the average
grade of the front lot line and ending at the average grade of
the rear lot line, and the maximum height of a structure shall be
measured vertically from Plane A to an imaginary Plane B, which
shall be located the allowed number of feet vertically above and
parallel to Plane A. See diagram of a side view below.
(1)
If the width of the property (measured parallel to the front lot line)
anywhere exceeds 35 feet, the property shall be divided into the
minimum number of equal sized sections, by lines perpendicular
to the curbline (or its extension), such that the average of the
maximum width of each section does not exceed 35 feet. Plane A
and B for each section shall be determined in the same manner as
in the preceding paragraph. See diagram of top view below.
(2)
B.
§ 295-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-5
257:478
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, with not more than
one nonresident assistant working at the same time, with no retail sales
of products produced off the premises, which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, does not change
the character thereof, does not have any exterior evidence of that secondary
use other than a permitted nameplate, does not involve the use of other
than customary home appliances and equipment and does not involve the
keeping of a stock in trade. The conducting of a clinic, hospital, barbershop,
beauty parlor, tea room, tourist home, animal hospital or raising of animals,
or any similar use, shall not be deemed to be a home occupation.
HOSPITAL — A building used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care
of human ailments, which term includes a sanitarium, clinic, rest home,
nursing home, convalescent home and institution for the insane.
HOTEL — A commercial building providing transient overnight
accommodations to the public for compensation. The word "hotel" includes
the word "motel" or similar name but excludes "bed-and-breakfast."
HOUSEHOLDER — An individual who resides in a dwelling unit and who
owns, rents or otherwise has legal possession of such unit.
INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL STORAGE YARD — Any property used for
the storage, at any time, of any equipment or supplies used in conjunction
with commercial or industrial enterprises.
JUNKYARD — Buildings, structures or premises where junk, waste,
discarded or salvage materials are bought or sold, exchanged, stored, baled,
packed, disassembled or handled, including automobile wrecking yards and
yards for house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but
not including premises used for the purchase or storage of used furniture
and household equipment or used cars in operable condition.
LENGTH, BUILDING — The greater of:
The horizontal length of the facade closest to and generally parallel
with the front lot line; or
A.
Where the facade has varied setbacks, the horizontal length of the sum
of the portions of the facade measured parallel to the front lot line.
B.
§ 295-5 TATTOOING § 295-5
257:479
LOADING SPACE — Any off-street space available for the loading and
unloading of goods to or from vehicles.
LOT; LOT AREA; LOT LINE; FRONT LOT LINE; REAR LOT LINE; SIDE LOT
LINE; LOT DEPTH; LOT WIDTH; CORNER LOT; THROUGH LOT —
LOT — An area of land not divided by streets, having frontage on
a street as defined herein, consisting of a single parcel or two or
more contiguous parcels occupied or to be occupied by a building or
buildings together with any required open spaces, or devoted or to be
devoted to a particular use or to a combination of uses permitted under
this chapter. A "subject property" or "property," as such terms are used
in §§ 486 through 497 of this chapter, shall be deemed to constitute a lot
for the purpose of applying the provisions of this chapter within areas
which are within, or proposed to be placed within, a Marine Waterfront-
B (MW-B) District.
A.
B. LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT LINE — The established division line between lots or between a lot
and a street.
C.
FRONT LOT LINE:
In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the line
separating the lot from the street;
(1)
In the case of a corner lot or through lot not located within the CC
District, that lot line, abutting a street, selected by the owner as
the front lot line.
(2)
In the case of a corner lot or through lot located within the CC
District, that lot line, abutting a street, selected by the Planning
Board as the front lot line. Generally, where a lot within the CC
District contains a lot line abutting Warburton Avenue or Main
Street, the Board shall determine such a lot line to be the front
lot line, except where such a determination will generate practical
difficulties.
(3)
D.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line that is generally opposite the front lot
line; if the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot comes
to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line
parallel to the front lot line, not less than 10 feet long, and lying wholly
within the lot and farthest from the front lot line.
E.
F. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front
and rear lot lines, measured at right angles to the front line, but not
including any portion of that distance which is closer to the front lot
line than the first point where minimum width is reached.
G.
H. LOT WIDTH — The lesser of:
§ 295-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-5
257:480
MAJOR LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR COST — The cost of
major structural repairs, replacement and maintenance of bulkheads,
platforms, rip-rap slopes, decking and support pilings for decking which
may become necessary in an MW-B District on an ongoing basis as
contemplated in § 295-84G(3) of this chapter.
MAJOR MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR FUND — A security fund established
to pay for the costs of major maintenance and repairs pursuant to
§ 295-84G(3) of this chapter.
MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT COVERAGE — The sum of the area of coverage
or footprint of all buildings, structures, paved areas and other improved
surfaces on a site, including areas covered with gravel, crushed stone, and
other materials used to support vehicles, but not including architectural
landscape features such as pools, ponds, fountains, patios, decks, and
gazebos. [Added 10-5-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004]
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building containing both residential and
nonresidential uses. Each nonresidential use within a mixed-use building
must be a permitted or special permit use within the district in which it
is located and each use is subject to the requirements for said use as if
contained individually, notwithstanding any statement to the contrary. No
mixed-use building shall contain a motor vehicle service station, a gasoline
filling station, a commercial parking lot, a commercial storage garage, a
hospital, a hotel, or a public utility structure.[Amended 4-19-2005 by L.L.
No. 5-2005]
MIXED-USE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A building with one or more
principal nonresidential use(s) located on the ground floor story, and with
one or more residential dwellings located on any story. Each use within a
mixed-use residential building is subject to the requirements for the use as
if existing individually.[Added 10-5-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004]
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including
structures thereon or any building or part thereof, that is used for the sale
of motor fuels or motor vehicle accessories and that may include facilities
for lubricating, washing or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but not
including body work, major repair or painting of vehicles by mechanical
means.
The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured perpendicularly to the lot depth; or
(1)
The distance along a line parallel to the front lot line that is the
number of feet from the front lot line required by this chapter for a
front yard.
(2)
CORNER LOT — A lot located at the junction of, and abutting on, two
or more intersecting streets when the interior angle(s) of intersection
does not exceed 135°.
I.
THROUGH LOT — A lot, other than a corner lot, having street frontage
on two or more streets.
J.
§ 295-5 TATTOOING § 295-5
257:481
NURSERY SCHOOL; DAY NURSERY —
NURSING HOME or CONVALESCENT HOME — Any establishment where
three or more persons suffering from or afflicted with or convalescing
from any infirmity, disease or ailment are habitually kept or boarded or
housed for remuneration, constructed, overseen and operated pursuant to
Article 28 of New York State Public Health Law, NYCRR Title 10, Section
86.2.[Added 12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019]
OFFICE, BUSINESS — A building or portion thereof used for the conducting
of activities by businesses exclusive of those identified as "professional,"
including but not limited to offices for building construction trades,
advertising, travel agency, collection agency, commercial art or graphic
design, building cleaning and maintenance services, computer processing
and data preparation businesses, or similar business, provided that no
merchandise is sold on premises, except such that is incidental or accessory
to the principal use, and provided that no assembly, disposal, or storage of
raw or finished materials occurs on premises.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — A building or portion thereof used for the
conducting of business activities by professionals, including but not limited
to architects, engineers, physicians, dentists, attorneys, insurance brokers,
real estate brokers, or others whose business usually involves nonmanual
work. No merchandise may be sold on premises, except such that are
incidental or accessory to the principal use.
PARKING AREA — An off-street area containing one or more parking spaces
with vehicular circulation ways and driveways, internal and peripheral
drainage facilities, lighting facilities, landscaping, signs, curbs, fences,
walls, pedestrian walks and other incidental areas and facilities
appurtenant thereto.
PARKING SPACE — A specific off-street location available for the parking
of one motor vehicle on a transient basis, normally located within a parking
area, and having usable and relatively direct access to a street.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A business enterprise involved
in the care, maintenance or repair of the appearance, condition or well
being of a person or a person's private apparel, goods or property. Personal
service establishments include but are not limited to barbershops, hair
salons, nail salons, tailors, dry-cleaning pickup and delivery depots,
including on-site clothes pressing, shoe repair, health clubs, day spas, post
office box rental, clothing rental, diaper service, TV and appliance repair,
and linen service.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — A facility for the provision
of personal wireless services. A personal wireless service facility includes
NURSERY SCHOOL — A building or structure, together with
surrounding grounds, designed to provide daytime care or instruction
for two or more children under six years of age and operated on a
regular or seasonal basis.
A.
B. DAY NURSERY — A nursery school.
§ 295-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-5
257:482
an antenna, equipment mounting structure and/or accessory buildings and
equipment.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Commercial mobile services, wireless
telecommunications services using duly authorized devices that do not
require individual licenses (excluding satellite earth station antennas), and
common carrier wireless exchanges, including cellular radiotelephone,
specialized mobile radio system and personal communications services.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
PORTABLE HOME STORAGE UNIT — A transportable unit designed and
used primarily for temporary storage of building materials (before they are
used for building purposes), household goods and other such materials for
use on a limited basis on residential property.[Added 9-7-2010 by L.L. No.
6-2010]
PRINCIPAL USE; ACCESSORY USE —
PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A legal entity created by a trust
agreement or certificate of incorporation, approved as to form and
sufficiency by the Village Attorney pursuant to § 295-84G of this chapter.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — Any laboratory engaged exclusively in the
pursuit of scientific research and development, including the research and
development of manufactured, processed or compounded products, or for
experimentation in pure or applied research, design, development and
production of prototype machines or devices, or of new products, and
uses necessary thereto, provided that products are not manufactured or
assembled primarily for wholesale or retail sale, that commercial servicing
or repair of commercial products is not performed and that there is no
display of any materials or products for sale.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT; RESIDENCE DISTRICT —
RESTAURANT — A business enterprise engaged in preparing and serving
food and beverages selected from a full menu by patrons seated at a table
or counter, served by a waiter or waitress, or at a buffet, and consumed on
the premises. See also "fast-food restaurant."
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or primary purpose for which land is used
or a building or structure is designed, intended, arranged or used or for
which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
A.
ACCESSORY USE — A use that is customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use on a lot, and located on the same lot
therewith.
B.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — An R-20, R-10, R-7.5, 2R, 2R-3.5, MR-2.5 or
MR-1.5 District.
A.
B. RESIDENCE DISTRICT — A residential district.
§ 295-5 TATTOOING § 295-5
257:483
ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR PANEL — A photovoltaic device capable of
collecting and converting solar energy into electrical energy located on the
roof of any legally permitted building for the primary purpose of producing
electricity for on-site or off-site consumption.109[Added 11-7-2017 by L.L.
No. 3-2017]
SENIOR HOUSING — Multiunit apartment buildings, condominiums,
cooperatives, that are restricted to a person or persons who meet the
minimum age requirement for “housing for older persons” contained in
Section 3607 of the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, or are restricted
to at least one person who is at least age 55, whichever is the higher
age.[Added 10-5-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004]
SHORELINE — The westerly limit of dry land area in an MW-A or MW-B
District, determined in the manner set forth in § 295-84F(9) below of this
chapter.
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof, or any device attached thereto
or painted thereon, or any material thing, illuminated or otherwise, that
displays or includes any numeral, letter, emblem, device, trademark or
other representation used as an announcement, designation, direction or
display to advertise or promote any person, firm, group, organization,
commodity, service, profession or enterprise, when the display is out-ofdoors
or within three feet of a window in view of the general public,
but not including the following: the flag or insignia of any government or
governmental agency; the flag of any civic, political, charitable, religious,
patriotic, fraternal or similar organization that is hung on a flagpole or
mast; or any Christmas or other seasonal holiday decorations that do not
contain commercial lettering, wording, designs, symbols or other devices.
SITE PLAN — A rendering, drawing or sketch prepared to specifications and
containing necessary elements, as set forth in §§ 295-104 through 295-114
of this chapter, which shows the arrangement, layout and design of the
proposed use of a single parcel of land as shown on said plan.
STORY; ONE-HALF STORY —
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
In measuring the height of a building, a basement shall be counted as a
story, but a cellar shall not be counted as a story.
A.
ONE-HALF STORY — Any space under a sloping roof where the clear
height of not more than 50% of such space between the top of the floor
beams and the structural ceiling level is seven feet or more and where
the aggregate area, including stairways, is less than 50% of the gross
floor area of the floor below. If the aggregate area is 50% or greater
B.
109. Editor's Note: The definitions of "senior assisted-living housing" and "senior enriched/
independent living housing," both of which were added 10-5-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004 and
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019.
§ 295-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-5
257:484
STREET; STREET LINE —
STRUCTURE — A combination of material(s) assembled, constructed or
erected, whether temporarily or permanently, at a fixed location, including,
without limitation, a building, porch, deck, patio with an impervious
surface, stationary carport, swimming pool, sign, outdoor generator or
air-conditioning equipment, and satellite dish, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on
the ground. As used in the Zoning Chapter, the term "structure" shall not
include a driveway, fence, nor a swing set, jungle gym, or similar play
equipment.[Amended 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008]
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS — The regulations Included in §§ 295-115
through 295-138 of this chapter.
SUPERMARKET — A facility with a gross floor area of 15,000 square feet or
more used primarily for the retail sale of food but also for the subordinate
retail sale of sundry, perishable items, medicines, and similar items.
SWIMMING POOL or POND — Any pool, structure, excavation, pond, tank,
depression, body of water or receptacle for water, having a depth at any
point greater than two feet, together with the apparatus and equipment, if
any, pertaining thereto, used, usable or intended to be used for swimming
or bathing.
TOWNHOUSE — One of several dwelling units in a dwelling, which dwelling
unit is designed for and occupied exclusively as a home or residence for not
more than two families living independently of any other family, separated
from other units by a ground-to-roof party wall or walls.
TRAILER — Any vehicle mounted on wheels, movable either by its own
power or by being drawn by another vehicle, and includes vehicles that
are equipped to be used for living or sleeping quarters or so as to permit
cooking. Such vehicles remain trailers even if the wheels are removed and/
or the vehicle is placed on a temporary or permanent foundation.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
VILLAGE MANAGER — The Village Manager of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
WATERFRONT ESPLANADE — A continuous pedestrian walkway abutting
the shoreline, as described in § 295-84G of this chapter.
than the gross floor area of the floor below, it shall count as a full story.
[Amended 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008]
STREET — Any existing state, county or local highway, or a public or
private thoroughfare shown on the Official Map as a street, or a way
shown upon a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board, as
provided by law, or on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Clerk prior to the appointment of the Planning Board and the
grant to the Planning Board of the power to approve subdivision plats.
A.
B. STREET LINE — The front lot line.
§ 295-5 TATTOOING § 295-5
257:485
WORKFORCE HOUSING UNIT — Each of the following is a workforce
housing unit:[Added 1-8-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
YARD; FRONT YARD; REAR YARD; SIDE YARD —
A for-purchase housing unit that must be sold to a household whose
income does not exceed 120% of the AMI and for which the annual
housing cost of a unit, including common charges, principal, interest,
taxes and insurance, does not exceed 33% of 100% of the AMI, adjusted
for household size.
A.
A rental unit that must be leased to a household whose income does not
exceed 90% of the AMI and for which the annual housing cost of the
unit, defined as rent plus any tenant-paid utilities, does not exceed 30%
of 80% of the AMI, adjusted for household size.
B.
YARD — An open space, unoccupied except as permitted under this
chapter, lying between a lot line and a line parallel to such line and
tangent to the nearest part of the principal building or group of
principal buildings.
A.
FRONT YARD — A yard extending across the full breadth of the lot
and abutting the front lot line; provided, however, that if a lot contains
frontage of less than the minimum width requirement, the front yard
shall be measured beginning at the closest point to the front lot line
where minimum width is achieved.
B.
REAR YARD — A yard extending across the full breadth of the lot and
abutting the rear lot line.
C.
SIDE YARD — A yard abutting a side lot line and extending from the
front yard to the rear yard; or, in the absence of a rear yard, from the
front yard to the rear lot line; or, in the absence of a front yard, from
the rear yard to the front lot line.
D.
§ 295-5 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-5
257:486
ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts and Schedule
[Amended 1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ 295-6. Enumeration of districts. [Amended 10-5-2004 by L.L. No.
7-2004; 1-5-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is
hereby divided into the following classes or districts:
One-Family Residence R-20 (formerly R1-20)
One-Family Residence R-10 (formerly R1-10)
One-Family Residence R-7.5 (formerly R1-7.5)
Two-Family Residence 2R (formerly R2-7.5)
Two-Family Residence 2R-3.5
Multifamily Residence MR-2.5 (formerly RMF-2.5)
Multifamily Residence MR-1.5 (formerly RMF-1.5)
Multifamily Residence/Office MR-O
Multifamily Residence/ Commercial MR-C
Limited Office LO (formerly LO-160)
Central Office CO (formerly CO-10)
Limited Commercial LC (formerly LC-40)
Central Commercial CC
Limited Industry LI (formerly LI-20)
General Industry GI (formerly GI-30)
Marine Waterfront MW
Marine Waterfront-A MW-A
Marine Waterfront-B MW-B
Public Park, Recreation and
Playground
PR
View Preservation VP
Neighborhood Commercial Overlay NCO
Mixed-Use Planned Development
District
MUPDD
Gateway Cluster Overlay GCO
§ 295-7. Zoning Map. [Amended 6-22-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
The boundaries of such districts and special building lines are hereby
established as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map, Village of Hastingson-
Hudson," dated June 22, 2004, and from time to time amended, which
§ 295-6 TATTOOING § 295-7
257:487
map, with all explanatory matter therein, accompanies and is hereby made
part of this chapter.110
§ 295-8. interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the locations of any boundaries shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines or the center line
of streets, railroads, rights-of-way or watercourses, or be parallel or
perpendicular thereto, unless such district boundary lines are indicated
by dimensions shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where district boundary lines divide a lot or unsubdivided property, the
location of any such boundary, if not indicated by dimensions, shall be
determined by the use of the map scale appearing thereon.
C. Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
the property lines of parks, other large public holdings or the
boundaries of the Village, such property lines shall be construed to be
the district boundary lines.
D. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the edge of lakes, ponds, reservoirs or other bodies of water, the
mean high water lines thereof shall be construed to be the district
boundaries, except that the regulations of the most restrictive district
on the edge of such a body of water shall apply to the area within the
mean high water line and the body of water thereof. Unless otherwise
designated on the Zoning Map, the regulations of the most restrictive
district on the edge of the body of water shall apply to all land under the
water.
E. Any boundary extending into the Hudson River or other bodies of water
bordering the Village shall be deemed to extend to the boundary of the
Village, unless otherwise indicated.
F. If the district classification of any land is in question, it shall be deemed
to be in the most restrictive adjoining district.
G. All distances and measurements, with the exception of height, shall be
taken horizontally. Height measurements shall be taken vertically, or
perpendicular to horizontal measurements.
H. Unless otherwise noted, all areas designated as streets on the Zoning
Map defined in § 295-7 are hereby zoned R-20.
110. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-7 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-9
257:488
§ 295-9. Lots in two or more districts.
Where a lot in one ownership of record is divided by one or more district
boundary lines, the regulations for the less restrictive portion of such lots
shall not extend into the more restricted portion of the lot.
§ 295-10. Order of restrictiveness.
For purposes of these regulations, where districts are referred to as being
generally "more restrictive" or less restrictive" with respect to permitted
uses and intensity of development, the designation shall refer to the order
in which the districts are set forth in § 295-6, the first named being the most
restrictive.
§ 295-11. Schedule controlling land and buildings.
A. Purpose and adoption of schedule. To facilitate public understanding of
this chapter and for the better administration thereof, the regulations
governing the use of land and buildings and the location, arrangement
height and minimum size of buildings, and other requirements, are set
forth in the annexed schedule controlling land and buildings111 for each
of the districts established by § 295-6 of this chapter. That schedule
(hereafter referred to as "the schedule") is hereby adopted and
declared to be part of this chapter and may be amended in the same
manner as any other part of this chapter. References in parentheses in
the schedule do not constitute a part of this chapter. In the event of any
conflict between the text of this chapter and the schedule, the text shall
govern.
B. Application of schedule.
(1) All limitations for any district as to use, percentage of area,
permissible height, required yards and minimum sizes thereof,
minimum sizes of dwellings and all other requirements shall be
those set forth in the schedule, which, in the case of each district
named, shall be read across the schedule from left to right.
Wherever in the schedule there appear the words "Same as in
(symbol of district) above," those words shall be construed to
include the specific limitations set forth in the same column for the
district thus referred to. The listing of any use in the schedule
either as being permitted in, or as being excluded from, any
particular district shall be deemed to be an exclusion of that use
from every other district, unless the use is expressly permitted in
that other district under the language set forth in the schedule
applying to that district.
(2) No use of land or existing or proposed buildings or structures shall
be permitted in the Village unless expressly listed on the schedule
111. Editor's Note: See Appendix B, District Regulations Summary, included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 295-9 TATTOOING § 295-11
257:489
or interpreted as listed on the schedule by the Zoning Board of
Appeals in cases of unclarity. All permitted uses shall conform
with the standards as listed in the schedule and with additional
standards and provisions which may exist elsewhere in this
chapter, including but not limited to the provisions of site plan
review and special use permits.
§ 295-11 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-11
257:490
ARTICLE III
Regulations Applicable to All Districts
[Amended 2-17-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998; 1-21-2003 by L.L. No.
1-2003]
§ 295-12. Application of general regulations.
The regulations set forth in this article shall apply in all zoning districts.
§ 295-13. Conformity required.
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or
part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with
the regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located
or is to be moved.
§ 295-14. Completion of structures issued building permit before
chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of any building for which a building
permit was duly issued and on which actual construction was lawfully begun
and diligently carried on prior to the adoption of this chapter, provided
that the building shall be completed within 12 months after the passage
of this chapter. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to be the actual
placing of construction materials in their permanent position, fastened in
a permanent manner, except that where a basement or cellar is being
excavated, such excavating shall be deemed to be actual construction,
or where demolition or removal of an existing structure has been begun
preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed
to be actual construction. Similarly, whenever a district shall be changed
hereafter, the provisions of this chapter with regard to building permits
issued prior to the passage of this chapter shall apply to building permits
issued for construction in that changed district before the time the
amendment effecting the change becomes effective.
§ 295-15. Conflicting standards.
In case of conflict between this chapter and any other Village statute, bylaw,
local law or regulation, the more restrictive standard shall apply. Examples
of such standards would include but not be limited to greater width or size
of yards or other open spaces; or a lower height of building; or a fewer
number of stories; or a greater percentage of lot area to be left unoccupied.
§ 295-16. Environmental matters.
The use, reuse, development or redevelopment of all lots, buildings,
structures or open lands shall be subject to review in accordance with the
environmental review procedures established in the State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQRA),112 and the regulations promulgated pursuant
§ 295-12 TATTOOING § 295-16
257:491
thereto and in the following chapters of the Hastings-on-Hudson Code:
Steep Slopes (Ch. 249); Tree Preservation (Ch. 273); Flood Damage
Prevention (Ch. 146); Environmental Quality Review (Ch. 131), and any
other applicable local laws relating to matters regulating the natural or
man-made environment.
§ 295-17. Accessory building attached to main building.
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, if any accessory
building is attached to a main or principal building, including attachment
by means of a breezeway or a roofed passageway, that attached accessory
building shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter
applicable to the main building. All other accessory buildings shall comply
with the requirements for accessory buildings as set forth in this chapter.
§ 295-18. Building lots and open spaces.
A. Lot measurements. All measurements herein shall be deemed to run to
and from the pertinent property lines, excepting only in the case of a
property owner whose title runs beyond a street line boundary to a
point within such street in which case, for purposes of measuring front,
side and/or rear yards, the property line shall be deemed to be
equivalent to the street line.
B. Lot for every building. Every building hereafter erected and every use
hereafter established shall be located on a lot as defined herein. Unless
otherwise permitted in this chapter, there shall be only one use or use
category permitted per lot.
C. Subdivision of a lot. Where a lot is formed hereafter from part of a lot
already occupied by a building or structure, that separation shall be
effected in such a manner as not to impair conformity with any of the
requirements of this chapter with respect to the existing building and
all yards and other required spaces in connection therewith. No permit
shall be granted for the erection of a building or structure upon the new
lot thus created unless it complies with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Irregularly shaped lots. Where a question exists as to the proper
application of any of the requirements of this chapter to a particular lot
or parcel because of the peculiar or irregular shape of the lot or parcel,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine how the requirements of
this chapter shall be applied.
E. Required open space.
(1) No lot shall be so reduced in area as to make any yard, court or
other required open space smaller than the minimum required
under this chapter.
112. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law Article 8.
§ 295-16 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-18
257:492
§ 295-19. Required street frontage and access; access to sewers.
§ 295-20. Required yards.
(2) No part of a yard, court or other required open space provided
about any building or structure for the purpose of complying with
the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of a yard,
court or other open space required under this chapter for another
building or structure.
F. Yards abutting district boundary lines. Where any rear yard or side yard
of a lot adjoins a district boundary line, that adjoining rear or side yard
shall have the dimensions required by the more restrictive of the two
adjoining districts.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, no building permit shall be issued
for the establishment of any use or the construction of any building or
structure, or any part thereof, unless the lot upon which that use is to
be established or that building or structure is to be built has frontage of
at least 70% of the lot width required for that district on a street or
highway that has been suitably improved to Village, county or state
road standards or a bond posted therefor, and unless the actual access
to the use, building or structure will be over that frontage or over a
right-of-way or easement satisfactory in location and physical condition
to the Village for such purposes, as set forth in § 7-730 of the Village
Law, all in accordance with the provisions of § 7-736 of the Village Law.
B. If a building permit is sought for the establishment of any use or
construction on a lot that has street frontage of less than 70% of the
required width for the district in which the lot lies, the application for a
building permit must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.
C. No building permit shall be issued for the establishment of any use or
the construction of any building or structure, or any part thereof, unless
the building, structure or use has access to a public sewer.
A. Yard for every building. No part of a required yard or other open space
provided about any building or on any lot for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as any part of the
required yard or open space for any other building or any other lot.
B. Obstructions in yards. No buildings or structures, or any projection
from buildings or structures, shall be permitted in a required yard,
except as follows:
(1) Cornices, canopies, eaves or cantilevered roofs or similar features
may project not more than two feet into a required yard, but only if
the feature is at least 10 feet above grade. Features less than 10
feet above grade may project not more than 12 inches into the
required yard.
§ 295-18 TATTOOING § 295-20
257:493
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection B(1), bay windows may project not
more than two feet into a required yard.
(3) Belt courses, windowsills and other ornamental features may
project not more than six inches into a required yard.
(4) A chimney may project not more than two feet into a required yard.
(5) A freestanding steel stair may project no more than four feet into a
required yard; but no required freestanding steel stair on any
structure may be constructed on the front or any side thereof which
faces on a street or be roofed over or enclosed.
(6) A terrace or uncovered porch or deck with its floor level no higher
than that of the main entrance to the building may project into a
required yard not more than six feet; or to a point not closer than
six feet to any property line; or to a point 1/2 of the minimum
required setback from any property line, whichever projection is
the least.
(7) No balcony shall project into a required yard.
(8) Except as set forth in Subsection E below, fences or walls, or a
fence on top of a wall, less than 6 1/2 feet in height may be erected
anywhere on the lot. Fences or walls, or a fence on top of a wall,
6 1/2 feet or greater in height shall be set back as far as the
Building Inspector deems necessary for visibility and shall conform
to the requirements set forth herein for buildings.
C. Parking, paving and structures on required yards in residential
districts. With the exception of driveways and sidewalks constructed in
compliance with §§ 295-39 through 295-44 below, in residential
districts:
(1) No motor vehicle, trailer, recreational vehicle, snowmobile, mobile
home, boat or permanent or temporary structure shall be placed on
any required yard nor shall any portion of any required yard be
paved.
(2) No portion of any required yard shall be paved except for
walkways, not exceeding four feet in width, to the principal or any
accessory structure on the lot. [Amended 8-5-2008 by L.L. No.
24-2008]
(3) Subsections C(1) and (2) shall not apply to any property that,
before the passage of this chapter, was thus regularly used,
provided that such use complies with the local law or zoning
ordinance in effect immediately prior to the date on which this
chapter becomes effective.
(4) No site plan shall permit any structures, parking or paving on a
required yard.
§ 295-20 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-20
257:494
§ 295-21. Height limitations; courts.
D. Front yard depth.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection D(2), the depth of a required
front yard in any residence district shall be the number of feet
specified in Article IX of this chapter.
(2) If, on one side of a street within 250 feet of any lot, there is
pronounced uniformity of alignment of the fronts of existing
buildings and of the depths of front yards that is less than the
required minimum depth specified in this chapter, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may permit a reduction in the required depth of
the front yard for a new building on that lot, or expansion of an
existing building on that lot, provided that the spirit and intent of
this chapter is met and that the depth of the front yard shall
conform as nearly as practicable to that existing on the neighboring
lots.
E. Visibility at intersections.
(1) On a corner lot, no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or planting
shall be erected, placed or maintained in such a way as to obstruct
traffic visibility across the triangular area formed by the two
intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting
points along those street right-of-way lines, which points, are
located 50 feet distant from the theoretical point of intersection of
the lines, measured along the street lines. Grading of corner lots
shall be in conformance with this chapter to the maximum possible
extent.
(2) Subsection E(1) above shall not apply to existing trees, provided
that no branches are closer than 10 feet to the ground.
F. Corner lots. On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be
not less than the required front yard or 15 feet, whichever is greater.
The property owner shall elect which of the two yards not abutting the
streets is the rear yard, except that the Planning Board shall make such
determination for lots located within the CC District.
G. Side yard width in relation to length. When a side yard exceeds 50 feet
in length, its required width shall be increased one foot for each 10 feet
of length in excess of 50 feet.
A. Height.
(1) Unless regulated specifically herein, the height limitations of this
chapter shall not apply to chimneys, church spires and church
belfries, standpipes, cross-member-style television antennas, ham
operator antennas, flagpoles or sculpture, provided that such
structures (with the exception of church spires and church belfries)
§ 295-20 TATTOOING § 295-21
257:495
do not extend more than 15 feet above the level of the roof on
which they are located.
(2) No towers, non-church belfries, penthouses, scenery lofts, cupolas,
water towers and water tanks, solar and wind energy devices,
elevator shafts, transmitting and receiving dishes or cones,
monuments, transmission towers and cables of public utilities or
similar structures or mechanical appurtenances may be erected on
any building unless approved by the Planning Board after a finding
by that Board that they are in furtherance of §§ 295-2 and 295-3
above. If so approved, such structures shall be screened in a
manner determined by the Planning Board to be appropriate and
consistent with the exterior of the building, unless such screening
would defeat their purpose. In any event, such structures shall not
exceed the maximum height permitted in the district; shall not be
used for sleeping or housekeeping purposes or for any commercial
purposes other than such as may be incident to the permitted use
of the principal building; and shall not cover at any level more than
10% of the area of the roof on which they are located (except for
solar heating panels).
(3) The requirements of Subsection A(2) of this section shall not apply
to personal wireless service facilities, which are regulated by
§ 295-85 of this chapter.
B. Height of accessory buildings. The height of accessory buildings shall
not be greater than 15 feet in the case of sloped roofs or 12 feet in the
case of flat roofs, except that accessory garages in multifamily districts
may provide recreation space on the roofs thereof to conserve open
space for grass and trees.
C. Courts. The width of inner and outer courts at any level shall be not less
than the greater of 20 feet or the height of the highest vertical wall
forming part of the court above the sill of the lowest window served by
the court.
§ 295-21 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-21
257:496
ARTICLE IV
Off-Street Parking and Loading
[Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999; 1-21-2003 by L.L. No.
1-2003]
§ 295-22. Application.
§ 295-23. Parking facilities dedicated to Village.
Required off-street parking facilities that, after development, are later
dedicated to and accepted by the Village shall be deemed to continue
to serve the uses, buildings or structures for which they were originally
provided.
§ 295-24. Existing structures and uses.
A. All buildings, structures and land uses hereafter erected, enlarged,
moved, created, changed in use or intensity or otherwise substantially
altered shall be provided with the amount of off-street parking and
loading space required by the terms of this chapter to meet the needs of
persons occupying or using such buildings, structures or land.
B. The plans for any new building or structure or any expansion of an
existing building or structure, when submitted for a building permit,
shall show specifically the location, size and type of improvements of
the off-street parking or loading space required to comply with this
chapter, and the means of access to such space from the public streets
or highways. Except for individual one- or two-family residences, no
building permit shall be issued until such plan for parking and loading
space and access to it and required improvement is approved by the
Planning Board as part of site plan approval, and the Planning Board
has determined that traffic access, traffic circulation and the general
layout of the parking facility are properly planned with regard to safety,
traffic on the public street and adequacy of access for cars and
pedestrians using the parking facility. No certificate of occupancy shall
be issued for any building or land use until the required off-street
parking and loading facilities have been established.
A. Buildings, structures and land uses in existence or for which building
permits have been approved on the effective date of this chapter shall
not be subject to the parking or loading space requirements set forth in
this chapter. However, any parking and loading facilities now existing to
serve such buildings, structures or uses shall not be reduced, except
where they exceed such requirements, in which case they shall not be
reduced below those requirements. Required parking and loading
facilities for the existing portion of such uses shall, however, be
provided at the time of any enlargement of such existing building,
structures or uses in the future, unless said building, structures or uses
are located in the CC District, in which case the provisions set forth in
§ 295-24 shall apply.
§ 295-22 TATTOOING § 295-24
257:497
§ 295-25. Planning Board approval.
Except for parking spaces accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling, all
off-street parking and loading areas shall be developed in accordance with
Planning Board site plan approval and Planning Board guidelines.
§ 295-26. Location.
B. It is the policy of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson to limit the number
of driveways and curb cuts accessing off-street parking areas within the
CC and MR-C Districts in order to minimize conflicts between
pedestrian and motor vehicle traffic. In order to effectuate this policy,
the following standards apply: [Amended 11-19-2013 by L.L. No.
7-2013]
(1) A change of use or expansion of an existing use within an existing
building, structure or portion thereof, occupying 2,500 square feet
gross floor area or less located within or proposed to be located in
the CC or MR-C District, shall be exempt from providing off-street
parking.
(2) The Planning Board may reduce or waive the requirements for offstreet
parking and loading set forth in § 295-36 of this chapter
where it determines that a change of use or expansion of a use
within an existing building, structure or portion thereof, occupying
more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area located within or
proposed to be located in the CC or MR-C District, will not generate
a significant increase in parking demand.
A. Except as permitted by Subsections B and C of this section, required
parking and loading spaces shall be provided upon the same lot as the
use, building or structure to which they are accessory.
B. Off-street parking spaces required for buildings, structures or land uses
on two or more adjacent lots may be provided in a single common
facility on one or more of the lots, provided that a legal instrument,
satisfactory to the Village Attorney, assures the continued existence of
the parking facility to serve the buildings, structures or land uses as
long as they may exist. Such agreements shall also guarantee that,
upon the termination of such joint use, each subsequent use of the
premises will provide off-street parking facilities for its own use in
accordance with all requirements of this chapter.
C. Substitution of equivalent parking.
(1) Where, for practical difficulties, strict compliance with the
minimum off-street parking requirements specified in this chapter
cannot be attained on that lot, the Board of Appeals, after notice
and hearing and upon recommendation of the Planning Board, may
permit the substitution therefor of equivalent off-street parking
space on another lot, provided that:
§ 295-24 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-26
257:498
§ 295-27. Different uses on single lot.
(a) The entrance to the substituted parking area is not over 750
feet by normal pedestrian travel from the building or use to
which such off-street parking space is to be appurtenant;
(b) No point of the substituted parking area is greater than 750
feet from the building or use to which it is to be appurtenant;
(c) The parking area is permitted in the district in which it is
located; and
(d) A legal instrument, satisfactory to the Village Attorney,
guaranteeing such continued use is furnished to the Village.
(2) If such alternate off-street parking space is authorized, such space
may not thereafter be used for any other purpose, unless other
alternative space complying with this subsection is substituted
therefor and approved by the Planning Board and the Board of
Appeals.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, where two or more different uses
occur on a single lot, the total amount of off-street parking and loading
facilities to be provided shall be the sum of the requirements of each
such individual use on the lot.
B. The Board of Appeals, upon recommendation of the Planning Board,
may approve the joint use of parking space by two or more
establishments, the total capacity of which space is less than the sum of
the spaces required for each, provided that:
(1) The establishments can clearly demonstrate that, by reason of
variations in the probable time of maximum use by occupants of
such establishments, the parking capacity to be provided will
substantially meet the parking demand generated;
(2) The establishments provide a legal instrument satisfactory to the
Village Attorney that assures the continued existence and use of
the joint parking facilities in connection with the uses and
establishments they serve;
(3) The site plan clearly demonstrates that sufficient space remains for
the provision of the total amount of off-street parking required, and
the site plan bears such designation;
(4) The establishments shall submit written guaranties, satisfactory to
the Village Attorney, that any spaces that may have been waived
can be constructed within six months after written notice to the
property owner by the Planning Board that such spaces have been
determined as necessary and must be constructed; and
(5) Approval of such joint use shall be automatically terminated upon a
change of use at any such establishment.
§ 295-26 TATTOOING § 295-27
257:499
§ 295-28. Parking and loading area screening.
§ 295-29. Size of parking spaces.
(6) Such uses shall be located on the same or adjacent lots, except as
provided for in § 295-26C.
C. All such undeveloped parking space shall be used and maintained as
additional landscaped grounds until required for parking.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, where an offstreet
parking or loading area in any business or multifamily residence
district adjoins a one-family residence district or is adjacent to a street,
park or other public open space, there shall be a suitably maintained
landscaped strip of a width specified in Subsection C below. Each such
landscaped strip shall consist of an evergreen hedge, wall or fence not
less than two feet in height, located at the inner edge of the landscaped
strip, exclusive of entrances and exits; and in front, or outside, of any
such wall or fence there shall be a planting screen of shrubbery not less
than four feet in width, at least 1/2 of which shall consist of evergreens
not less than two feet in height.
B. The shrubbery shall be of sufficient density to conceal, in midsummer of
the year succeeding the planting thereof, 25% of the vertical area of the
wall or fence. Any portion of the landscaped strip not occupied by
shrubbery shall be planted with a good-quality grass seed or permanent
plant cover, such as ivy or pachysandra or similar growth, and shall be
kept free of trash, suitably watered, except when prohibited in times of
drought, and suitably trimmed and maintained. Wherever motor
vehicles are to be parked adjacent to the landscaped strip, there shall
be a suitable curb or bumper guard, approved as to design and
construction by the Building Inspector.
C. Minimum widths of landscaped strips shall be:
(1) Along a street frontage, except as to entrances and exits: 10 feet.
(2) Along any boundary abutting directly on a residence district,
except as specified below: 10 feet.
(3) Along any boundary of a multifamily residence use, the adjacent
portion of which is used for the parking of passenger vehicles or for
access and turning areas appurtenant thereto: five feet.
(4) The Planning Board may require that trees be planted within said
landscape strip, provided said trees shall not impede sight lines
therefrom. The species and spacing of said trees shall be
determined by the Planning Board.
A. Each parking space shall be at least nine feet wide and 18 feet long. If
this space is enclosed, the Planning Board may require the size of the
space to be increased for maneuverability.
§ 295-27 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-29
257:500
§ 295-30. Additional standards as to size and location of parking
spaces.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 295-29:
§ 295-31. Grades, drainage and marking of parking spaces.
Required off-street parking facilities may be enclosed in a structure, or
may be open, except as required specifically herein or by the Planning
Board in site plan review. All required parking facilities shall be graded,
surfaced, drained and maintained throughout the duration of their use to
the extent necessary to avoid nuisances of dust, erosion or excessive water
flow across public ways or adjacent lands. The maximum slope within a
parking area shall not exceed 5%. In multifamily residential developments
and in nonresidential developments, the Planning Board shall require the
provision of suitable markings to indicate individual parking spaces,
maneuvering area, entrances and exits.
B. Backup and maneuvering aisles between rows of parking spaces shall
be 25 feet wide, except that in areas with angled parking spaces, the
Planning Board may approve a lesser width, provided that it is adequate
and appropriate. Where such aisles are also needed to carry traffic to
and from other portions of the parking area to the street, the Planning
Board may require the width of the aisles to be at least 35 feet.
C. Where parked vehicles will overhang landscaped islands, the Planning
Board may reduce the required length of the parking spaces by not
more than the amount of the overhang, which shall not exceed two feet.
A. Parking spaces required for single-family and two-family dwellings may
be reduced in width to eight feet and may be provided in an accessory
garage or carport or in a driveway not less than eight feet nor more
than 24 feet in width or in a combination thereof, but may not encroach
upon any required yard and in any event may not be less than five feet
from any side or rear lot line.
B. Parking spaces required for any business use or for multifamily
dwellings or for accessory uses permitted thereto shall be paved and
clearly marked. Except in the CC and MR-C Districts, no parking space
accessory to such uses shall encroach on any required yard and in any
event shall not be closer than 10 feet to any side or rear lot line.
C. Parking spaces for all other uses shall be nine feet in width, paved and
clearly marked and, except in the CC and MR-C Districts, may not
encroach on any required yard.
D. Off-street parking spaces required for any use or structure within the
CC or MR-C Districts shall be located in the rear yard or within the
structure.
§ 295-29 TATTOOING § 295-32
257:501
§ 295-32. Internal landscaping in parking areas.
In addition to any landscaping otherwise required by this chapter, all offstreet
parking areas containing 20 or more parking spaces shall be curbed,
and at least 10% of the total parking area shall be landscaped with trees,
shrubs and other plant materials. At least one tree, not less than 15 feet in
height at the time of planting, shall be provided within the parking area for
each 10 parking spaces. Such trees and landscaped areas shall be arranged
and designed in such a way as to provide vertical definition to major traffic
circulation aisles and to entrances and exits, and shall be of such type and
location as will provide the maximum of shade without interfering with sight
lines or impeding the safe flow of traffic. The type, size, amount and location
of all such landscaping shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Board.
§ 295-33. Traffic circulation in parking areas.
In order to encourage safe and convenient traffic circulation, the Planning
Board may require the interconnection of parking areas by way of access
drives within and between adjacent lots. The Board shall require written
assurance and/or deed restrictions, satisfactory to the Village Attorney,
binding the owners and their heirs and assignees to permit and maintain
such internal access, circulation and interuse of parking facilities by the
users of the facilities.
§ 295-34. Snow storage in parking areas.
In all off-street parking areas containing 20 or more parking spaces,
adequate provision shall be made for the storage of snow, with a minimal
loss of parking capacity. The location of such snow storage areas shall be
indicated on the site plan and shall be compatible with the storm drainage
system.
§ 295-35. Commercial vehicles in parking areas.
Commercial vehicles with less than a three-fourths-ton capacity may be
parked in a residential district, provided that the vehicle shall be parked
entirely within a closed garage. Commercial vehicles with a three-fourthston
capacity or greater shall not be parked in any residential district.
§ 295-36. Schedule of off-street parking requirements.
A. The number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined by
reference to the following schedule. (When the computation of required
parking spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction over 1/2 shall require one space): [Amended 12-17-2019 by
L.L. No. 14-2019]
§ 295-32 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-36
257:502
Use Minimum Off-Street Parking
Animal hospital or veterinary
office
1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 350 square feet of
gross floor area
Artist studio 1 space for each employee and
artist, plus 1 space for each 400
square feet of gross floor area
Banking office 10 spaces, plus 5 additional spaces
for each person in excess of 2
acting as tellers, plus 4 waiting
spaces for each drive-in window
Bed-and-breakfast 2 spaces, plus 1 additional space
per guest bedroom
Boat, yacht, swim, tennis, golf or
country club
1 space for each 3 members, plus 1
space for each employee per shift
Bowling alley 4 spaces for each bowling lane
Club, other than boat, yacht,
swim, tennis, golf or country
club
1 space for each club member, plus
1 space for each employee
Funeral home 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 50 square feet of
gross floor area assembly rooms,
plus 1 space for each commercial
vehicle to be garaged on the site
Hospital, nursing home, active
adult/independent living
housing, assisted living housing,
continuum of care facility
1 space for each 2 beds, plus 1
space for each employee, plus 1
space for each nonemployee
medical practitioner or technician
regularly practicing in the facility
Library, museum or art gallery 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area
Light industry, general industry
or manufacturing facility
1 space for each commercial
vehicle garaged on lot, plus the
greater of 1 space for each
employee or 1 space for each 300
square feet of gross floor area
Marina 2 spaces for each mooring slip
(excluding mooring slips used by
members of any boat or yacht club
owning the marina), plus 1 space
for each 2 employees
§ 295-36 TATTOOING § 295-36
257:503
Use Minimum Off-Street Parking
Medical or dental office (other
than accessory to residential
use)
4 spaces for each practitioner, plus
1 space for each employee
Mixed-use building The requirement for a mixed-use
building shall be the sum of the
spaces required for each individual
use contained within the building. A
residential use shall meet the
parking standards for multifamily
dwellings set forth herein.
Motel or hotel 1 space for each guest sleeping
room or suite, plus 1 space for each
employee
Motor vehicle sales and service,
fishing marine supply, repair
garage or outdoor sales or
storage facility
1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 150 square feet of
gross floor area
Multifamily dwelling 1 1/4 space per studio/ efficiency
unit; 1 1/2 space per 1-bedroom
unit; 1 3/4 space per 2-bedroom
unit; 2 spaces per 3-or-more
bedroom unit.
Office for business or
professional use (other than
medical or dental office or office
accessory to residential use)
1 space for each 250 square feet of
gross floor area, or the sum of 2
spaces for each tenant, plus 1 space
for each employee, whichever is
greater
One- and two-family dwellings 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Place of worship, theater,
auditorium, athletic field,
gymnasium, other public
building or other assembly
One space for each 3 seats or pew
spaces, plus 1 space for each 500
square feet of floor space used for
public assembly; in places without
seats, 1 space for each 100 feet of
public space used for public
assembly (a pew space shall be
considered to be 20 inches wide)
Professional office or home
occupation permitted in a
residential district, including
rectory, parsonage, or office
accessory to a place of worship
In addition to space required for
residential and other permitted
uses, 4 spaces for each medical or
dental practitioner, 3 spaces for
each practitioner of any other
permitted occupation, plus 1 space
for each employee
Public utility substation 2 spaces
§ 295-36 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-36
257:504
Use Minimum Off-Street Parking
Research office or laboratory 1 space for each employee or 1
space for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Restaurant or other place
serving food or drink
1 space for each employee per shift,
plus the greater of 1 space for each
4 seats or 1 space for 100 square
feet of gross floor area
Retail or personal service
business or establishment
1 space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Roomers or boarders In addition to spaces required for
the principal residential use and
other permitted uses, 1 space for
each roomer or boarder
School or day nursery 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 12 pupils
Warehouse, wholesale storage,
facility, utility, printing plant, ice
plant or other similar
commercial use
1 space for each commercial
vehicle garaged on the lot, plus the
greater of 1 space for each
employee or 1 space for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area
B. With respect to any building, structure or use for which the required
parking spaces are not specifically set forth in this chapter, and upon
recommendation of the Planning Board, the Board of Appeals shall
determine the number of off-street parking spaces required, which
number shall bear a reasonable relation to the minimum off-street
parking requirements for specified uses as set forth in the above
schedule.
C. On application by the owner or lessee, or, upon recommendation by the
Planning Board in the course of site plan review and after due notice
and hearing, if the Board of Appeals shall find that the minimum offstreet
parking space specified for any use by this chapter is, in a
particular case, in excess of the number required to comply with the
above schedule, the Board of Appeals may in such case, and subject to
such conditions as it may impose, waive temporarily the construction of
such number of units so found to be in excess of those so required, but
the land necessary to provide the parking units, temporarily waived,
and the access and turning areas appurtenant thereto shall not be built
upon, but shall be kept available for the construction of the required
parking units, temporarily waived. The Board of Appeals shall have
power, after notice and hearing, to rescind such waiver when, in its
judgment, the public interest so requires.
D. Upon recommendation of the Planning Board and in order to preserve
the historical or aesthetic character of the lot or the surrounding
§ 295-36 TATTOOING § 295-36
257:505
§ 295-37. Operation and maintenance of off-street parking
facilities.
Required off-street parking facilities and related landscaping shall be
maintained as long as the use, building or structure exists that the facilities
are designed to serve. Such maintenance shall include, without limitation,
prompt removal of snow, leaves and refuse. Required parking areas
developed for specific structures and uses shall be reserved at all times
for those persons who are employed at or make use of such structures and
land uses, except when dedicated to and accepted by the Village as public
parking areas.
§ 295-38. Off-street loading requirements.
neighborhood, the Zoning Board of Appeals may, without a showing
of practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, reduce by not more
than 30% the number of off-street parking spaces required by this
chapter, provided that such reduction shall be consistent with §§ 295-2
and 295-3 above.
E. Within the CC and MR-C Districts, a restaurant or retail use with a
gross floor area of 2,500 square feet or less shall be exempt from
providing off-street parking spaces as required by this chapter.
[Amended 3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
A. Size of loading spaces.
(1) Each off-street loading space shall be at least 15 feet in width, 45
feet in length and 14 feet in clear height, exclusive of access and
turning areas, except as permitted in Subsection A(2), (3) and (4)
below.
(2) Each off-street loading space for a funeral home shall be at least 10
feet in width, 20 feet in length and 7 1/2 feet in clear height.
(3) If the Planning Board determines that, because of the nature of the
particular use or uses served, fifteen-foot-by-forty-five-foot-byfourteen-
foot spaces are not required, it may permit reduction of
loading space size to not less than 12 feet in width, 30 feet in depth
and 14 feet in height.
(4) All loading spaces shall be within the principal structure or within a
side or rear yard, or within one of two or more access drives to a
required parking area, or within a single drive having a paved or
unobstructed width of at least 25 feet.
B. Required number of loading spaces.
(1) The number of off-street loading spaces shall be determined as
follows:
§ 295-36 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-38
257:506
(a) For retail and/or service business establishments, a minimum
of one space for the first 6,000 square feet or part thereof, plus
one space for each additional 8,000 square feet of gross floor
area or part thereof.
(b) For office or office and research establishments, a minimum of
one space for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or
part thereof, plus one space for each additional 15,000 square
feet of gross floor area or part thereof.
(c) For wholesale business, manufacturing, industry, storage,
warehouse and other commercial establishments, a minimum
of one space for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or
part thereof for the first 15,000 square feet and one space for
each additional 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or part
thereof.
(d) For funeral homes, one loading space for each chapel.
(2) The number of off-street loading spaces for uses that do not fall
within the categories listed above shall be determined by the
Planning Board and established in site plan review and approval.
§ 295-38 TATTOOING § 295-38
257:507

ARTICLE V
Driveways and Sidewalks
§ 295-39. General provisions.
For the reasons stated in §§ 295-2 and 295-3, in particular for traffic and
pedestrian safety both on and off the street, as well as to provide for
possible future road widening, realignment or other improvements, all new
driveways and sidewalk crossings entering onto any street shall comply
with all requirements of §§ 295-40 through 295-44 below and shall be
subject to the approval of the Building Inspector, except where such
driveways or crossings are part of a use subject to a special use permit or a
site plan, in which case they shall be subject to Board of Appeals or Planning
Board approval, as required by this chapter.
§ 295-40. Driveway grades.
A. Single-family dwellings.
(1) Between the paved street and the required minimum setback line
(the minimum yard requirement), the maximum grade for any new
driveway accessory to a single-family dwelling shall be 15%, but
the Planning Board shall have the discretion to allow a grade as
steep as, but no steeper than, 20%. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
L.L. No. 2-2012]
(2) Notwithstanding the maximum permitted grades specified in
Subsection A(1) of this section, no driveway serving a single-family
dwelling shall have an entrance grade in excess of 3% within 30
feet of the center line of the traveled way of the street, or within 20
feet of the front property line, whichever distance is greater.
B. Other than single-family dwellings.
(1) Between the paved street and the required minimum setback line
(the minimum yard requirement), the maximum grade for any new
driveway accessory to a permitted use, building or structure other
than a single-family dwelling, and connecting to a street, shall be
8%, but the Planning Board in approving a site plan shall have the
discretion to allow a grade as steep as, but no steeper than, 12%.
(2) Notwithstanding the maximum permitted grades specified in
Subsection B(1) of this section, no driveway serving a permitted
use other than single-family residence shall have an entrance grade
in excess of 3% within 50 feet of the center line of the traveled way
of the street, or within 30 feet of the front property line, whichever
distance is greater. The Planning Board may increase these
requirements in situations where, because of the nature of the
proposed use or other circumstances, substantial traffic volumes
are anticipated.
§ 295-39 TATTOOING § 295-41
257:509
§ 295-41. Maximum driveway size and curbcuts. [Amended 8-5-2008
by L.L. No. 24-2008]
§ 295-42. Driveway alignment and location.
Any driveway entering onto a street shall be located and aligned in such
a way as to minimize possible traffic hazard. The entrance portion of the
driveway, as required by § 295-40 above, shall be aligned and constructed
so as to permit vehicles to enter and exit at approximately right angles
to the street. Driveways serving any building, structure or use other than
a single-family residence shall enter the street only over a stepped curb
provided by the property owner and approved by the Building Inspector.
§ 295-43. Sight distance.
Clear visibility shall be provided in both directions at all exit points so
that motorists stopped on the entrance grade portion of any new driveway
will have an unobstructed view of the intersected road for a reasonable
distance (commensurate with the speed and volume of traffic on such road)
and so that the motorist traveling on the road shall have such view of the
automobile in the driveway.
§ 295-44. Sidewalks crossings or driveway entrances.
Sidewalk crossings or driveway entrances for whatever purpose shall be
subject to the approval of the Village Engineer as to safety, drainage and
adequacy of width, grade, sight distance and construction.
A. No driveway shall exceed 960 square feet nor shall be wider than 24
feet.
B. No more than one curbcut shall be permitted per lot, unless there is at
least 32 feet between curbcuts, in which case a maximum of two
curbcuts, totaling 24 feet in width, shall be permitted.
§ 295-41 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-44
257:510
ARTICLE VI
Maintenance; Screening and Buffer Areas; Landscaping
§ 295-45. Maintenance of developed properties.
Those portions of developed areas and properties not covered by buildings,
structures, parking and loading areas, sidewalks or similar improvements
shall be permanently maintained in such manner as to minimize erosion and
stormwater runoff and harmoniously blend the uses with the neighborhood
and residential character of the Village as a whole. Such maintenance
shall be conducted in accordance with landscape guidelines which may be
adopted by the Planning Board.
§ 295-46. Screening and buffer areas.
In connection with the review of any site plan or any application for a
special use permit, a buffer strip shall be required along all property lines
abutting or directly across a local street from any property in a residence
district. This requirement is in addition to any other landscaping
requirements of this chapter, in particular § 295-28. Such buffer strip shall
comply with at least the following minimum standards:
§ 295-47. Maintenance of plantings.
All plantings shown on an approved site plan or special use permit plan shall
be maintained in a vigorous growing condition throughout the duration of
the principal use, and plants not so maintained shall be replaced with new
plants at the beginning of the next growing season.
A. It shall be of evergreen planting of such type, height, spacing and
arrangement as, in the judgment of the approving authority, will
effectively and continuously screen the activity of the lot from the
neighboring residential area. Nonevergreen plantings may be included
to supplement evergreen planting, but not to take its place.
B. The buffer strip shall be at least 15 feet in width.
C. A wall or fence of location, height, design and materials determined by
the approving authority to provide screening equivalent to that
required by Subsection A of this section may be substituted for part or
all of the planting required by that paragraph, provided that the fifteenfoot
buffer required by Subsection B of this section is maintained.
D. Where the approving authority determines that the existing topography
or landscaping provides adequate screening for the neighboring
residential areas, the approving authority may modify the screening
and buffer requirements of this section.
E. In cases of conflict between the requirements of this section and other
landscape requirements established in this chapter, the approving
authority may, in its discretion, decide which of the conflicting
requirements shall be applicable.
§ 295-45 TATTOOING § 295-48
257:511
§ 295-48. Landscaping.
In connection with the review of any site plan or any application for a
special use permit, for a multifamily or nonresidential use, those portions
of such multifamily or nonresidential properties which are not proposed
as locations for buildings, structures, off-street parking and loading areas,
sidewalks or similar improvements shall be required to be landscaped and
permanently maintained in accordance with § 295-47 above.
§ 295-48 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-48
257:512
ARTICLE VII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 295-49. Exterior lighting.
All exterior lighting in business, office, industrial and residential districts,
including the lighting of signs, shall be directed away from adjoining streets
and residential properties and, in connection with multifamily or
nonresidential uses in residence districts, shall be so located and shielded
that the light sources are not directly visible from any adjoining property
or from the street and that any such illumination does not cause glare
observable within an R-20, R-10, R-7.5 or 2R District. In acting on any
special use permit application, the Board of Appeals, as a condition of
approval, may also restrict hours of lighting and types of fixtures.
§ 295-50. Signs.
§ 295-51. Tents, trailers, boats, recreational vehicles, mobile homes
and portable home storage units. [Amended 9-7-2010 by L.L. No.
6-2010]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, signs may be lighted,
provided that the lights are so located and shielded that the sources are
not directly visible from points beyond the boundaries of the lot on
which they are located. In no case, however, shall such signs include
any red or green or flashing or intermittent lights; lights of changing
degrees of intensity; nor shall such signs be of a type that has the whole
or any part in motion by rotating, fluttering or any other means, except
that customary seasonal lighting and decorations shall be permitted.
B. Any signs or lighting of signs, except signs permitted on a one- or twofamily
dwelling, must be approved by the Architectural Review Board
and must comply with the provisions of Chapter 234, Signs, of the
Hastings-on-Hudson Code.
C. Signs shall not obscure any sign displayed by public authority, nor
interfere with access of light or air to any window in any building, nor
obstruct any opening in any building required by law for ingress or
egress.
D. No signs or lighting of signs shall be permitted if the approving
authority finds that they may be mistaken for traffic signal devices.
A. Except as provided in this section, tents, trailers, houseboats, boats,
mobile homes and portable home storage units, whether supported on
wheels, a foundation or otherwise, shall not be permitted as a principal
or accessory use or a part of any principal or accessory use in any
district, including, without limitation, use for permanent dwelling
purposes.
§ 295-49 TATTOOING § 295-51
257:513
§ 295-52. Outdoor pools and ponds.
B. A temporary permit for use of a trailer,(Note: The term "trailer" is
defined in the Zoning Code as follows: Any vehicle mounted on wheels,
movable either by its own power or by being drawn by another vehicle,
and includes vehicles that are equipped to be used for living or sleeping
quarters or so as to permit cooking. Such vehicles remain trailers even
if the wheels are removed and/or the vehicle is placed on a temporary
or permanent foundation.) or portable home storage unit as a
temporary field office or for storage in connection with and only during
the course of construction or repair of a principal or accessory use on
the same lot may be issued by the Building Inspector for a period not
exceeding six months, renewable at his or her discretion if work on the
construction is diligently progressing but not yet completed for not
more than two additional six-month periods. The fee for such temporary
permit shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees by resolution. Such
temporary permit shall automatically expire 14 days after construction
or repair is completed.
C. Any such temporary field office or portable home storage unit may be
placed only on a driveway, in the rear yard or in an enclosed garage or
similar structure. No temporary field office shall be used for overnight
living quarters.
A. Setbacks. Except in the rear yard, no outdoor pool or pond shall be
constructed or installed unless every part of such pool is located at least
100 feet from every side or street line and no less than five feet from the
main building on the premises. If the pool is constructed or installed in
a rear yard, every part of the pool shall be at least 20 feet from every
side, rear lot or street line and no less than five feet from the main
building on the premises.
B. Fence or other enclosure.
(1) There shall be erected and maintained in good condition a chain
link wire fence, not less than four feet nor more than six feet in
height, or a woven wooden fence, brick or stone wall or other
acceptable enclosure, not less than four feet nor more than six feet
in height, either enclosing the entire portion of the premises upon
which the pool shall be situated or entirely surrounding the area in
which the pool is located. The enclosure or fence shall be of the
kind and character as to resist any attempt by children or animals
to enter the pool area.
(2) The enclosure or fence shall have not more than two openings for
ingress or egress. The openings shall not face the deep end of the
pool and shall have a self-closing gate or door with an adequate
lock, which can be opened from outside the pool enclosure only by
means of a key or combination. The gate, door and lock shall at all
times be maintained in proper working order to ensure that the
gate or door shall be kept closed and locked at all times when the
§ 295-51 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-52
257:514
pool is not in use. The type and height of the enclosure or fence
and the lock and gate, or door, shall be approved by the Building
Inspector, who shall, in evaluating a request for approval, give
due consideration to the adequacy and durability of the proposed
enclosure or fence to ensure the safety and welfare of the general
public, and particularly of small children, and to the terrain and
character of the district, with a view to conserving the value of
buildings and land and encouraging the most appropriate use of
land in the Village.
C. Rescue devices. All outdoor pools and ponds with depth greater than
four feet in any part shall be equipped with at least one rescue device,
such as a pole of at least 10 feet in length, a shepherd's crook, a ring
buoy, a heavy line or other such rescue equipment as recommended by
the American National Red Cross, which can be used by the
nonswimmer to make an unassisted rescue from land of a drowning or
potentially drowning person. Such a rescue device shall be placed not
less than six feet nor more than 10 feet from the edge of the pool near
the location of the greatest depth.
D. No cross-connection. There shall be no cross-connection between the
public water supply system of the Village and any pipes or apparatus
feeding water to a pool from a private well, system or other source; and
there shall be no such cross-connection between the public water
supply and any purification or filtration system of any pool.
E. Inlet and outflow. If the water for any pool is supplied from the public
water supply system, the inlet shall be more than six inches above the
overflow level of the pool.
F. Drainage. Drainage of the pool or pond shall be performed in a manner
that does not cause soil erosion or damage to public or private property
or that introduces into the Village drainage sewer system an amount of
water in excess of the capacity of such system.
G. Water treatment. The water of any outdoor pool used or intended for
swimming shall be treated in the manner sufficient to maintain the
bacterial standards established by all applicable provisions of law
relating to a public swimming pool existing in the same location or area.
H. No loudspeakers or floodlights. No loudspeaker device of any kind shall
be operated in connection with any outdoor pool or pond, nor shall any
floodlighting or any other lights be used in connection therewith that
shall throw rays of light beyond the property lines of the parcel upon
which the pool or pond is located.
I. Abandonment. Should the owner abandon the pool, the owner shall fill
in the depression. The Building Inspector shall be notified of the
abandonment so that an inspection of the site may be made and the
records of the permit be marked accordingly.
J. Residence districts. In residence districts,
§ 295-52 TATTOOING § 295-52
257:515
§ 295-53. Vehicular traffic.
(1) Outdoor pools and ponds shall be permitted only for use by
residents of the premises and their guests, without charge for
admission and not for the purpose of profit.
(2) Enclosures, sometimes referred to as "swimming pool bubbles" or
"bubbles" or the like, shall not be permitted.
(3) No outdoor pool or pond shall occupy more than 6% of the total lot
area.
K. Structures. An outdoor pool or pond shall be considered to be a
structure for the purpose of compliance with all provisions of law,
Village ordinances and the building code of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson;113 and in the construction, design and operation of the pool or
pond, all such laws, ordinances and building codes shall be complied
with unless clearly inapplicable by their terms or inconsistent with this
chapter.
L. Building permits. An outdoor pool or pond shall be a structure for
purposes of this chapter and therefore, among other things, shall not be
installed, reconstructed, altered, renovated, enlarged or moved without
a building permit. No such permit shall be issued unless the plans for
the pool or pond comply with the then-current building code of the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson;114 any plans for the pool or pond shall
show such compliance and shall show appropriate drainage provisions
to dispose of the water in the pool without interference with the public
water system, the existing sanitary facilities, public sewers or drainage
systems or with any public highway. Such plans shall have affixed
thereto the signature of the owner or his or her agent and shall contain
a statement to the effect that the person signing the plans has read and
is familiar with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
provisions of law relating to the installation, construction and
maintenance of outdoor pools and ponds.
M. Application. Except for the provisions of Subsection J(2) and (3),
Subsections B through L shall also apply to all outdoor pools and ponds
in existence on the effective date of this chapter.
A. No business or industrial use shall be permitted where it is determined
by the Planning Board that, because of the nature of the use and the
type and number of vehicle trips that it will generate, particularly in
relation to the capacity of the street system serving the lot upon which
the use is to be located, the result will be unusual traffic hazards or
congestion or noise and air pollution conditions that are inconsistent
with provisions of this chapter.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Building Construction.
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Building Construction.
§ 295-52 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-53
257:516
B. If, however, a limit is placed upon the use, either in terms of employees
or by some other appropriate measure, that, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, would be adequate to ensure that the potential traffic
generation from the use will be properly related to the capacity of the
street system serving it, then the approving authority may approve the
use with that limitation, to which the owners are required to adhere.
§ 295-53 TATTOOING § 295-53
257:517

ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, Lots and Uses
§ 295-54. Continuance of nonconformity subject to conditions.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any lot, building, structure or use
of land that is not conforming with the provisions of this chapter, but that is
lawfully existing under the provisions of the local law in effect immediately
prior to the date on which this chapter becomes effective, may be continued
subject to compliance with the conditions set forth in §§ 295-55 through
295-65 below. Any unexcused failure to comply with those conditions shall
immediately render the lawful nonconformity unlawful; and the lot, building
or structure and any use thereof shall thenceforth conform to this chapter.
This section shall also apply to any lot, building, structure or use lawfully
existing on the effective date of any amendment to this chapter that makes
such lot, building, structure or use nonconforming with this chapter.
§ 295-55. Prohibition against extension of nonconformity.
§ 295-56. Restrictions on conforming alterations of nonconforming
lots, buildings and structures.
A. No lot, building or structure that is lawfully nonconforming with
respect to any area requirement, including, without limitation, height,
minimum yard size or minimum lot area per family, shall be enlarged or
altered in such a manner as to increase the nonconformity or so as
substantially to enlarge or increase the habitable or other useful area of
the nonconformity, including, without limitation, the alteration of roof
or floor levels or the addition of habitable or other useful area above or
below a lawfully nonconforming building or structure.
B. No lawfully nonconforming use of any land, building or structure shall
be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of the land,
building or structure than that occupied by the use at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, nor shall such a lawfully nonconforming use be
moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the land, building or
structure occupied by that use at the time of the adoption of this
chapter or to any other land, building or structure.
A. No lot, building or structure that, because of a previously granted
variance or otherwise, is not in compliance with this chapter shall be
enlarged, moved or altered, except as follows:
(1) If the enlargement, move or alteration would reduce the
nonconformity;
(2) If the enlargement, move or alteration does not require a building
permit;
§ 295-54 TATTOOING § 295-56
257:519
§ 295-57. Change of nonconforming use to substantially more
conforming use.
The only use to which a lawfully nonconforming use may be changed is
one that is permitted under this chapter, except that the Board of Appeals,
upon application made within six months after the cessation of the lawfully
nonconforming use and after notice and hearing, may grant a temporary
conditional permit for a new use that does not conform with this chapter,
provided that the Board shall find that:
§ 295-58. Prohibition against reversion to nonconforming use.
No lawfully nonconforming building, structure or use, if changed in whole
or in part to a building, structure or use that conforms to or is in greater
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, shall be changed back to a
former lawfully nonconforming building, structure or use.
§ 295-59. Effect of discontinuance.
(3) If the enlargement, move or alteration is made pursuant to an order
of the Building Inspector to strengthen or restore the building or
structure or any part thereof to a safe condition; or
(4) If the enlargement or alteration complies with Subsection B of this
section.
B. A one- or two-family dwelling that is conforming with respect to use but
not conforming with respect to one or more area requirements may be
enlarged or altered in such a manner as not to increase the
nonconformity.
A. The proposed new use shall be confined to the same structure, building
and land;
B. The proposed new use will be substantially more in keeping with the
comprehensive zoning plan of land use and development and the
character of the neighborhood than the former nonconforming use; and
C. The proposed new use will tend to facilitate the later conversion of the
structure to a more conforming use.
A. Any lawfully nonconforming use of any land, building or structure that
has ceased for a continuous period of six months or longer shall be
deemed to be abandoned and shall not be resumed. If any
nonconforming use partially ceases for a continuous period of six
months or longer, the portion of the nonconforming use that has thus
ceased shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not be resumed.
B. If any lawfully nonconforming lot, structure or building shall cease to be
nonconforming, in whole or in part, for a continuous period of six
months or longer, then the portion of the nonconformity that has ceased
shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not be resumed.
§ 295-56 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-59
257:520
§ 295-60. Effect of serious damage.
C. A lawfully nonconforming sign of any type, once removed, shall only be
replaced by a conforming sign.
A. A single-family dwelling in any district or a two-family dwelling in a 2R
District, which dwelling is situated on a lot having an area of less than
7,500 square feet or a width at front of building of less than 50 feet, and
not conforming to this chapter with respect to required yards, if
accidentally damaged from whatever cause to whatever extent, may be
rebuilt or restored on its original foundations. [Amended 5-20-1997
by L.L. No. 3-1997]
B. A single-family dwelling not falling within the category specified in
Subsection A above and not conforming to this chapter with respect to
required yards, if accidentally damaged from whatever cause to the
extent of not more than 50% of its volume above the foundations, as
determined and certified by the Building Inspector, may be restored on
its original foundations. If such a dwelling is damaged to more than
50% of such volume, it may be rebuilt or restored to provide an
equivalent livable area but shall conform to the side yard requirements
herein set forth and shall not be nearer to the street than the average
distance of the dwellings on the lots adjacent thereto on each side or, if
there be none adjacent, the average distance of the two nearest
dwellings on the same side of the street; in no event shall the dwelling
have a front yard with a depth that is less than that specified by Article
IX of this chapter for a front yard in the district in which the lot is
located.
C. In the event of the accidental destruction or damage, from whatever
cause, of a single building, the first floor of which prior thereto was
used primarily for the sale of goods at retail or the performance of
customary personal services, or a combination thereof, whether such
use was a conforming use or a lawful nonconforming use, may be
restored upon the original site for the continuance of the use, subject to
the following provisions:
(1) If the damage to the building was less than 50% of the volume
above the foundations, as determined and certified by the Building
Inspector, the building may be restored upon those foundations to
its original dimensions.
(2) If the damage to the building was more than 50% of its volume
above the foundations, as determined and certified by the Building
Inspector, the building may be rebuilt, subject to the approval of
the Board of Appeals, upon the same lot in such manner as to
provide floor area for merchandising or personal services
equivalent to that existing prior to the damage, and subject to the
addition of such number of off-street parking spaces as the Board of
Appeals may determine can at reasonable cost be developed upon
the lot by means of access directly from the street on which the
§ 295-59 TATTOOING § 295-60
257:521
§ 295-61. Application to rebuild.
Application pursuant to § 295-60 for a building permit to rebuild or restore
any damaged or destroyed building shall be filed within six months of the
day of such damage and shall be accompanied by plans for reconstruction,
which plans shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this
chapter for the district in which the building is located, except as specified
in § 295-60.
§ 295-62. Completion of rebuilding.
Any building permit issued for rebuilding or restoration pursuant to
§§ 295-60 and 295-61 shall lapse 12 months after its issuance unless the
rebuilding or restoration has been substantially completed in accordance
therewith and the Building Inspector, in his or her discretion, has granted
an extension of the permit. All rebuilding and reconstruction shall be
completed, and the nonconformity resumed, within 18 months after the day
of damage or destruction; otherwise, the nonconformity, to the extent not
resumed, shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall thenceforth not be
resumed.
§ 295-63. Termination of certain uses within three years.
property fronts or by access from a side street or by easement over
the property of another. In approving the permit to rebuild, the
Board of Appeals may impose such conditions as, in its judgment,
are necessary in the public interest, having due regard to the
circumstances in the particular case.
D. Any other building or structure not falling within the provisions of
Subsections A through C of this section, if damaged to the extent of not
more than 50% of its volume above the foundations, as determined and
certified by the Building Inspector, whether such use was a conforming
use or a lawful nonconforming use, may be restored upon the original
site to its former use and dimensions, but, if damaged to the extent of
more than 50% of its volume, as determined and certified by the
Building Inspector, may be restored to its original use and to an
equivalent usable building area in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Subsection C of this section.
A. The following uses, if located in a residence district and lawfully
nonconforming with this chapter, shall, within three years after the
effective date of this chapter, either terminate or be changed to a use
that conforms to this chapter:
(1) Any use involving only the land and not accessory to a building or
structure located on the same lot assessed as a real estate
improvement.
(2) Any use involving improvements of a fair market value of $1,000 or
less.
§ 295-60 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-63
257:522
§ 295-64. Nonconforming lots.
A building permit may be issued for the erection of a building for a
permitted use on a lot for which a valid conveyance was recorded before the
effective date of this chapter, notwithstanding that the area or dimensions
of the lot are less than that required for the district in which it lies, provided
that:
§ 295-65. Lots made nonconforming by future amendment.
Should the required area or dimensions of lots be changed by future
amendment of this chapter, any conforming lot existing on the effective date
of that amendment and made nonconforming by the amendment may be
built upon, subject to the limitations contained in § 295-64.
(3) Any junkyard or industrial or commercial storage yard, whether
operating in conjunction with a structure or not.
B. The following buildings or structures, if located in a residence district
and lawfully nonconforming with this chapter, shall, within three years
after the effective date of this chapter, either be removed or changed to
conform to this chapter:
(1) Buildings or structures having an assessed valuation for tax
purposes of $1,000 or less.
(2) Buildings or structures used in conjunction with a junkyard or
industrial or commercial storage yard.
A. The lot met the zoning requirements existing at the time the deed to the
lot was recorded;
B. All required yards and other requirements in effect at the time of the
obtaining of the building permit are complied with; and
C. At no time since the effective date of this chapter has the owner of the
lot owned any contiguous lot. If at any time since the effective date of
this chapter the owner of the lot has owned any contiguous lot, then
that other lot, or so much thereof as may be necessary, shall be
combined with the lot for which the permit is sought to make one or
more conforming lots, whereupon a building permit may be issued, but
only for such combined lots.
§ 295-63 TATTOOING § 295-65
257:523

ARTICLE IX
District Use and Area Regulations
§ 295-66. Permitted and prohibited uses. [Amended 1-21-2003 by
L.L. No. 1-2003]
The principal and accessory uses set forth in this article with respect to
each district are the only uses permitted in that district. All other uses are
prohibited.
§ 295-67. One-Family Residence (R-20) Districts. [Amended
3-21-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995; 8-12-1997 by L.L. No. 7-1997;
2-17-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998; 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999;
6-6-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000; 1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in an
R-20 District:
(1) One-family detached dwellings, not to exceed one per lot.
(2) Municipal parks, municipal playgrounds and municipal
conservation areas, including the customary accompanying
refreshment and service buildings.
(3) Places of worship, parish houses and buildings for religious
education, provided that:
(a) No more than one family shall live on the site;
(b) The lot on which they are located shall front on or have direct
and convenient access to a major or collector road, as
determined by the Planning Board;
(c) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not
more than 15% of the site area, nor shall the sum total of land
covered with buildings and paved areas exceed 40% of the site
area;
(d) All new principal buildings shall have a minimum front yard of
40 feet and minimum side and rear yards of 40 feet each,
provided that no side or rear yard shall equal less than 1 1/2
times the height of the building wall nearest that lot line; and
(e) Off-street parking and loading facilities shall not be permitted
in the front yard, except for necessary access drives, nor shall
such facilities be located within any required yard, but in any
event not within 20 feet of any adjoining property in a
residence district. The Planning Board may, however, permit
up to 10% of the required off-street parking spaces to be
located in the front yard (other than in the required front yard),
provided that the Planning Board finds that the parking is
designed and limited to visitor use and provided further that
§ 295-66 TATTOOING § 295-67
257:525
the parking is attractively landscaped and maintained, and
further provided that the Planning Board determines that the
front yard parking is necessary to facilitate an improved
parking and traffic circulation system on the site.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in an R-20 District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter:
(1) Schools and day nurseries, provided that:
(a) They occupy a lot with an area of not less than three acres plus
one acre for each 100 pupils for which the building is designed;
and
(b) They comply with the requirements set forth in Subsection
A(3)(b) through (e) above.
(2) Libraries and museums, provided that they comply with the
requirements set forth in Subsection A(3)(b) through (e) above.
(3) Hospitals, nursing homes or convalescent homes, provided that:
[Amended 12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019]
(a) They shall occupy a lot of not less than 20 acres that has not
less than 1,500 feet of frontage on a state highway; and
(b) They shall comply with the requirements set forth in
Subsection A(3)(b) through (e) above.
(4) Assisted living housing, active adult/independent living housing,
continuum of care facility, provided that: [Amended 12-17-2019
by L.L. No. 14-2019]
(a) They shall occupy a lot of not less than five acres;
(b) They shall be located at least 75 feet from any street or lot line
and contain accommodations for not more than five beds per
acre; and
(c) They shall comply with the requirements set forth in
Subsection A(3)(b) through (c) and (e).
(5) Public utility substations, public utility transmission and
distribution lines, public utility water towers and railroads and
public utility rights-of-way and structures necessary to provide
service within the Village, but not personal wire service facilities,
except as permitted by § 295-85 of this chapter, provided that:
(a) Any lot on which a public utility substation or water tower is
located shall have an area of at least 7,500 square feet and a
frontage of at least 75 feet. The station or tower shall be set
back at least 30 feet from the front property line and 20 feet
from all other property lines and shall be enclosed by
§ 295-67 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-67
257:526
protective fencing and a gate which shall be closed and locked
except when necessary to obtain access thereto;
(b) Any such facilities shall be so designed, enclosed, painted or
colored and screened with evergreens that they will be
harmonious with the neighborhood in which they are located.
All such property shall be suitably landscaped and maintained
in reasonable conformity with the standards of property
maintenance of the neighborhood in which it is located;
(c) All new or additional power transmission or distribution lines
shall be placed underground, wherever possible; and
(d) They shall comply with the requirements set forth in § 295-95
of this chapter.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
R-20 District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is
permitted in an R-20 District
(1) The office or studio of an architect, artist, dentist, engineer, lawyer,
musician, teacher, physician or similar profession, but not including
veterinarians, provided that
(a) The office or studio is incidental to the residential use of the
premises and is carried on by a resident therein with not more
than one nonresident assistant, including partners, associates
and part-time and full-time employees;
(b) The office or studio shall not occupy more than 30% of the area
of one floor of the main building;
(c) The office or studio shall not create a nuisance to any
surrounding residents;
(d) There shall be no outside storage and no display, advertising or
other visible evidence of the use outside the building in which
it is located, except for a single identification nameplate not
exceeding one square foot in area; and
(e) The parking area shall be subject to site plan review to
determine that it is of adequate size for the particular use,
suitably screened with evergreen planting, walls or fences or
combinations thereof, and with entrance and exit drives
designed in a safe and adequate manner.
(2) Customary home occupations, as defined in § 295-5 of this chapter,
provided that
(a) The occupation is incidental to the residential use of the
premises and is carried on in the main building by a resident
therein with not more than one nonresident assistant, working
§ 295-67 TATTOOING § 295-67
257:527
at the same time, including partners, associates and part-time
and full-time employees;
(b) Only customary household tools, appliances and equipment are
used;
(c) The occupation does not occupy more than 30% of the area of
one floor of the main building;
(d) The occupation does not create a nuisance to any surrounding
residents;
(e) The use does not create waste disposal requirements
significantly in excess of those normally produced in a
residential district unless a suitable method for the disposal of
such wastes is provided, as determined by the approving
authority;
(f) There shall be no outside storage and no display, advertising or
other visible evidence of the use outside the building in which
it is located, except for a single identification nameplate not
exceeding one square foot in area;
(g) All products sold on the premises shall be made on the
premises, except for the sale of items that are incidental to the
provision of a permitted service;
(h) There shall be no mechanical or structural fabrication,
assembly or processing of any products or items, except that
which is incidental to the permitted accessory use;
(i) The parking area shall be subject to site plan review to
determine that it is of adequate size for the particular use,
suitably screened with evergreen planting, walls or fences or
combinations thereof, and with entrance and exit drives
designed in a safe and adequate manner;
(j) No more than one commercial vehicle, which vehicle shall be
less than three-fourths-ton in design capacity, shall be used in
connection with such a permitted accessory use. Such vehicle
shall be housed in an enclosed garage when not in actual use;
and
(k) Where the proposed use involves structural alterations or
additions requiring a building permit, the use shall be
permitted only if the structure in which it is to be located is
deemed by the Building Inspector to be adaptable to the
proposed use from the point of view of public health and safety
and the other requirements of this chapter, and shall conform
to all height and yard requirements of this chapter.
(3) Storage and parking of trailers, boats and snowmobiles, provided
that: [Amended 9-7-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010]
§ 295-67 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-67
257:528
(a) No more than one boat, one trailer and one snowmobile may be
parked or stored on a lot, except that a boat may be parked or
stored on a boat trailer;
(b) Any boat (with its trailer) or snowmobile shall either be parked
or stored fully enclosed in a garage or similar structure or, if
parked or stored outside, shall be parked or stored at least 10
feet from any side or rear lot line and at least 20 feet from the
front lot line;
(c) The trailer shall not exceed 140 square feet in horizontal crosssection
area and, except as provided in § 295-51, shall be
parked or stored fully enclosed in a garage or similar
structure; and
(d) The parking or storing of a trailer or boat or snowmobile shall
not impair the provision of the required off-street parking for
the structure or land use on that lot as specified in this chapter.
(4) A garden house, toolhouse, playhouse, greenhouse or similar
occupancy use customarily incident to the permitted principal use
of the premises and not operated for profit.
(5) A swimming pool, provided that it complies with this chapter.
(6) Off-street parking facilities, but not portable carports or similar
structures, serving the permitted principal and accessory uses in
the lot and conforming with this chapter. [Amended 8-5-2008 by
L.L. No. 24-2008]
(7) Signs, but only the following, and provided that they comply with
§ 295-50 of this chapter:
(a) For dwellings, one sign per lot, not exceeding two square feet
in area, giving the name of the property and/or occupants of
the premises, and one additional sign, not more than one
square foot in area, identifying any profession or occupation
permitted as an accessory use on the lot.
(b) For permitted principal uses other than dwellings, one sign
placed at each street frontage where the use has an access
drive, provided that the total area of all such signs does not
exceed 40 square feet and no one sign exceeds 25 square feet.
(c) One "For Sale" or "For Lease" sign or one "Sold" sign per lot,
not exceeding six square feet in area. A "Sold" sign shall not be
displayed for more than 30 days after the date of the execution
of the contract of sale. Such signs shall not be illuminated and
shall not contain luminous or reflective material.
(d) Temporary identifying signs, not over six square feet in area,
and not more than one for each street frontage of the lot,
during the course of construction only. Such signs shall not be
§ 295-67 TATTOOING § 295-67
257:529
illuminated and shall not contain luminous or reflective
material.
(8) Roof-mounted solar panels. [Added 11-7-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
D. Boarders and accessory apartments.
(1) Statement of purposes.
(a) It is the purpose of this subsection to legalize and control
boarder units and accessory apartments in single-family
residences in the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and to assure
that accessory dwelling units do not contribute to traffic
congestion and parking problems, and that they meet
minimum health, fire and safety standards.
(b) It is the further purpose of this subsection to create small
rental housing units without increasing density, by utilizing
existing housing stock and resources. This subsection is also
intended to provide economic support for resident families,
particularly the elderly and those of moderate income, and to
encourage diversity in the population of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson.
(c) To help achieve these purposes, and to promote the other
objectives of this chapter and the Planning Principles outlined
by the Planning Board, including the promotion of the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson, the following specific standards are set forth for
boarders and accessory apartments.
(2) Accessory uses requiring a boarder permit or an accessory
apartment permit. The following uses are permitted accessory uses
in an R-20 District but require a boarder permit or an accessory
apartment permit issued pursuant to the provisions detailed in this
section:
(a) Boarders. (NOTE: "Boarder" is defined in § 295-5 of this
chapter as follows: "Boarder" or "roomer" means a person who
permanently occupies a room in a dwelling unit for sleeping
purposes for which he or she pays compensation to the
property owner.)
[1] In a single-family dwelling, not more than two
nontransient boarders or roomers shall be permitted,
provided that the following conditions ate met:
[a] The applicant property owner must occupy as a
principal residence the premises for which permission
is sought to house boarders or roomers, and the
applicant must have occupied said premises for at
§ 295-67 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-67
257:530
least 24 months immediately preceding the date of the
application.
[b] Each sleeping room utilized by a single boarder shall
have not less than 100 square, feet of floor area,
exclusive of closet space, in any such room, and each
sleeping room utilized by two boarders shall have not
less than 120 square feet of floor area, exclusive of
closet space, in any such room.
[c] The dwelling may not have an accessory apartment,
nor may any accessory apartment exist in any other
building on the property.
[d] The dwelling shall be in compliance with this chapter
and all applicable building, fire, electrical, health and
other safety codes.
[e] In addition to the parking requirements for the
principal dwelling and other permitted uses, one offstreet
vehicular parking space must be provided for
each boarder or roomer. Boarders and/or roomers
shall be permitted to keep on the subject premises
only regular passenger automobiles or motorcycles.
[f] Food storage and microwave ovens are permitted
after issuance of a boarder permit by the Building
Inspector. Refrigerated food storage shall be limited
to six-cubic-foot-capacity storage units.
Nonrefrigerated food storage will not be included in
the limitation. Microwave ovens shall be utilized on a
table or bench not to exceed 36 inches in height.
[g] For each boarder the property owner must obtain a
boarder permit from the Building Inspector. The
boarder permit may be issued by the Building
Inspector only after the subject application is
reviewed and approved by him or her. Such review
shall include but not be limited to a physical
inspection of the property to ascertain the adequacy of
the structure to accommodate such use, and the
adequacy of the site to provide appropriate off-street
parking facilities.
[2] Every application for a boarder permit shall be
accompanied by a fee to be set by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to § 295-152 of this chapter.
[3] A boarder permit shall be issued for a period of not more
than two years.
§ 295-67 TATTOOING § 295-67
257:531
[4] The Building Inspector shall establish all rules and
regulations necessary to administer the provisions of this
section. A record of all such permits shall be kept in the
office of the Building Inspector.
[5] There shall be a limitation on the issuance of boarder
permits so that not more than 100 boarder permits are in
existence during any calendar year.
[6] All owners of dwellings that house one or more roomer or
boarder on the effective date of this subsection shall apply
to the Building Inspector for a boarder permit within 90
days of the effective date of this subsection. If application
is made within 90 days, the owner of the dwelling shall not
be deemed in violation of this subsection until a final
determination on the application has been made. If
application is not made within 90 days, the owner of the
dwelling shall be deemed in violation of this subsection.
[7] A boarder permit shall expire automatically upon change
of ownership of the dwelling or when the owner ceases to
reside in the dwelling. In such event, the roomer(s) or
boarder(s) shall be permitted to reside in the dwelling for
60 days if the owner of the dwelling so consents, unless the
Building Inspector approves an additional extension of
time.
[8] In the event that a dwelling with a valid boarder permit is
sold or transferred, the new owner may, within 60 days
from the taking of title, apply for a boarder permit. All of
the conditions set forth above must be met, except the new
owner need not have occupied the premises for 24 months
preceding the application. If an application is submitted
within the sixty-day period, the new owner shall not be
deemed in violation of this subsection, notwithstanding the
fact that the previous boarder permit expired. Should the
new owner have (a) boarder(s) or roomer(s) but fail to
apply for a boarder permit within 60 days from the taking
of title, the new owner shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter. In addition, the new owner shall be precluded
from applying for a boarder permit for a period of one year
from the date on which title was transferred.
[9] Any property owner who houses roomer(s) or boarder(s)
and who fails to obtain a boarder permit or who violates
any provision of this section or any regulation made under
it shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not
more than $500 upon conviction of a first offense, and, for
the second and each subsequent conviction, by a fine of
not more than $1,500. Each month's continued violation
shall constitute a separate additional violation. In addition
§ 295-67 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-67
257:532
to the foregoing, any owner who violates any provision
of this subsection shall be subject to revocation of the
boarder permit by the Building Inspector.
(b) Accessory apartments. [Amended 11-5-2019 by L.L. No.
12-2019]
[1] In a single-family residence, one accessory apartment
shall be permitted, provided that the following conditions
are met:
[a] The owner of the single-family residence in which the
accessory apartment is to be located shall occupy one
of the dwelling units on the premises as a principal
residence.
[b] An accessory apartment shall be located in the
principal building or in a conforming accessory
building.
[c] An accessory apartment shall not be permitted in a
residence that houses one or more boarders or
roomers.
[d] An accessory apartment permit is to be obtained from
the Planning Board. An accessory apartment permit
may be issued only to the owner-occupant of the
principal residence at which the accessory apartment
is to be located.
[e] An applicant for an accessory apartment permit shall
furnish a site plan indicating existing building and lot
conditions and a dimensional floor plan of the
principal building and the proposed accessory
apartment. The site plan shall also include a location
map showing the applicant's property and adjacent
property and streets, location of existing and proposed
off-street parking and ingress and egress to the site.
[f] An accessory apartment permit may be issued by the
Planning Board only after the subject application is
reviewed and reported upon by the Building Inspector.
Such review by the Building Inspector shall include
but not be limited to a physical inspection of the
residence in which the accessory apartment is to be
located.
[g] The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on
the application for an accessory apartment permit.
The hearing shall be held upon the same notice as that
required for a zoning variance.
§ 295-67 TATTOOING § 295-67
257:533
[h] The minimum floor area for an accessory apartment
shall be 300 square feet, but in no case shall it exceed
33% of the floor area of the principal dwelling, unless,
in the opinion of the Planning Board, a greater or
lesser amount of floor area is warranted by the
specific circumstances of a particular building.
[i] The accessory apartment shall not include more than
two bedrooms.
[j] In addition to the parking requirements for the
principal dwelling and other permitted uses, one
accessible and usable off-street vehicular parking
space must be provided for the accessory apartment,
plus one additional space for each bedroom in excess
of one in the accessory apartment.
[k] No exterior changes shall be made to the building in
which the accessory apartment is located that, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, would alter the singlefamily
character and appearance of the residence.
[l] The proposed accessory apartment shall not adversely
affect the single-family character of the neighborhood.
In applying this requirement, the Planning Board shall
consider the effect of the proposed accessory
apartment on traffic, noise, congestion, appearance
and any other factor that the Planning Board deems
consistent with the purposes of this subsection.
[m] The proposed accessory apartment shall be in
compliance with all applicable building, fire,
electrical, health and other safety codes.
[2] It is the intent of this section that neighborhoods zoned as
single-family maintain their single-family character. The
Planning Board may deny an accessory apartment permit
should it find that the number of such apartments,
including the one proposed, will adversely affect the
character of the zoned single-family neighborhood. In
granting an accessory apartment permit, the Planning
Board shall have the authority to impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as are consistent with the spirit
and intent of the Accessory Apartment Law.
[3] Every application for an accessory apartment permit shall
be accompanied by a fee to be set by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to § 295-152 of this chapter.
[4] The Planning Board shall establish all rules and
regulations necessary to administer the provisions of this
§ 295-67 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-67
257:534
subsection. A record of all accessory apartment permits
shall be kept in the Village office.
[5] An accessory apartment permit shall be issued for a period
of not more than three years and may be renewed by
application to the Building Inspector. Notice of the
renewal request shall be given by the applicant to all
property owners within 100 feet by regular mail, with
proof of mailing provided, advising that any objection to
the renewal shall be provided to the Building Department.
Prior to renewal of the accessory apartment permit, the
Building Inspector shall inspect the accessory apartment
and determine that all the requirements of this subsection
are met. Provided that no objections are received and the
Building Inspector has determined that the accessory
apartment is in compliance, the Building Inspector shall
renew the permit for an additional three years. If
objections are filed, the Building Inspector shall have the
option of forwarding the request to the Planning Board to
conduct a public hearing on the renewal application on the
same notice as that required for a zoning variance, except
that mail notice need not be by certified mail, and to make
a determination on the application.
[6] An accessory apartment permit shall expire automatically
upon change of ownership of the principal residence or
when the owner ceases to occupy the residence. In such
event, the tenant of the accessory apartment shall be
permitted to remain in the apartment for 60 days, if the
owner of the principal residence so consents, unless the
Planning Board approves an additional extension of time.
[7] In the event that a residence with a valid accessory
apartment permit is sold or transferred, the new owner
may, within 60 days from the taking of title, apply for an
accessory apartment permit. The new owner must meet all
the requirements set forth in Subsection D(2)(b)[1] of this
section in order to obtain an accessory apartment permit.
If an application is submitted within the sixty-day period,
the new owner shall not be deemed in violation of this
subsection as long as the application is pending,
notwithstanding the fact that the previous accessory
apartment permit expired. Should a new owner maintain
an accessory apartment but fail to apply for an accessory
apartment permit within 60 days from the taking of title,
the new owner shall be deemed in violation of this
subsection. In addition, the new owner shall be precluded
from applying for an accessory apartment permit for a
period of one year from the date on which title was
transferred.
§ 295-67 TATTOOING § 295-67
257:535
[8] Any owner or builder, or agent of either of them, who fails
to obtain an accessory apartment permit, who allows
occupancy of an accessory apartment in violation of this
subsection or who constructs or causes to be constructed
an accessory apartment shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000. Each month's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation. In addition to the foregoing, any owner who
violates any provision of this subsection or any condition
imposed by the Planning Board in granting the permit
shall be subject to the revocation of the accessory
apartment permit by the Planning Board.
E. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through D, all lots in an R-20 District shall have an area of at least
20,000 square feet and a width of at least 150 feet.
F. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through D and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an R-20 District shall
have:
(a) A front yard at least 40 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 40 feet deep (eight feet in the case of
accessory buildings and structures, except 15 feet in the case
of accessory garden houses, toolhouses, playhouses,
greenhouses and similar accessory uses, and 20 feet in the
case of swimming pools, as required by § 295-52A);
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 50 feet, each of which yards is
at least 20 feet (eight feet in the case of accessory buildings
and structures); and
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than 2 1/2 stories.
(2) Lot coverage. [Amended 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008]
(a) For single-family dwellings:
[1] Building coverage shall not exceed 15% of the area of the
lot.
[2] Development coverage shall not exceed 25% of the area of
the lot.
(b) For all other uses, all buildings and structures on the lot shall
together cover not more than 15% of the area of the lot.
§ 295-67 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-68
257:536
§ 295-68. One-Family Residence (R-10) Districts. [Amended
1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in an
R-10 District: any principal use permitted in an R-20 District as set forth
in § 295-67A above.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in an R-10 District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter: any use in an R-20
District requiring a special use permit as set forth in § 295-67B above,
except hospitals and nursing homes or convalescent homes. [Amended
12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019]
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
R-10 District, but only in conjunction with a principal use that is
permitted in an R-10 District: any accessory use permitted in an R-20
District as set forth in § 295-67C above, except uses accessory to
hospitals and nursing homes or convalescent homes. [Amended
12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019]
D. Boarders and accessory apartments are permitted subject to the
requirements of § 295-67D.
E. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in an R-10 District shall have an area of at least
10,000 square feet and a width of at least 100 feet.
F. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an R-10 District shall
have:
(a) A front yard at least 30 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 30 feet deep or 30% of the lot depth,
whichever is less (eight feet in the case of accessory buildings
and structures);
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 30 feet, each of which yards is
at least 12 feet (eight feet in the case of accessory buildings
and structures); and
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than 2 1/2 stories.
(2) Lot coverage. [Amended 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008]
(a) For single- family dwellings:
§ 295-68 TATTOOING § 295-68
257:537
§ 295-69. One-Family Residence (R-7.5) Districts. [Amended
1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
[1] Building coverage shall not exceed 25% of the area of the
lot.
[2] Development coverage shall not exceed 35% of the area of
the lot.
(b) For all other uses, all buildings and structures on the lot shall
together cover not more than 25% of the area of the lot.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in an
R-7.5 District: any principal use permitted in an R-10 District as set
forth in § 295-68A above.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in an R-7.5 District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter: any use permitted in
an R-10 District requiring a special use permit as set forth in § 295-68B
above.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
R-7.5 District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is
permitted in an R-7.5 District: any accessory use permitted in an R-10
District as set forth in § 295-68C above.
D. Boarders and accessory apartments are permitted subject to the
requirements of § 295-67D.
E. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in an R-7.5 District shall have an area of at least
7,500 square feet and a width of at least 75 feet.
F. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an R-7.5 District shall
have:
(a) A front yard at least 25 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 25 feet deep (eight feet in the case of
accessory buildings and structures);
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 20 feet, each of which yards is
at least eight feet (also eight feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures); and
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than 2 1/2 stories.
§ 295-68 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-69
257:538
§ 295-70. Two-Family Residence (2R) Districts. [Amended
12-17-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996; 1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
(2) Lot coverage. [Amended 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008]
(a) For single-family dwellings:
[1] Building coverage shall not exceed 30% of the area of the
lot.
[2] Development coverage shall not exceed 40% of the area of
the lot.
(b) For all other uses, all buildings and structures on the lot shall
together cover not more than 30% of the area of the lot.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in a 2R
District:
(1) Any principal use permitted in an R-7.5 District as set forth in
§ 295-69A above.
(2) Two-family detached dwellings, not to exceed one per lot.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in a 2R District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter: any use permitted in
an R-7.5 District requiring a special use permit as set forth in § 295-69B
above.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in a
2R District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is permitted
in a 2R District:
(1) Any accessory use permitted in an R-7.5 District as set forth in
§ 295-69C above.
(2) In a single-family dwelling not more than two nontransient
boarders or roomers shall be permitted, provided that all the
conditions listed in § 295-67D(2) (a) [1] through [9] above are met.
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in a 2R District shall have an area at least 7,500
square feet and a width of at least 75 feet, except that no two-family
dwelling shall be permitted on a lot having an area of less than 10,000
square feet and a width of at least 100 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each single-family dwelling in a 2R District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 25 feet deep;
§ 295-69 TATTOOING § 295-70
257:539
§ 295-70.1. Two-Family Residence (2R-3.5) Districts. [Added
1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
(b) A rear yard at least 25 feet deep (eight feet in the case of
accessory buildings and structures);
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 20 feet, each of which yards is
at least eight feet (also eight feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures); and
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than 2 1/2 stories.
(2) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, every other building and structure, including each twofamily
dwelling, in a 2R District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 30 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 30 feet deep or 30% of the lot depth,
whichever is less (eight feet in the case of accessory buildings
and structures);
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 30 feet, each of which yards is
at least 12 feet (eight feet in the case of accessory buildings
and structures); and
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than 2 1/2 stories.
(3) Lot coverage. [Amended 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008]
(a) For single-family dwellings:
[1] Building coverage shall not exceed 30% of the area of the
lot.
[2] Development coverage shall not exceed 40% of the area of
the lot.
(b) For all other uses, all buildings and structures on the lot shall
together cover not more than 25% of the area of the lot.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in a
2R-3.5 District:
(1) One-family detached dwellings, not to exceed one per lot.
(2) Two-family detached dwellings, not to exceed one per lot.
§ 295-70 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-70.1
257:540
(3) Municipal parks, municipal playgrounds and municipal
conservation areas, including the customary accompanying
refreshment and service buildings.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in a 2R-3.5 District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter: public utility
substations, public utility transmission and distribution lines, public
utility water towers and railroads and public utility rights-of-way and
structures necessary to provide service within the Village, but not
personal wire service facilities, in accordance with the requirements as
set forth in § 295-67B(5).
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in a
2R-3.5 District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is
permitted in a 2R-3.5 District:
(1) Any accessory use permitted in a 2R District as set forth in
§ 295-70C above, except storage and parking of trailers, boats and
snowmobiles.
D. Accessory apartments are permitted by special use permit subject to
the requirements of § 295-67D(2)(b).
E. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in a 2R-3.5 District shall have an area at least 3,500
square feet and a width of at least 25 feet, except that no two-family
dwelling shall be permitted on a lot having an area of less than 5,000
square feet and a width of less than 50 feet.
F. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each single-family dwelling in a 2R-3.5 District shall
have:
(a) A front yard at least 10 feet deep; provided, however, that the
front yard may be reduced to two feet deep only where an
unenclosed porch encroaches into the front yard;
(b) A rear yard at least 15 feet deep (five feet in the case of
accessory buildings and structures);
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 16 feet, each of which yards is
at least five feet (also five feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures);
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than 2 1/2 stories.
§ 295-70.1 TATTOOING § 295-70.1
257:541
§ 295-71. Multifamily Residence (MR-2.5) Districts. [Amended
1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
(2) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, every other building and structure, including each twofamily
dwelling, in a 2R-3.5 District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 10 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 20 feet deep or 30% of the lot depth,
whichever is less (five feet in the case of accessory buildings
and structures);
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 25 feet, each of which yards is
at least 10 feet (five feet in the case of accessory buildings and
structures);
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than 2 1/2 stories; and
(3) Lot coverage. [Amended 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008]
(a) For single-family dwellings:
[1] Building coverage shall not exceed 50% of the area of the
lot.
[2] Development coverage shall not exceed 60% of the area of
the lot.
(b) For all other uses, all buildings and structures on the lot shall
together cover not more than 50% of the area of the lot.
G. Special provisions for through lots with frontage on both Ridge Street
and Southside Avenue. Where a through lot gains vehicular access
exclusively from Southside Avenue, and where vehicular access to
Ridge Street is prohibited or otherwise restricted by deed or by other
restrictive covenant, said lot may be developed in accordance with the
use and bulk requirements of the MR-C District, except that no building
may exceed a height of 40 feet or three stories and all rooftop
mechanical equipment shall be screened from view of existing or
prospective residences within the 2R-3.5 District.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in an
MR-2.5 District:
(1) Any principal use permitted in a 2R District as set forth in
§ 295-70A above.
§ 295-70.1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-71
257:542
(2) Multifamily dwellings for three or more families, provided that
suitably improved and usable recreation area and open space shall
be provided, as follows:
(a) One hundred square feet for each studio (efficiency) dwelling
unit; and
(b) Two hundred square feet for each bedroom.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in an MR-2.5 District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter: any use permitted in
a 2R District requiring a special use permit as set forth in § 295-70B
above.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
MR-2.5 District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is
permitted in an MR-2.5 District:
(1) Any accessory use permitted in a 2R District as set forth in
§ 295-70C above.
(2) Professional offices or studios in a ratio of one per 25 dwelling units
or major fraction thereof on the lot, provided that the office or
studio shall be only on the street floor of the building and/or, if
there exists direct access to the office or studio from outside the
building, on the floor immediately above the street floor.
(3) Accessory recreational facilities customarily incident to multifamily
dwellings, provided that such facilities are limited to the use of the
residents of the premises and their accompanying, nonpaying
guests and are not operated for profit.
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in an MR-2.5 District shall have an area of at least
2,500 square feet for each dwelling unit and a width of at least 100 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an MR-2.5 District shall
have:
(a) A front yard at least 100 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 40 feet deep (eight feet in the case of
accessory buildings and structures, provided that the roof of
the accessory building or structure is used as open space and
the wall of the accessory building or structure does not exceed
6 1/2 feet in height);
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 80 feet, each of which yards is
at least 40 feet [eight feet in the case of accessory buildings
§ 295-71 TATTOOING § 295-71
257:543
§ 295-72. Multifamily Residence (MR-1.5) Districts. [Amended
1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
and structures, with the same provision as that contained in
Subsection E(1)(b) above]; and
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than two stories.
(2) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not more
than 25% of the area of the lot.
(3) No building or structure on the lot shall exceed 160 feet in length.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in an
MR-1.5 District:
(1) Any principal use permitted in an MR-2.5 District as set forth in
§ 295-71A above.
(2) Hotels with not less than 12 sleeping rooms, provided that access
to all rooms shall be through common lobbyways.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in an MR-1.5 District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter: any use permitted in
an MR-2.5 District requiring a special use permit as set forth in
§ 295-71B above.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
MR-1.5 District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is
permitted in an MR-1.5 District: any accessory use permitted in an
MR-2.5 District as set forth in § 295-71C above.
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in an MR-1.5 District shall have an area of at least
1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit and a width of at least 25 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage. [Amended
8-21-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an MR-1.5 District shall
have:
(a) A front yard at least 12 feet deep or 1/2 the height of the
building wall nearest the front lot line, whichever is greater;
(b) A rear yard at least 30 feet deep (eight feet in the case of
accessory buildings and structures, provided that the wall of
§ 295-71 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72
257:544
§ 295-72.1. Multifamily Residence/Office (MR-O) Districts. [Added
1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
the accessory building or structure does not exceed six feet in
height);
(c) Side yard requirements shall be based upon the lot width as
follows:
[1] Lot width of 25 feet to 49 feet shall require minimum side
yards of two feet each, and a minimum total of both side
yards of five feet.
[2] Lot width of 50 feet to 74 feet shall require minimum side
yards of two feet each, and a minimum total of both side
yards of 10 feet.
[3] Lot width of 75 feet to 99 feet shall require minimum side
yards of five feet each, and a minimum total of both sides
of 15 feet.
[4] Lot width of 100 feet or more shall require minimum side
yards of 10 feet each, and a minimum total of both sides of
20 feet.
(d) A maximum height of 40 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than three stories.
(2) Building coverage shall not exceed 35%.
(3) Development coverage shall not exceed 50%.
(4) Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.75.
(5) No building or structure on the lot shall exceed 160 feet in length.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in a MRO
District:
(1) Any principal use permitted in a 2R-3.5 District as set forth in
§ 295-70.1A above.
(2) Three-family detached dwellings.
(3) Business and professional offices.
(4) Artist studios.
(5) Mixed-use buildings containing no more than eight dwellings,
provided that any residential dwelling unit contained therein has a
minimum floor area of 500 square feet, and further provided that
§ 295-72 TATTOOING § 295-72.1
257:545
suitably improved and usable recreation area and open space shall
be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) One hundred square feet for each studio (efficiency) dwelling
unit; and
(b) Two hundred square feet for each bedroom for all other
dwelling units.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in an MR-O District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter:
(1) Any use permitted in an MR-1.5 District requiring a special use
permit as set forth in § 295-72B above.
(2) Dwellings for four or more families but not more than eight
families, provided that suitably improved and usable recreation
area and open space shall be provided in accordance with the
following requirements:
(a) One hundred square feet for each studio (efficiency) dwelling
unit; and
(b) Two hundred square feet for each bedroom for all other
dwelling units.
(3) Retail sales of antiques, books, art, gifts, or similar specialty items.
(4) Restaurants with a total floor area of 2,500 square feet or less, and
outdoor dining areas accessory thereto.
(5) Health or athletic clubs.
(6) Bed-and-breakfasts, subject to the following requirements:
(a) The special use permit shall specify the maximum number of
guest rooms approved pursuant to these provisions.
(b) The applicant property owner shall occupy as a principal
dwelling the single-family dwelling for which permission to
operate a bed-and-breakfast is sought and must have occupied
said dwelling for at least 24 months prior to the date of
application.
(c) Each guest room to be occupied by a guest shall have not less
than 120 square feet of floor area, exclusive of closet space.
(d) The dwelling shall not have an accessory apartment or a
boarder permit in the dwelling or in any other building on the
property.
(e) The dwelling shall be in compliance with all applicable
building, fire, electrical, health, safety and other codes.
§ 295-72.1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72.1
257:546
(f) In addition to the parking requirements for the principal
dwelling and other permitted uses, one off-street parking space
per each guest room shall be provided.
(g) Meals shall be limited to breakfast and snack service for
guests.
(h) The bed-and-breakfast shall receive all required permits from
the Westchester County Department of Health.
(i) The bed-and-breakfast shall not cause any noises, odors, or
other disturbances not normally associated with a single-family
dwelling.
(j) The maximum length of stay of any guest shall be limited to 15
days in any thirty-day period. A guest register logging the
arrival and departure of all guests shall be available for review
at all times.
(k) Every application for a bed-and-breakfast special use permit
shall be accompanied by a fee to be set by the Board of
Trustees.
(l) The special use permit shall expire after five years from the
date of issuance, on change of ownership or when the owner
ceases to reside in the dwelling. In such cases the owner has
60 days to renew such permit.
(m) Any owner who operates a bed-and-breakfast without such a
permit shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not
less than $1,000. Each month's continued violation shall
constitute a separate additional violation. Further, violation of
any condition in this section or imposed by the granting of the
special use permit shall lead to revocation of the permit.
(n) A bed-and-breakfast shall require site plan approval by the
Planning Board.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
MR-O District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is
permitted in an MR-O District: any accessory use permitted in an
MR-1.5 District as set forth in § 295-72C above.
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in an MR-O District shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(1) A two-family dwelling shall require a lot area of at least 5,000
square feet and a lot width of at least 50 feet.
(2) A residential use with three or more dwelling units shall require
5,000 square feet for the first two dwellings, and 1,500 square feet
§ 295-72.1 TATTOOING § 295-72.1
257:547
for each additional dwelling thereafter and a lot width of at least
50 feet.
(3) Any other use shall require a lot area of at least 3,500 square feet
and a lot width of at least 25 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each residential use with three or more dwellings in an
MR-O District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 10 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 30 feet deep (eight feet in the case of
accessory buildings and structures, provided that the roof of
the building or structure is used as open space and the wall of
the accessory building or structure does not exceed six feet in
height);
(c) Two side yards, each of which is at least 12 feet or 1/2 of the
height of the building wall nearest the side lot line, whichever
is greater [eight feet in the case of accessory buildings and
structures, with the same proviso as that contained in
Subsection E(1)(b) above];
(d) A maximum height of:
[1] Forty feet (15 feet in the case of accessory buildings and
structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the case of
accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and no
more than three stories.
(2) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, every other building and structure, including each twofamily
dwelling, in an MR-O District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 10 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 15 feet deep (five feet in the case of
accessory buildings and structures);
(c) Two side yards, each of which yard is at least eight feet (also
five feet in the case of accessory buildings and structures);
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet (15 feet in the case of accessory
buildings and structures with sloped roofs and 12 feet in the
case of accessory buildings and structures with flat roofs) and
no more than 2 1/2 stories.
(3) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not more
than 50% of the area of the lot.
§ 295-72.1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72.2
257:548
§ 295-72.2. Multifamily Residence/Commercial (MR-C) Districts.
[Added 1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in a MRC
District: [Amended 3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
(1) Any principal use permitted in a 2R-3.5 District as set forth in
§ 295-70.1A above.
(2) Dwellings for three or more families, provided that suitably
improved and usable recreation area and open space shall be
provided in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) One hundred square feet for each studio (efficiency) and one
bedroom dwelling unit; and
(b) One hundred square feet for each additional bedroom
thereafter for all other dwelling units.
(3) Retail uses with a gross floor area of 2,500 square feet or less.
(4) Restaurants with a gross floor area of 2,500 square feet or less, and
outdoor dining areas accessory thereto.
(5) Artist studios.
(6) Health, fitness or athletic clubs.
(7) Business and professional offices.
(8) Personal service establishments.
(9) Other service establishments, but excluding gasoline filling
stations and motor vehicle storage, repair or service
establishments.
(10) Copy, offset and incidental job printing.
(11) Mixed-use buildings, provided that any residential dwelling unit
contained therein has a minimum gross floor area of 500 square
feet and further provided that suitably improved and usable
recreation area and open space shall be provided in accordance
with the following requirements:
(a) One hundred square feet for each studio (efficiency) and onebedroom
dwelling unit; and
(b) One hundred square feet for each additional bedroom
thereafter for all other dwelling units.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in a MR-C District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter: [Amended
3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
§ 295-72.2 TATTOOING § 295-72.2
257:549
(1) Any use permitted in an MR-1.5 District requiring a special use
permit as set forth in § 295-72B above.
(2) Production and processing of goods, provided that:
(a) Goods produced and processed are sold at retail on the
premises.
(b) The area used for the production and processing of goods does
not exceed 40% of the use.
(c) No offensive noises, gases, fumes, odors, vibrations or other
objectionable influences or hazards shall emanate from such
use, and the operation of such use shall not be detrimental to
the health, safety or general welfare of neighboring properties
or the community.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
MR-C District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is
permitted in an MR-C District: any accessory use permitted in an
MR-1.5 District as set forth in § 295-72C above.
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in an MR-C District shall have an area of at least
2,500 square feet and a width of at least 20 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height; maximum building length
and coverage. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an MR-C District shall have:
(1) A rear yard at least 30 feet deep where adjacent to a residential
district;
(2) A side yard of at least 10 feet on any side of the lot adjacent to a
residential district;
(3) A maximum height of 40 feet and no more than three stories except
as follows: [Amended 12-16-2008 by L.L. No. 29-2008]
(a) Where Plane B (NOTE: Plane B is defined in § 295-5, Height,
Building, Subsection B.) slopes down from the front lot line, a
structure that does not exceed 40 feet in height measured at
the front lot line (or at any required setback) may extend
horizontally at up to such height toward the rear lot line for the
greater of: 40 feet from the front lot line (or required setback)
or 20 feet after it has exceeded Plane B, at which point it must
come down to or below the height of Plane B. Thereafter, it
may, one or more times, extend horizontally at up to such
height toward the rear lot line until it exceeds the height of
Plane B for 20 feet, at which point it must come down below
the height of Plane B, except that no portion of the 20 feet of
the structure closest to the rear lot line (or required setback)
may exceed Plane B. See diagram of side view below.
§ 295-72.2 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72.2
257:550
§ 295-72.3. Mixed-Use Planned Development District (MUPDD).
[Added 10-5-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004]
(b) Where Plane B (NOTE: Plane B is defined in § 295-5, Height,
Building, Subsection B.) slopes up from the front lot line, a
structure that does not exceed 40 feet in height measured at
the front lot line (or at any required setback) may extend
horizontally at up to such height toward the rear lot line to a
point 20 feet or more from the front lot line (or required
setback). Thereafter, it may, one or more times, step up to a
height such that it will be below Plane B when extended
horizontally at up to such height for 20 feet toward the rear lot
line, except that the last 20 feet of the structure closest to the
rear lot line (or required setback) must end below Plane B. See
diagram of side view below.
(4) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not more
than 80% of the area of the lot.
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the Mixed-Use Planned
Development District (MUPDD) is to create planning and zoning
§ 295-72.2 TATTOOING § 295-72.3
257:551
flexibility in order to achieve environmentally sensitive, economically
beneficial, and socially desirable development that is more creative in
its mixture of compatible land use and design than is possible under
more rigid, conventional zoning regulations. This type of zoning is
also designed to minimize traffic impacts on adjacent and neighboring
streets, protect the Hastings-on-Hudson central business district,
protect the character of neighboring properties, respect culturally and
environmentally significant resources, and provide access to Village
and county trailways.
B. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in a
MUPDD District:
(1) Dwellings for three or more families, including active adult/
independent living housing and assisted living housing, provided
that: [Amended 12-17-2019 by L.L. No. 14-2019]
(a) The maximum number of dwelling units per acre shall be six
and the maximum number of bedrooms per acre shall be 12.
[1] The maximum number of dwelling units and bedrooms per
acre may be increased by not more than 33 1/3% beyond
the basic permitted density if the applicant agrees to
dedicate to the Village, or an entity designated by the
Board of Trustees, land for open space or recreation
purposes, and if the Board of Trustees determines that
such dedication of land is of sufficient size and suitability
to permit the increased density, which determination shall
lie within the absolute discretion of the Board of Trustees.
[2] Any such land dedicated in exchange for increased density
shall not be included in lot area for purposes of calculating
maximum building coverage and maximum development
coverage under Subsection E of this section, nor shall it
reduce the applicant's open space requirement under the
following subsection.
(b) For each dwelling unit, there shall be provided suitably
improved and usable recreation area and open space in the
following amounts:
[1] One hundred square feet for each studio (efficiency)
dwelling unit; and
[2] Two hundred square feet for each bedroom.
(2) Attached single-family townhouses, provided that:
(a) The maximum number of townhouses per acre shall be six and
the maximum number of bedrooms per acre shall be 12.
[1] The maximum number of dwelling units and bedrooms per
acre may be increased by not more than 33 1/3% beyond
§ 295-72.3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72.3
257:552
the basic permitted density if the applicant agrees to
dedicate to the Village, or an entity designated by the
Board of Trustees, land for open space or recreation
purposes, and if the Board of Trustees determines that
such dedication of land is of sufficient size and suitability
to permit the increased density, which determination shall
lie within the absolute discretion of the Board of Trustees.
[2] Any such land dedicated in exchange for increased density
shall not be included in lot area for purposes of calculating
maximum building coverage and maximum development
coverage under Subsection E of this section, nor shall it
reduce the applicant's open space requirement under the
following subsection.
(b) For each townhouse, there shall be provided at least 100
square feet of suitably improved and usable recreation area
and open space for each bedroom.
(3) Municipal parks, municipal playgrounds, and municipal
conservation areas, including customary refreshment and service
buildings.
(4) Business and professional offices, excluding medical or dental
offices.
(5) Mixed-use residential buildings, provided that:
(a) The maximum number of dwelling units per acre shall be six
and the maximum number of bedrooms per acre shall be 12.
[1] The maximum number of dwelling units and bedrooms per
acre may be increased by not more than 33 1/3% beyond
the basic permitted density if the applicant agrees to
dedicate to the Village, or an entity designated by the
Board of Trustees, land for open space or recreation
purposes, and if the Board of Trustees determines that
such dedication of land is of sufficient size and suitability
to permit the increased density, which determination shall
lie within the absolute discretion of the Board of Trustees.
[2] Any such land dedicated in exchange for increased density
shall not be included in lot area for purposes of calculating
maximum building coverage and maximum development
coverage under Subsection E of this section, nor shall it
reduce the applicant's open space requirement under the
following subsection.
(b) For each dwelling unit, there shall be provided suitably
improved and usable recreation area and open space in the
following amounts:
§ 295-72.3 TATTOOING § 295-72.3
257:553
[1] One hundred square feet for each studio (efficiency)
dwelling unit; and
[2] Two hundred square feet for each bedroom.
(c) The portion of the building used for residential purposes shall
have an entrance that does not require access through the
portion of the building used for nonresidential purposes, other
than by means of a common lobby.
(d) Only the following nonresidential uses are permitted in a
mixed-use building:
[1] Artist studios, not to exceed 1,500 square feet.
[2] Stores and shops, not to exceed 1,500 square feet of gross
floor area, for the retail sale of antiques, books, art, gifts,
or similar specialty items.
[3] A store or shop, not to exceed 1,500 square feet of gross
floor area, for the retail sale of food, sundries, perishables,
and other convenience goods. Not more than one such
store or shop shall be permitted per seven-acre site.
[4] Business and professional offices, excluding medical or
dental offices.
(6) Health or athletic clubs.
C. Principal uses requiring a special permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in a MUPDD District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter:
(1) Research, design, and development laboratories, provided that:
(a) All research and related activities shall be carried on within
fully enclosed buildings.
(b) None of the following shall be permitted:
[1] Chemical plants.
[2] Motor-testing laboratories.
[3] The keeping and use of large animals, but nothing herein
shall prohibit the keeping and use of small animals that are
commonly used in scientific laboratories incidental to the
experimentation, development, and research conducted in
the laboratories, provided that such animals be kept only
in the interior of any building or structure located on the
property of the laboratories, and further provided that no
animals shall be kept that will create any noise or cause
offenses, annoyances, or disturbance to any of the
§ 295-72.3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72.3
257:554
surrounding properties and to their owners, occupants,
and users.
[4] Facilities engaged in research in the field of explosives.
(c) There shall be no display or sale of goods at retail.
(d) There shall be no manufacturing or fabrication, except that a
small number of pilot or experimental models, which require
the supervision of the technical staff of such laboratory for
their productions, may be produced on the premises.
(e) No offensive noises, gases, fumes, odors, vibrations or radio,
electric or electronic emanations, or other objectionable
influences or hazards shall emanate from such use, and no
waste products shall be discharged therefrom of a character to
create a nuisance.
(f) No radioactive materials shall be kept or used on the premises.
(2) Public utility substations, public utility transmission and
distribution lines, public utility water towers and railroads and
public utility rights-of-way and structures necessary to provide
service within the Village, but not personal wireless service
facilities, except as permitted by § 295-85 of this chapter, provided
that:
(a) Any lot on which a public utility substation or water tower is
located shall have an area of at least 7,500 square feet and a
frontage of at least 75 feet. The station or tower shall be set
back at least 35 feet from the front property line and 50 feet
from all other property lines and shall be enclosed by
protective fencing and a gate, which shall be closed and locked
except when necessary to obtain access thereto;
(b) Any such facilities shall be so designed, enclosed, painted, or
colored and screened with evergreens that they will be
harmonious with the neighborhood in which they are located.
All such property shall be suitably landscaped and maintained
in reasonable conformity with the standards of property
maintenance of the neighborhood in which it is located;
(c) All new or additional power transmission or distribution lines
shall be placed underground, wherever possible; and
(d) All such facilities shall comply with the requirements set forth
in § 295-95 of this chapter.
D. Accessory uses.
(1) Residential uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in a
MUPDD District in conjunction with a principal residential use that
is permitted in a MUPDD District.
§ 295-72.3 TATTOOING § 295-72.3
257:555
(a) The office or studio of an architect, artist, dentist, engineer,
lawyer, musician, teacher, physician, or similar profession, but
not including veterinarians, provided that:
[1] The office or studio is incidental to the residential use of
the dwelling unit and is carried on by a resident therein
with not more than one nonresident assistant, including
partners, associates, and part-time and full-time
employees;
[2] The office or studio shall not occupy more than 30% of the
floor area of the dwelling unit;
[3] The office or studio shall not create a nuisance to any
surrounding residents;
[4] There shall be no outside storage and no display,
advertising, or other visible evidence of the use outside the
dwelling unit in which it is located, except for a single
identification nameplate not exceeding one square foot in
area; and
[5] The parking area shall be subject to site plan review to
determine that it is of adequate size for the particular use,
suitably screened with evergreen planting, walls, or
fences, or combinations thereof, and with entrance and
exit drives designed in a safe and adequate manner.
(b) Customary home occupations, as defined in § 295-5 of this
chapter, provided that:
[1] The occupation is incidental to the residential use of the
premises and is carried on in the dwelling unit by a
resident therein with no more than one nonresident
assistant, working at the same time, including partners,
associates, and part-time and full-time employees;
[2] Only customary household tools, appliances, and
equipment are used;
[3] The occupation does not occupy more than 30% of the
floor area of the dwelling unit;
[4] The occupation does not create a nuisance to any
surrounding residents;
[5] The use does not create waste disposal requirements
significantly in excess of those normally produced in a
residential district unless a suitable method for the
disposal of such wastes is provided, as determined by the
approving authority;
§ 295-72.3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72.3
257:556
[6] There shall be no outside storage and no display,
advertising, or other visible evidence of the use outside the
dwelling unit in which it is located, except for a single
identification nameplate not exceeding one square foot in
area;
[7] All products sold in the dwelling unit shall be made in the
dwelling unit, except for the sale of items that are
incidental to the provision of a permitted service;
[8] There shall be no mechanical or structural fabrication,
assembly, or processing of any products or items, except
that which is incidental to the permitted accessory use;
[9] The parking area shall be subject to site plan review to
determine that it is of adequate size for the particular use,
suitably screened with evergreen planting, walls, or
fences, or combinations thereof, and with entrance and
exit drives designed in a safe and adequate manner;
[10]No more than one commercial vehicle, which vehicle shall
be less than three-fourths ton in design capacity, shall be
used in connection with such a permitted accessory use.
Such vehicle shall be housed in an enclosed garage when
not in actual use; and
[11] Where the proposed use involves structural alterations or
additions requiring a building permit, the use shall be
permitted only if the dwelling unit in which it is to be
located is deemed by the Building Inspector to be
adaptable to the proposed use from the point of view of
public health and safety and the other requirements of this
chapter.
(c) A garden house, toolhouse, playhouse, greenhouse, or similar
occupancy use customarily incident to the permitted principal
use of the premises and not operated for profit.
(d) Accessory recreational facilities, including swimming pools,
customarily incidental to multifamily dwellings, provided that
such facilities are limited to the use of the residents of the
premises and their accompanying, nonpaying guests and are
not operated for profit.
(e) Off-street parking facilities serving the permitted principal and
accessory uses in the lot and conforming with this chapter.
(f) Signs, but only as permitted by the Board of Trustees in the
concept plan approval, and provided they comply with § 295-50
of this chapter.
§ 295-72.3 TATTOOING § 295-72.3
257:557
(2) Nonresidential uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in a MUPDD District but only in conjunction with a principal
nonresidential use that is permitted in a MUPDD District:
(a) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the
permitted principal uses.
(b) Parking and loading facilities, provided that no loading shall
take place nearer than 100 feet to a residence district or a
residential use or between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(c) Signs, but only as permitted by the Board of Trustees in the
concept plan approval, and provided they comply with § 295-50
of this chapter.
(3) Roof-mounted solar panels are a permitted accessory use in a
MUPDD District in conjunction with any type of principal use that
is permitted in a MUPDD District. [Added 11-7-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
E. Development regulations. Each site in the MUPDD District shall be
subject to the following development regulations:
(1) Minimum site size: seven acres.
(2) Maximum building coverage: 30% of lot area.
(3) Maximum development coverage: 60% of lot area.
(4) Site perimeter setbacks.
(a) Minimum site perimeter setback:
[1] Front: 35 feet.
[2] Side: 50 feet.
[3] Rear: 50 feet.
[4] From designated trailway or other significant
environmental feature: 50 feet.
(b) Except for driveways and walkways providing access to a
structure or parking on the site, no portion of the area within a
site perimeter setback may be paved. Areas within a site
perimeter setback are to be landscaped and kept as open
space.
(c) No motor vehicle, trailer, recreational vehicle, snowmobile,
mobile home, boat, or permanent or temporary structure shall
be placed in any area within a site perimeter setback.
(5) Maximum height: three stories or 40 feet, whichever is less.
§ 295-72.3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72.3
257:558
F. General MUPDD application review process. Application for approval of
any use within the MUPDD Zoning District shall follow a two-phase
review process:
(1) Application for approval of a MUPDD concept plan by the Village
Board of Trustees; and
(2) Application for subdivision approval, if necessary, and site plan
approval by the Planning Board, subject to the requirements of the
approved MUPDD concept plan.
G. Specific MUPDD application review process.
(1) The concept plan submission shall be made to the Building
Inspector and shall include 15 copies of the following information,
in form and detail sufficient to enable the reviewers to understand
the general nature and scope of the applicant's proposal:
(a) A location map of the site in relation to the surrounding area
showing all roads and key development features, including
significant neighboring land uses and zoning district
boundaries.
(b) A current topographic map of the property indicating the
general nature and location of any wetlands, hydrogeologic
zone boundaries, special groundwater protection areas,
special wildlife habitat areas, and any other significant
environmental features.
(c) A conceptual sketch plan map indicating the approximate
quantity, nature, and location of proposed land uses; the
proposed open space system and its relationship to
neighboring open spaces; the proposed principal means of
access to the site and major elements of the site circulation
system; the proposed provision for parking; the existing and
proposed availability of mass transportation services; water
supply and wastewater disposal facilities; and, to the extent
known, the height, bulk, location, and general design of
buildings and other structures, interior lot lines, if any, and the
general floor plans for each building.
(d) A written statement describing the general reasons why the
applicant believes that approval of its application would
further the legislative purpose and intent of the MUPDD
zoning, and any other pertinent supporting rationale or
documentation.
(e) A quantitative analysis for the entire site (including subtotals
for each school district) that indicates preserved land areas,
the floor space of the various types of proposed commercial
and other nonresidential uses, the proposed number of
residential dwelling units by size and type, and the area,
§ 295-72.3 TATTOOING § 295-72.3
257:559
percentages of the site, and floor area ratios proposed for each
type of land use.
(f) Proposals for the construction, operation, and maintenance of
all planned utility systems, roadway improvements, sidewalks,
trails, and other infrastructure.
(g) Proposals for the ownership, use, and maintenance of all
preserved open spaces.
(h) A description of any proposed covenants and restrictions
intended to be offered by the applicant.
(i) A list of all governmental approvals, permits, and licenses
required for each phase of development.
(j) Proof of title and an affidavit as to ownership and/or control of
all involved properties. The MUPDD site may be owned by one
or more persons, partnerships, limited partnerships, trusts, or
corporations, but must be presented as a single property at the
time of the application to the Village Board. Such multipleowner
applications shall be jointly filed and consented to by all
owners and, if approved, shall be binding on all of them and all
future owners. Legal agreements, in recordable form and in
substance satisfactory to the Village Attorney, shall be
provided to assure this.
(k) Demonstration by the applicant that potential traffic
generation shall be within the reasonable capacity of the
existing or planned road(s) or street(s) providing access and
that traffic circulation, exit and entrance drives are laid out to
minimize traffic hazards and nuisances.
(l) The names and addresses of the owners of properties in a
radius of 500 feet from each property line of the site.
(m) Projected schedule for development.
(2) Review by Board of Trustees.
(a) Upon receipt of a complete application as determined by the
Building Inspector for concept plan approval, the Building
Inspector shall distribute the application to the Board of
Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall conduct a preliminary
review of the concept plan to determine whether a public
hearing shall be scheduled on the application. If it so
determines, the Board of Trustees shall refer the concept plan
to the Planning Board and schedule a public hearing with the
same notice as required by this chapter for a zoning variance.
(b) Before the close of the public hearing on the concept plan, the
Planning Board shall file with the Board of Trustees an
advisory report on the concept plan. In recommending the
§ 295-72.3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72.3
257:560
adoption or rejection of the concept plan, the Planning Board
shall state the reasons for its recommendations. The failure of
the Planning Board to file an advisory report as required by
this section shall not affect the power of the Board of Trustees
to act on the proposed concept plan.
(c) The Board of Trustees, without limiting its legislative
discretion, shall consider at least the following matters in
determining the suitability of the proposed MUPDD concept
plan:
[1] The extent to which the application implements the
legislative purposes and intent, as set forth in this section.
[2] The proposed mix of land uses and their planned design
and arrangement on the site, including compatibility with
site conditions, and with neighboring streets and land
uses.
[3] The potential impact of the proposed development upon
the area in which it is located, and upon the Village and
surrounding areas.
[4] The adequacy of the phasing plan to ensure that the uses
in each phase will be self-sufficient if future phases should
be delayed or abandoned.
(3) Action by Board of Trustees.
(a) The Board of Trustees shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the proposed MUPDD concept plan. Approval or
conditional approval shall not be deemed to create vested
rights or to waive any right of the Village to a subsequent
detailed review of any aspect of the proposed development or
of any specific subdivision or site plan as required pursuant to
this article, including environmental review pursuant to the
New York State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
(b) Conditions of approval may include, without limitation:
[1] Required modifications of any aspect of the proposed
MUPDD Plan, including partial approval of all or any
portion of the concept plan.
[2] Restrictions on the quantity, type, and location of each
permitted land use;
[3] Creation or modification of access roadways and/or
overpasses, including access to any designated trailway;
[4] Requirements related to the construction, ownership,
operation, and maintenance responsibility for both on-site
and off-site infrastructure improvements;
§ 295-72.3 TATTOOING § 295-72.3
257:561
[5] Provisions assuring the permanent ownership,
preservation, and maintenance responsibility for required
open spaces and for buildings or sites of significant
historical and/or archaeological value;
[6] The dedication of open or recreational space;
[7] The establishment of standards, including design,
performance, and/or bulk standards, as determined
appropriate by the Village Board, to govern the future
approval of detailed subdivisions and/or site plans for
individual sections of the proposed development by the
Planning Board;
[8] Requirements related to the phasing, timing, and/or
sequencing of the proposed development and related
improvements; and
[9] Any other items relating to the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public.
(c) Any proposed amendment to the approved MUPDD concept
plan may be made by the Board of Trustees and only after a
public hearing with the same notice as required for the initial
MUPDD application.
(d) Approval or conditional approval of the MUPDD concept plan
shall expire in three years or as set forth in the Board of
Trustees' approval, unless the required development progress
has been made or such time limit has been extended by the
Board of Trustees.
(4) Subdivision/site plan application to Planning Board.
(a) The approval or conditional approval of a MUPDD concept plan
application by the Board of Trustees shall authorize the
applicant to proceed with the detailed design and planning of
individual sections of the planned development and to submit
applications to the Planning Board for subdivision and/or site
plan approval, as appropriate, and in accordance with the
procedures and requirements for such applications as set forth
in this chapter. All such applications must conform with the
requirements of the approved MUPDD concept plan, and any
findings and conditions issued in connection therewith by the
Board of Trustees. Subdivision and/or site plan approval, as
appropriate, shall be required prior to the issuance of any
permit for building, demolition, land clearance, land use, or
land development within a MUPDD or any section thereof.
(b) Although the procedural requirements for subdivision and site
plan review shall be the same as those applicable to other
subdivision and site plan applications in the Village, in
§ 295-72.3 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-72.3
257:562
§ 295-73. Limited Office (LO) District. [Amended 1-21-2003 by L.L.
No. 1-2003]
reviewing subdivision and site plan applications within a
MUPDD, the Planning Board shall also consider the following:
[1] The conformity of the application to the approvals,
agreements, and conditions imposed by the Board of
Trustees.
[2] Any section or sections for which the Planning Board shall
grant approval or conditional approval shall be determined
to be capable of being self-supporting, sustainable, and
environmentally sound in the event that the applicant does
not proceed with other sections.
[3] The dedication of land for permanent preservation and the
construction of on-site and/or off-site infrastructure
improvements shall be accomplished in conformance with
the approved phasing plan and shall be installed so as to
properly serve the proposed site development. In order to
make such determination, the Planning Board may require
the preparation and submission of such additional detailed
plans and/or studies with respect to water supply,
sewerage service, stormwater drainage, road
improvements, and other utilities and services, as the
Planning Board may find necessary to allow it to determine
their adequacy not only to serve the individual section(s)
proposed but also to be properly related to utilities and
services which, in the future, will serve the MUPDD as a
whole.
[4] The conformity and progress of development in preceding
sections of the MUPDD in relation to all applicable timing
and sequencing requirements and conditions.
A. Principal uses, The following uses are permitted principal uses in an LO
District:
(1) Any principal use permitted in an R-10 District as set forth in
§ 295-68A above, except dwellings.
(2) Professional, business, and governmental offices.
(3) Research, design and development laboratories, provided that:
(a) There shall be no manufacturing or fabrication, except that a
small number of pilot or experimental models, which require
the supervision of the technical staff of such laboratory for
their production, may be produced on the premises.
§ 295-72.3 TATTOOING § 295-73
257:563
(b) All research and related activities shall be carried on within
fully enclosed buildings.
B. Principal uses requiring a special permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in an LO District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter: any use permitted in
an R-10 District requiring a special use permit as set forth in § 295-68B
above.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
LO District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is permitted
in an LO District.
(1) Any accessory use permitted in an R-10 District as set forth in
§ 295-68C above, except uses accessory to dwellings.
(2) One dwelling unit for a caretaker of a permitted principal use.
(3) Buildings and uses immediately, customarily and exclusively
accessory to a permitted principal office building or research
laboratory use on the site, including off-street parking and loading
facilities, fully enclosed storage and maintenance of motor vehicles
and other equipment, central heating, air conditioning and power
plants, water tanks and refuse disposal systems, and the following
uses where necessary for the comfort, convenience and exclusive
use of the occupants, employees and business visitors in the
building or buildings:
(a) Clinics and cafeterias, when conducted within a main building.
(b) Recreation facilities, provided that all such buildings and uses
shall be planned as an integral part of the office building or
research laboratory development and located on the same lot
with the use to which they are accessory.
(c) Assembly hall for meetings incident to the business of the
principal use.
(4) Signs, but only the following, in addition to those allowed under
Subsection C(1) above:
(a) For each research laboratory or office building development,
one identification sign facing each street on which the lot
abuts, announcing the name of the company or companies
located in the building.
(b) Each such sign shall not exceed 60 square feet in area, nor
shall it be placed on the roof or extend above the wall of the
building on which it is placed, nor shall any such sign, if
freestanding, exceed 10 feet in any dimension, nor have any
part more than 12 feet above ground level.
§ 295-73 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-73
257:564
§ 295-74. Central Office (CO) Districts. [Amended 1-21-2003 by L.L.
No. 1-2003]
(c) In addition to the foregoing signs, necessary small directional
signs, not exceeding two square feet each in area, shall be
permitted in locations determined by the approving authority,
which shall also determine whether the wording of the signs is
acceptable.
(d) Any sign permitted under this section must also comply with
the provisions of Chapter 234, Signs, of the Hastings-on-
Hudson Code, and must be approved by the Architectural
Review Board.
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in an LO District shall have an area of at least four
acres and a width of at least 300 feet.
E. Required yards, maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an LO District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 80 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 120 feet deep;
(c) Two side yards, each of which is at least 50 feet; and
(d) A maximum height of 40 feet and no more than two stories.
(2) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not more
than 10% of the area of the lot.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in a CO
District:
(1) One- or two-family dwellings in existence on January 21, 2003,
subject to the bulk requirements for two-family dwellings in a 2R
District as set forth in § 295-70E(2) above.
(2) Professional and governmental offices.
(3) Business offices, except no outdoor storage of materials on
premises shall be permitted, and only one commercial vehicle per
business office shall be stored overnight on the lot.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in a CO District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter:
(1) Any use permitted in an LO District requiring a special use permit
as set forth in § 295-73B above.
§ 295-73 TATTOOING § 295-74
257:565
(2) In order to preserve the architectural quality of older, residential
structures: the reuse of such structures for the retail sale of
antiques, books, art, gifts, or other specialty items, provided that:
(a) The architecturally important features are preserved through
the reuse;
(b) The reuse will not cause undue traffic congestion or parking
demand.
(3) In order to preserve the architectural quality of older, residential
structures: the reuse of such structures as bed-and-breakfasts,
subject to the following:
(a) The architecturally important features are preserved through
the reuse.
(b) The reuse will not cause undue traffic congestion or parking
demand.
(c) The requirements for bed-and-breakfasts as set forth in
§ 295-72.1B(6) shall be met.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in a
CO District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is permitted
in a CO District:
(1) Any accessory use permitted in an LO District as set forth in
§ 295-73C above, except storage and maintenance of vehicles,
cafeterias, assembly halls, power plants, water tanks, refuse
disposal systems and signs.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection C(1) above, one sign facing each
street to which the lot has access, provided that the sign shall be
applied to the face of the building, shall not exceed 12 square feet
and shall be only indirectly lit. Any such sign must be approved by
the Architectural Review Board and must comply with the
provisions of Chapter 234, Signs, of the Hastings-on-Hudson Code.
In addition, signs of a number, type, size and location specified in
§ 295-67C(7)(b) through (d) above shall be permitted.
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in a CO District shall have an area of at least 10,000
square feet and a width of at least 100 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each building or structure in a CO District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 15 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 20 feet deep;
§ 295-74 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-74
257:566
§ 295-75. Limited Commercial (LC) Districts. [Amended 1-21-2003
by L.L. No. 1-2003]
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 25 feet, each of which yards is
at least 10 feet; and
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet and no more than 2 1/2 stories.
(2) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not more
than 30% of the area of the lot.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in an LC
District:
(1) Supermarket and accessory offices.
(2) Business and professional offices.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in an LC District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter:
(1) Restaurants.
(2) Banks.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
LC District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is permitted
in an LC District:
(1) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the permitted
principal uses.
(2) Parking and loading facilities, provided that no loading shall take
place nearer than 50 feet to a residence district or between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(3) Signs, excluding billboards, provided that:
(a) For signs attached to building walls:
[1] Not more than one such sign shall be permitted for each
tenant on the premises on each wall fronting on a street;
and
[2] The aggregate area of all permanent or wall signs shall be
no greater than the length of such wall in feet times two.
(b) For freestanding signs, in addition to signs permitted in
Subsection B(3)(a) above, not more than one freestanding sign,
with a total area on all faces of not more than 40 square feet,
provided that no such sign is erected less than 25 feet from any
lot line.
§ 295-74 TATTOOING § 295-75
257:567
§ 295-76. Central Commercial (CC) Districts. [Amended 10-3-2000
by L.L. No. 2-2000; 1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
(c) Any sign permitted under this section must be approved by the
Architectural Review Board and must comply with the
provisions of Chapter 234, Signs, of the Hastings-on-Hudson
Code.
(4) Roof-mounted solar panels. [Added 11-7-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in an LC District shall have an area of at least 40,000
square feet and a width of at least 100 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an LC District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 30 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 40 feet deep;
(c) Two side yards, each of which is at least 20 feet; and
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet and no more than two stories.
(2) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not more
than 50% of the area of the lot.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in a CC
District:
(1) Banks and restaurants, without drive-throughs only.
(2) Personal service establishments.
(3) Other service establishments, but excluding gasoline filling
stations and motor vehicle storage, repair or service
establishments.
(4) Outlets and pickup stations for laundries and cleaning
establishments. Washing of apparel on the premises is prohibited.
Complete cleaning of wearing apparel or household effects on the
premises is permitted only if noncombustible solvent is used.
(5) Production and processing of goods, provided that such goods are
to be sold at retail on the premises, the area so used does not
exceed 40% of the retail area, and the installation will not have an
adverse effect on neighboring uses.
(6) Business and professional and Village-related governmental
offices.
§ 295-75 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-76
257:568
(7) Funeral parlors.
(8) Copying, offset, and incidental job printing.
(9) Municipal parking lots and parking structures.
(10) Self-service and hand laundries.
(11) Places of worship.
(12) Membership clubs.
(13) Public utility structures.
(14) Governmental offices in existence on January 21, 2003.
(15) Retail uses except the sale of motor vehicles.
(16) Mixed-use buildings, provided that: [Amended 4-19-2005 by L.L.
No. 5-2005]
(a) Any residential dwelling unit contained therein has a minimum
gross floor area of 500 square feet.
(b) Only nonresidential uses are permitted on the ground floor.
The Planning Board, however, after a public hearing held upon
the same notice as that required for a zoning variance, may, in
its discretion, permit residential use on the ground floor in the
CC District, but only if such residential use is not located on
that portion of the ground floor story that abuts a street, is
compatible with neighboring properties, and is consistent with
the commercial nature of the CC District.
(c) Artist studios shall be permitted above the ground floor story.
(17) Museums and cultural uses in existence on January 21, 2003.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in a CC District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter:
(1) Hotels, provided that:
(a) A hotel may be located on a lot with retail, office or other
commercial uses allowed as a permitted use or by special use
permit in the CC District, but shall not be permitted in
combination with multifamily dwellings or any residential use.
(b) The maximum length of stay of any guest room shall be limited
to 15 days in any thirty-day period. A guest register logging the
time and departure of all guests shall be available for review at
all times.
(c) A hotel may include the following accessory uses: conference
rooms, dining areas, banquet facilities, indoor fitness area,
§ 295-76 TATTOOING § 295-76
257:569
retail shops and administrative offices or any other use that
the Zoning Board of Appeals determines to be customary and
incidental to a hotel use.
(d) Guest rooms are permitted food storage and microwave ovens.
Refrigerated food storage is limited to six-cubic-foot capacity
storage units. Microwave ovens shall be utilized on a table or
bench not to exceed 36 inches in height. Nothing herein shall
permit kitchenettes or kitchens within a guest unit.
(e) Each guest room shall be served individually by a bathroom.
(f) The hotel shall be in compliance with this chapter and all
applicable building, electrical, health, fire and other safety
codes.
(g) The special use permit shall specify the maximum number of
guest rooms approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(h) Every application for a hotel special use permit shall be
accompanied by a fee to be set by the Board of Trustees.
(i) A hotel permit expires after five years or on change of
ownership. In such cases, the owner has 60 days to renew the
permit.
(j) Anyone operating a hotel without a special use permit shall be
guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000.
Each month's continued violation will constitute a separate
additional violation. Further, violation of any condition in this
section or imposed by the granting of the permit shall lead to
revocation of the permit.
(k) A hotel use shall require site plan approval from the Planning
Board.
C. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in a
CC District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is permitted
in a CC District:
(1) Any accessory use permitted in an LC District as set forth in
§ 295-75B above.
(2) Signs accessory to an establishment, located on the same lot,
provided that:
(a) Not more than one such sign shall be permitted for each tenant
on the premises on each wall fronting on a street.
(b) The aggregate area of all permanent or wall signs shall be no
greater than the length of such wall in feet times two.
(c) In addition, where the building is set back from the street line a
distance of 25 feet or more, one freestanding sign, with a total
§ 295-76 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-76
257:570
area of not more than 80 square feet, may be erected. No such
freestanding signs shall encroach on any required yard.
(d) Any sign permitted under this section must be approved by the
Architectural Review Board and must comply with the
provisions of Chapter 234, Signs, of the Hastings-on-Hudson
Code.
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in a CC District shall have an area of at least 2,500
square feet and a width of at least 20 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage. Subject to the
provisions of Subsections A through C and § 295-82C and the design
guidelines for the Central Commercial District adopted by the Board of
Trustees, each building and structure in a CC District shall have:
[Amended 11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
(1) No required front yard, except where the Planning Board finds that
an absence of front yard would adversely impact existing views as
determined in accordance with the provisions of § 295-82, or would
impede traffic. In such case, the Planning Board may require a
front yard up to 10 feet deep;
(2) A rear yard at least 10 feet deep at the ground floor and 20 feet
above the ground floor; but if either side or the rear of the lot is
adjacent to a residence district then the rear yard shall be at least
30 feet deep;
(3) No side yard, except that where a side yard adjoins either a
residence district or a one- or two-family dwelling, in which case a
side yard shall be provided at least 10 feet deep; and
(4) A maximum height of 40 feet and no more than three stories except
as follows: [Amended 12-16-2008 by L.L. No. 29-2008]
(a) Where Plane B (NOTE: Plane B is defined in § 295-5, Height,
Building, Subsection B.) slopes down from the front lot line, a
structure that does not exceed 40 feet in height measured at
the front lot line (or at any required setback) may extend
horizontally at up to such height toward the rear lot line for the
greater of: 40 feet from the front lot line (or required setback)
or 20 feet after it has exceeded Plane B, at which point it must
come down to or below the height of Plane B. Thereafter, it
may, one or more times, extend horizontally at up to such
height toward the rear lot line until it exceeds the height of
Plane B for 20 feet, at which point it must come down below
the height of Plane B, except that no portion of the 20 feet of
the structure closest to the rear lot line (or required setback)
may exceed Plane B. See diagram of side view below.
§ 295-76 TATTOOING § 295-76
257:571
(b) Where Plane B (NOTE: Plane B is defined in § 295-5, Height,
Building, Subsection B.) slopes up from the front lot line, a
structure that does not exceed 40 feet in height measured at
the front lot line (or at any required setback) may extend
horizontally at up to such height toward the rear lot line to a
point 20 feet or more from the front lot line (or required
setback). Thereafter, it may, one or more times, step up to a
height such that it will be below Plane B when extended
horizontally at up to such height for 20 feet toward the rear lot
line, except that the last 20 feet of the structure closest to the
rear lot line (or required setback) must end below Plane B. See
diagram of side view below.
(c) On steeply sloped sites (a ten-foot change in elevation from the
front lot line to the rear lot line), an increase of an additional
floor may be permitted by the Planning Board, provided:
[1] The site slopes downward from the street line and the
lowest story is below street grade; or
§ 295-76 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-76
257:572
§ 295-77. Limited Industry (LI) Districts. [Amended 10-3-2000 by
L.L. No. 2-2000; 1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
[2] The site slopes upward from the street line and the fourth
story is set back from the front lot line(or any required
setback) by no less than 20 feet;
[3] The maximum height does not exceed 40 feet as measured
and determined in § 295-5 (Building Height) and
§ 295-76E(4); and
[4] Any structure with an additional floor shall meet all
requirements set forth in § 295-82, View Preservation (VP)
Districts.
F. Facade changes. [Amended 11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
(1) All construction, reconstruction, and alterations to buildings or
structures within the CC District shall conform to any design
guidelines duly adopted by the Board of Trustees for the CC
District.
(2) Where site plan review and approval is required by the Planning
Board, said site plan, including building elevations or renderings,
shall be referred to the Architectural Review Board, which shall
serve in an advisory capacity to said Planning Board. No further
review and approval by the Architectural Review Board is required
for issuance of a building permit if the Architectural Review Board
has issued a favorable recommendation to the Planning Board
during site plan review.
(3) Any alteration to a facade or roof of a building or structure that
does not require site plan approval or a building permit, including
but not limited to changing a window, door, awning, or siding, but
not including painting, shall be approved by the Architectural
Review Board.
(4) A disapproval by the Architectural Review Board under this section
may be appealed to the Hastings-on-Hudson Zoning Board of
Appeals in the same manner as is provided in § 295-140 of this
Chapter.
G. No security gate within the CC District shall be closed between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m., except by approval of the Board of
Trustees.
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in an LI
District: any principal uses permitted in a CC District as set forth in §
295-76A above, except: [Amended 4-19-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
(1) Mixed use buildings are permitted only if the mixed use building
consists of one or more principal nonresidential use(s) located on
§ 295-76 TATTOOING § 295-77
257:573
the ground floor story, and one or more residential dwellings or
nonresidential uses located above the ground floor story; and
(2) Mixed use buildings may contain artist studios on any floor.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. The following uses are
permitted principal uses in an LI District but require a special use
permit issued pursuant to Article X of this chapter:
(1) Any use permitted in a CC District requiring a special use permit as
set forth in § 295-76B above.
(2) Research laboratory.
(3) Storage or warehousing establishment.
(4) Cleaning, dyeing or laundry establishment
(5) Any use consisting of the manufacture, fabrication, assembling or
other handling of products.
(6) Storage of cars, but excluding car wrecking or storage of wrecked
cars or used car parts.
C. Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in an LI
District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is permitted in
an LI District: any accessory use permitted in a CC District except
dwelling units above permitted principal uses, as provided in
§ 295-76C(3).
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C, all lots in an LI District shall have an area of at least 20,000
square feet and a width of at least 150 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an LI District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 25 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 40 feet deep;
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 50 feet, each of which yards is
at least 20 feet; but any side yard on a side of the lot adjacent
to either a residence district or a one- or two-family dwelling
shall be at least 40 feet; and
(d) A maximum height of 40 feet and no more than two stories.
(2) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not more
than 25% of the area of the lot if no building or structure on the lot
is more than one story; if any building or structure on the lot is
more than one story, then all buildings and structures on the lot
shall together cover not more than 15% of the area of the lot.
§ 295-77 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-77
257:574
§ 295-78. General Industry (GI) District. [Amended 1-21-2003 by
L.L. No. 1-2003]
(3) All parking and loading areas shall be set back no less than 1/2 of
the required yard.
A. Principal uses. Subject to the provisions of § 295-80A below, the
following uses are permitted principal uses in a GI District any principal
use permitted in an LI District as set forth in § 295-77A above.
B. Principal uses requiring a special use permit. Subject to the provisions
of § 295-80A below, the following uses are permitted principal uses in a
GI District but require a special use permit issued pursuant to Article X
of this chapter:
(1) Any use permitted in an LI District requiring a special use permit,
as set forth in § 295-77B above.
(2) Research laboratories.
(3) Any other use which the Board of Appeals after a public hearing
finds is consistent with §§ 295-2 and 295-3 above.
C. Accessory uses. Subject to the provisions of § 295-80A below, the
following uses are permitted accessory uses in a GI District but only in
conjunction with a principal use that is permitted in a GI District any
accessory use permitted in an LI District as set forth in § 295-77C
above.
D. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
through C and § 295-80A, all lots in a GI District shall have an area of at
least 30,000 square feet and a width of at least 150 feet.
E. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A through C, § 295-80A
and § 295-82C, each building and structure in a GI District shall
have:
(a) A front yard at least 25 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 75 feet deep;
(c) Two side yards totaling at least 40 feet, each of which yards is
at least 15 feet; but on any side where there is a driveway
between the building and lot line, the side yard shall be 25 feet;
and
(d) A maximum height of 40 feet and no more than two stories.
(2) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not more
than 35% of the area of the lot if no building or structure on the lot
is more than one story; if any building or structure on the lot is
§ 295-77 TATTOOING § 295-78
257:575
§ 295-79. Marine Waterfront (MW) Districts.
§ 295-80. Access to and preservation of Hudson River waterfront in
GI and MW Districts.
more than one story, then all buildings and structures on the lot
shall together cover not more than 20% of the area of the lot.
A. Principal uses. Subject to the provisions of § 295-80A, the following
uses are permitted principal uses in an MW District:
(1) Yacht club or marina.
(2) Fishing and marine supply sales.
(3) Beach, swimming or park facility.
(4) Restaurant.
B. Accessory uses. Subject to the provisions of § 295-80A below, the
following uses are permitted accessory uses in an MW District:
[Amended 11-7-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(1) Accessory uses and buildings customarily incident to the permitted
principal uses.
(2) Roof-mounted solar panels.
C. Minimum lot size and width. Subject to the provisions of Subsections A
and B and § 295-80A, all lots in an MW District shall have an area of at
least 20,000 square feet and a width of at least 150 feet.
D. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsections A and B, § 295-80A and
§ 295-82C, each building and structure in an MW District shall
have:
(a) A front yard at least 25 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 60 feet deep;
(c) Two side yards, each of which is at least 15 feet; and
(d) A maximum height of 35 feet and no more than 2 1/2 stories.
(2) All buildings and structures on the lot shall together cover not more
than 20% of the area of the lot.
A. Approval by Planning Board and Board of Trustees.
(1) No development or redevelopment in a GI or MW District shall
occur unless there shall be adequate public access to the use of the
waterfront as determined by the Planning Board in the site plan
review. The Planning Board shall have the authority to require as a
§ 295-78 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-80
257:576
§ 295-81. Public Park, Recreation and Playground (PR) Districts.
§ 295-82. View Preservation (VP) Districts.
condition of site plan approval for such development or
redevelopment a setback from the waterline of not more than
60 feet of dry land and a public easement for pedestrian traffic
between the closest public street and that setback.
(2) No building permit or certificate of occupancy for any building,
structure or use in a GI or MW District shall be granted without the
approval of the Board of Trustees after a public hearing, which
approval shall be subject to those conditions deemed by the Board
of Trustees necessary to preserve, protect and improve the scenic
value and recreational use of the Hudson River waterfront in the
Village.
A. District boundaries. Every Village-owned park, playground and
recreational area dedicated by the Village as a public park shall be
deemed to be a PR District.
B. Permitted uses. Subject to the provisions of Subsection C below, the
following uses shall be permitted in a PR District: those uses necessary
to preserve and promote the purposes of the park, playground or
recreational area.
C. Approval by Board of Trustees. No building, structure or use shall be
permitted in a PR District unless authorized by the Board of Trustees
after a public hearing.
A. Purpose. The purpose of VP Districts is to protect and preserve the
character of the community, to preserve and enhance property values
and to promote improved visual relationships between the Village and
the Hudson River and the Palisades.
B. Principal and accessory uses. Subject to the provisions of Subsection C
below, the permitted principal and accessory uses for any lot or parcel
in a VP District shall be the same as otherwise permitted in the district
in which the lot or parcel is located.
C. Approval by Planning Board and Board of Appeals.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected, altered, enlarged or
moved in the district unless approved in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) Every application to permit the erection or exterior alteration of a
building or structure in a VP District shall be referred by the
Building Inspector to the Planning Board for its report and
recommendations as to the best siting, dimensions and
configuration of principal and accessory structures so as to cause
the least possible obstruction of the view of the Hudson River and
§ 295-80 TATTOOING § 295-82
257:577
§ 295-83. Marine Waterfront-A (MW-A) District.
the Palisades for neighboring properties and adjacent public
property and rights-of-way. The Planning Board shall issue its
report and recommendations within 60 days after receipt of the
application.
(3) After approval by the Planning Board, the plan for erection or
exterior alteration of the building or structure shall be referred to
the Board of Appeals, which shall conduct a public hearing on the
plan. The Board of Appeals shall hold the hearing and render its
decision within 60 days after the referral by the Planning Board.
(4) Joint notice of both the Planning Board meeting at which the
application is to be considered and the Board of Appeals public
hearing on the application shall be given at least 14 days before the
Planning Board meeting. Notice shall be given as required in
§ 295-143C. In addition, notice shall be given to the Architectural
Review Board and shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village not less than 10 days before both the
Planning Board meeting and the Board of Appeals hearing.
D. Waiver of View Preservation approval. Notwithstanding the
requirements of Subsection C above, View Preservation approval shall
not be required where the Building Inspector determines that the
erection or exterior alteration will have no negative effect on the view
of the Hudson River and the Palisades for neighboring properties and
adjacent public property and rights-of-way, and that determination is
confirmed both by the Chairperson of the Planning Board, or another
Planning Board member designated by the Chairperson, and by the
Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or another member
designated by the ZBA Chairperson. [Added 8-5-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015115]
E. Roof-mounted solar panels. Notwithstanding the requirements of
Subsection C above, View Preservation approval shall not be required
for the erection of roof-mounted solar panels. [Added 11-7-2017 by
L.L. No. 3-2017]
A. Purposes. The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson has established a Marine
Waterfront-A (MW-A) District classification applicable to future
development within the area of the Village situated along the shoreline
of the Hudson River, in order to achieve the purposes and objectives set
forth in §§ 295-2 and 295-3 of this chapter as they apply to such area,
and in order to achieve the following additional purposes:
(1) To establish a carefully designed and orderly development plan for
the riverfront area which will implement the comprehensive
115. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former § 295-82D, Waiver of View Preservation
approval, added 8-6-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013.
§ 295-82 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-83
257:578
planning goals and objectives of the Village Board, and which will
protect the quality of the environment and the public health, safety
and general welfare.
(2) To encourage the development of attractive, functional and
appropriately scaled uses along the riverfront, in a manner that will
provide economic support for the Village while affirming the
character of the Village as a locus of riverfront activity.
(3) To provide for public access along the riverfront for the purposes of
recreation, leisure and other water-related or water-dependent
uses.
(4) To promulgate zoning regulations that will be conducive to
accomplishing the foregoing purposes with respect to smaller
riverfront sites characterized by irregular configuration, limited
parcel depth, minimal dry land area or remoteness from points of
suitable vehicular or pedestrian access to and from areas situated
east of the Metro-North railroad right-of-way.
B. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in an
MW-A District:
(1) Fishing and marine supply sales.
(2) Beach, swimming or park facility.
(3) Restaurant and other places serving food and drink, but excluding
fast-food restaurants other than fast-food booths or kiosks
approved by the Planning Board either at the time of site plan
approval under § 295-84J below or thereafter.
(4) Health and sports club to be constructed or reconstructed on the
site of any existing health or sports club, or on a lot having a
property line that is within 250 feet of the property line of such a
site.
(5) Public or nonprofit cultural or educational facility, such as a
museum or information center, including but not limited to a
museum or information center designed and located in such
manner as will encourage water-dependent or water-related use of
such facility.
(6) Municipal uses of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
C. Principal uses requiring a special use permit.
(1) The following uses are permitted principal uses in an MW-A District
but require a special use permit issued by the Village Board of
Trustees:
(a) Yacht club or marina facility.
§ 295-83 TATTOOING § 295-83
257:579
(b) Health and sports club not located in accordance with
Subsection B(4) above.
(c) Multifamily dwellings.
(d) Any use proposed to be constructed upon or adjacent to any
bulkheading, decks or pilings situated in, beneath or over the
Hudson River.
(2) Before approving an application for a special use permit for any use
set forth in Subsection C(1)(a) through (d) above, the Village Board
shall hold a public hearing on notice duly published and given as
provided in § 295-143 of this chapter, and, in the case of any use set
forth in said Subsection C(1)(a), (b) or (c) above, shall consider the
requirements in § 295-87 of this chapter. With respect to any such
use, the Village Board also shall consider additional factors
identical to those required to be considered before a special use
permit for a particular use is issued in the MW-B District as set
forth in § 295-84D below, and shall apply the same parking
requirements as are set forth in § 295-84F(6) below. The following
additional provisions shall be applicable to certain special use
permits issued under this Subsection C:
(a) With respect to any use described in Subsection C(1)(d) above,
the Village Board may make any special use permit conditional
upon implementation of long-term maintenance, repair and
funding arrangements similar to those set forth in
§ 295-84G(3) of this chapter.
(b) The Village Board shall require that all or the preponderance of
dwelling units in an MW-A District will be townhouses.
D. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
MW-A District: [Amended 11-7-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(1) Accessory uses and buildings customarily incident to the permitted
principal uses.
(2) Roof-mounted solar panels.
E. Minimum lot size and width. All lots in an MW-A District shall have a dry
land area of at least 20,000 square feet and a width of at least 150 feet.
F. Required yards; maximum building height and coverage; parking
requirements.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection F(4) below in this section, each
building and structure in an MW-A District shall have:
(a) A front yard at least 25 feet deep;
(b) A rear yard at least 60 feet deep;
(c) Two side yards, each of which is at least 15 feet; and
§ 295-83 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-83
257:580
(d) A maximum height of three stories, but not more than 30 feet
above elevation 10 established in National Geodetic Survey
Datum (1929).
(2) The minimum yard requirements set forth in Subsections F(1)(a),
(b) and (c) above may be reduced by the Planning Board as part of
the procedure for site plan approval under §§ 295-104 through
295-114 of this chapter.
(3) All buildings and structures on the lot, excluding a health and
sports club, shall together cover not more than 20% of the dry land
area of the lot.
(4) In recognition of the parking requirements of sports and health
clubs, and the special height, bulk and structural characteristics of
such facilities containing tennis and/or racquetball courts, the
following provisions shall be applicable, notwithstanding any
contrary provision of this chapter, only to sports or health club
facilities:
(a) The maximum height for a sports or health club shall be 50 feet
above elevation 10 established in National Geodetic Survey
Datum (1929), measured to the top of any roof parapet.
(b) The maximum lot coverage of a sports or health club shall not
exceed 60,000 square feet.
(c) The yard requirements of Subsection F(1)(a), (b) and (c) above
in this section shall not be applicable.
(5) The aggregate floor area ratio of all residential development
situated in all areas of the Village (considered in the aggregate)
within the MW-A District shall not exceed 0.09. For purposes of the
floor area ratio calculation under the preceding sentence, only the
dry land area of lots within the MW-A District shall be taken into
account.
(6) The parking requirements applicable to a health and sports club
located in accordance with Subsection B(4) above shall be the same
as those set forth for such a facility in § 295-84F(6) below. Except
as provided in Subsection C(2) above, parking requirements for all
other uses in the MW-A District shall be as set forth or provided for
in § 295-36 of this chapter.
G. Applicability of other provisions to an MW-A District.
(1) View preservation. Section 295-82A through C, regarding
regulations for a View Preservation District, shall apply to any
application for a permit for the erection or exterior alteration of a
building or a structure in an MW-A District.
(2) General regulations. All the general regulations set forth in this
chapter shall apply in their entirety to an MW-A District except as
§ 295-83 TATTOOING § 295-83
257:581
expressly set forth in the provisions of Subsections A through I
inclusive, and as set forth below:
(a) In applying § 295-27 within an MW-A District, the approving
board shall be the Village Board.
(b) In applying §§ 295-86 through 295-97 within an MW-A District,
the approving authority shall be the Village Board.
(c) In an MW-A District, the height limitations set forth in
§ 295-21A shall be measured in feet above elevation 10
established in National Geodetic Vertical Datum (1929).
(d) In the MW-A District, the time of expiration of any special use
permit shall be established by the Village Board as a condition
of such special use permit, notwithstanding any contrary
provisions of § 295-96 of this chapter.
H. Access to waterfront. No development or redevelopment in the MW-A
District shall take place unless there shall be adequate public access for
recreational use of the waterfront. Adequacy shall be determined by the
Planning Board, which shall have the authority to require, as a
condition to site development plan approval, any or all of the following:
(1) A setback from the shoreline of a maximum area equal to the
greater of 30% of the width of the dry land area of the lot, or 60
feet.
(2) A public pedestrian easement extending along the entire river
frontage of the lot, which shall be not less than 15 feet wide at any
point, and shall have an average width of not less than 25 feet.
(3) A public easement for pedestrian traffic between such public
pedestrian easement and a public street.
(4) A declaration or agreement executed by the owner of the lot and
recorded in the Westchester County Clerk's office, Land Records
Division, dedicating such easements in perpetuity to the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson and requiring the connection and continuity of
the riverfront easement area and any walkway improvements
thereon with any similar easement area and improvements then
existing or subsequently created in any abutting property in an
MW-A or MW-B District.
(5) Such other features as are necessary and appropriate for public
access to the waterfront and for implementing those provisions of
§ 295-84K of this chapter which the Planning Board deems
applicable to the river frontage in an MW-A District.
I. Bulkheads, platforms, rip-rap slopes, decks and pilings. As a condition
of any special use permit granted under Subsection C above, or as a
condition of site development plan approval if Subsection C is not
applicable, the Village Board or the Planning Board, as the case may be,
§ 295-83 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-83
257:582
§ 295-84. Marine Waterfront-B (MW-B) District.
may require, as part of the proposed redevelopment of a lot, that
arrangements be established for the repair or replacement of
bulkheads, platforms, rip-rap slopes, decking or pilings for decking
situated along the river bank of the lot, and along the riverbank of
any Village property devoted to park use situated between the lot and
the Hudson River, and the subsequent maintenance and repair of such
facilities, which arrangements shall be similar in whole or in part to
the procedures and the funding and security requirements described in
§ 295-84G(3) and (4) below.
A. Purposes. The Village of Hastings-on-Hudson has established an MW-B
District classification applicable to future development within the area
of the Village situated along the shoreline of the Hudson River, in order
to achieve the purposes and objectives set forth in §§ 295-2 and 295-3 of
this chapter as they apply to such area, and in order to achieve the
following additional purposes:
(1) To establish a comprehensive, carefully designed and orderly
development plan for the riverfront area that will implement the
comprehensive planning goals and objectives of the Village Board
and that will protect the quality of the environment and the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(2) To encourage the development of larger, more centrally located
tracts of waterfront land as single, unified and comprehensive
projects, containing uses appropriate to a waterfront area.
(3) To counteract the deleterious influence of the existing Metro-North
railroad right-of-way, and of existing underutilized industrial
buildings, on neighboring properties, and reduce the isolation of
the area situated west of the railroad right-of-way.
(4) To encourage the development of attractive, functional and
appropriately scaled uses along the riverfront, in a manner that will
provide economic support for the Village while affirming the
character of the Village as a locus of riverfront activity.
(5) To provide for public access along the riverfront for the purposes of
recreation, leisure and other water-related or water-dependent
uses.
(6) To help meet the needs of the community for alternate housing
opportunities, including middle-income and senior citizen housing.
B. Eligibility. An owner of real property may petition the Village Board of
Trustees for a change of the zoning classification of the property to MWB
in accordance with the procedures set forth in Subsection H below if
the property has the following characteristics:
(1) The property contains 25 or more contiguous acres of dry land; and
§ 295-83 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:583
(2) The property has a minimum of 3,000 feet of frontage along the
shoreline, including shoreline within coves and inlets.
C. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in an
MW-B District:
(1) Multifamily dwellings.
(2) Personal service stores engaged in providing services generally to
individuals, such as but not limited to barbershops, beauty parlors
and shoe repair shops. Drive-up facilities and any individual store
having a floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet are excluded from
this category of use. This category of use also includes tailoring,
laundry and cleaning establishments subject to the following:
(a) If steam pressure is used, it shall not exceed 15 pounds'
pressure per square inch and steam condensate shall be
discharged through a roof vent or to the rear of the building.
(b) The washing of apparel on the premises is prohibited.
(c) Dry cleaning of wearing apparel or household effects on the
premises is permitted only if noncombustible solvent is used.
(3) Convenience retail stores engaged in selling merchandise for
personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of the merchandise, excluding any type of
drive-up facility and any individual store having a floor area in
excess of 2,000 square feet. All merchandise offered for sale shall
be stored and displayed in fully enclosed structures, except for
temporary outdoor uses permitted by the Village under Village
procedures regulating such uses.
(4) Bank or automatic teller machine facility, excluding, in either case,
any drive-up facility.
(5) Restaurants and other places serving food and beverages, but
excluding fast-food restaurants other than fast-food booths or
kiosks which may be approved by the Planning Board either at the
time of site plan approval under Subsection J below or thereafter.
(6) Business offices.
(7) Professional offices of doctors, dentists, engineers, architects,
surveyors, certified public accountants or attorneys, provided that
the aggregate floor area of doctors' or dentists' offices shall not
exceed 15,000 square feet, except as provided in Subsection D
below, and provided, further, that no individual doctor or dentist or
group of doctors and dentists practicing together shall occupy
more than 2,500 square feet of floor area.
(8) Community facilities, such as meeting rooms and recreation rooms,
suitable for social, civic, cultural and educational activities.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:584
(9) Health and sports club to be constructed or reconstructed
substantially on the site of an existing sports or health club.
(10) Art galleries and antique shops.
(11) Fishing and marine supply sales.
(12) Municipal uses of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, including but
not limited to public recreation facilities, such as a park or
waterfront esplanade, and a public boat-launching facility.
D. Principal uses requiring a special use permit.
(1) The following uses are permitted principal uses in an MW-B District
but require a special use permit issued by the Village Board of
Trustees:
(a) Professional offices of doctors or dentists, if the aggregate
floor area thereof would exceed 15,000 square feet, provided
that no individual doctor or dentist or group of doctors or
dentists practicing together shall occupy more than 2,500
square feet of floor area.
(b) Health and sports club not located in accordance with
Subsection C(9) above.
(c) Theater or band shell.
(d) Public or nonprofit cultural or educational facility, such as a
museum or information center, including but not limited to a
museum or information center designed and located in such
manner as will encourage water-dependent or water-related
use of such facility.
(2) Before approving an application for a special use permit for any use
set forth in Subsection D(1) above in this section, the Village Board
shall hold a public hearing on notice duly published and given as
provided in § 295-143 of this chapter, and shall consider the
requirements and objectives set forth in § 295-87 of this chapter
and the additional factors set forth below:
(a) The need for the proposed uses within the Village.
(b) The off-street parking requirements and traffic impact of the
proposed use.
(c) Any characteristics of the proposed use that make waterfront
location particularly appropriate.
(d) The extent to which the proposed use will complement and
enhance other uses permitted on the property.
(e) Consistency of the proposed use with the objectives of the
design review criteria set forth below in Subsection K, and the
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:585
compatibility of such use with public benefits or amenities
required under this chapter in an MW-B District.
(f) The deleterious aesthetic, environmental and navigational
consequences of any proposed development that would intrude
into the Hudson River beyond the historical westerly limit of
waterfront uses in the Village.
(g) Any other factors that the Village Board may deem significant
within the context of the purposes set forth in Subsection A
above.
(3) The Village Board may attach such conditions to its approval of any
special use permit as are necessary or appropriate to assure that
the purposes set forth in Subsection A above are achieved, the
factors set forth in Subsection D(2) above are respected and the
design criteria set forth in Subsection K below will be met, and may
require that performance of any or all of such conditions be
secured by a letter of credit or bond. The Village Board may also
require that such conditions shall be incorporated in a declaration
of covenants or other instrument satisfactory to the Village
Attorney to be executed by the owner of the subject property and
recorded in the Westchester County Clerk's office, Land Records
Division.
E. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory uses in an
MW-B District but only in conjunction with a principal use that is
permitted in such district:
(1) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the permitted
principal uses.
(2) The accessory uses permitted in a residential unit but limited to
customary home occupations and the office of an architect, artist,
engineer, lawyer, musician, teacher, physician or similar profession
in a residence. The accessory uses permitted under this subsection
shall not include any uses that require pickup, delivery or supply
service by trucks or other commercial vehicles.
(3) Signs are a permitted accessory use in an MW-B District but only in
conjunction with a permitted principal use. Such signs must comply
with the provisions of Chapter 234, Signs, of the Hastings-on-
Hudson Code, and with the design guidelines set forth in the
standards for site plan approval in Subsection K(4) of this section.
(4) Public utilities, but not personal wire service facilities, except as
permitted by § 295-85 of this chapter. [Amended 2-17-1998 by
L.L. No. 1-1998]
(5) Swimming pool, provided that it complies with this chapter.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:586
(6) Roof-mounted solar panels. [Added 11-7-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
F. Density; height; floor area limits; building coverage; parking; setback
from river; shoreline. The following regulations shall be applicable to
any development in an MW-B District:
(1) Residential density. The maximum residential density shall be 31
dwelling units for every two acres of dry land area. Such maximum
residential density may be increased under the incentive density
provisions set forth below in Subsection I. For the purposes of the
preceding sentence, the dry land area of the subject property shall
not be deemed to include the area of any portion of the waterfront
esplanade constructed or to be constructed over water.
(2) Height of buildings.
(a) The following limitations on building height shall be applicable
in an MW-B District:
[1] Residential building: 65 feet above elevation 10
established in National Geodetic Vertical Datum (1929).
[2] Sports or health facility: 50 feet above elevation 10
established in National Geodetic Vertical Datum (1929).
[3] Mixed-use building devoted principally to nonresidential
uses other than a sports or health facility: 65 feet above
elevation 10 established under National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (1929).
[4] Building devoted to nonresidential uses other than sports
or health facility: 65 feet above elevation 10 established
under National Geodetic Vertical Datum (1929).
(b) Notwithstanding the height limitation set forth in Subsection
F(2)(a)[1] and [3] above, the height of residential buildings and
mixed-use buildings referred to in such subsections may be
increased by the Village Board up to a maximum of 103 feet
above elevation 10 established in National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (1929), through the issuance of one or more special use
permits, in each case following a public hearing held by the
Village Board on notice duly published and given as provided in
§ 295-143 of this chapter. In considering any application for
such a special use permit, the Village Board shall determine
whether view preservation and other guidelines set forth in
Subsection K(1) below have been sufficiently considered, and
shall take into account the impact that any proposed rooftop
elevator equipment will have, in combination with the impact
of the proposed building height, on important scenic views.
The Village Board shall require the applicant to submit such
computer-assisted design representations of the proposed
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:587
development as the Village Board may deem appropriate in
connection with such application. The Village Board may
attach such limitations and conditions to its approval of any
such special use permit as it deems necessary or appropriate
to assure that the purposes of the above-mentioned guidelines,
and the objectives of Subsection F(7) below in this section, are
achieved. The Village Board may require that such limitations
and conditions be incorporated in a declaration of covenants
or other instrument satisfactory to the Village Attorney to be
executed by the owner of the subject property and recorded in
the Westchester County Clerk's office, Land Records Division.
(c) Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this chapter, within
the MW-B District height shall be measured to the top of any
parapet, if the roof is flat, and to the highest point on the roof,
if the roof is of any other type. The height limitations of this
section shall not be applicable to chimneys and stair
bulkheads, provided that chimneys and stair bulkheads shall
be erected only to the height necessary for their safe and
effective operation and for compliance with applicable
governmental laws, rules, codes and regulations concerning
firesafety and building construction.
(d) Notwithstanding § 295-21A of this chapter, within the MW-B
District all water tanks and all building elevator, heating, airconditioning
and ventilation equipment and all antennas and
similar projections shall, except as provided in Subsection
F(2)(e) below, be subject to the height limitations of this
section and shall be enclosed and concealed within or beneath
buildings, and no such tanks, equipment, antennas or
projections (including any housings, casings, cupolas,
penthouses, belfries or enclosures therefor) shall be visible on
any roofs or other exterior surfaces of buildings, or on the
surface of any land area.
(e) Elevator equipment in a building having a mansard or pitched
roof may exceed the applicable maximum building height
permitted under this Subsection F if compliance with such
height limitation is physically impracticable, provided that the
applicant shall include in its concept plan submitted under
Subsection H below, and in any special use permit application
submitted under Subsection F(2)(b) above, a detailed
explanation of the necessity for the proposed projection above
the maximum permitted height, of the impracticability of
reducing such projection and of proposed methods of
moderating the visual impact of such projection. The
requirements of Subsection F(2)(d) above applicable to
concealment of equipment within buildings shall not be
applicable to any elevator equipment that projects above the
roofline of any building in an MW-B District above, but any
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:588
such equipment that extends above the roofline shall be
completely enclosed and covered in a rooftop penthouse that
shall be compatible in quality of materials and in appearance
with the roof and exterior of the building on which it is placed.
(3) Floor area ratio.
(a) The floor area ratio of all buildings and structures on the
subject property shall not exceed 0.725, except as permitted
under the incentive density provisions set forth below in
Subsection I below in this section.
(b) The floor area ratio devoted to sports or health club use shall
not exceed 0.065.
(c) The floor area ratio devoted to all nonresidential uses, other
than community space required under this chapter and sports
or health club use, shall not in the aggregate exceed 0.095. Not
more than 80% of such floor area ratio shall be devoted to
business or professional office use, or to any combination of
such office uses.
(d) The area of the subject property used in the calculation of the
foregoing floor area ratios shall consist only of dry land,
excluding the area of any portion of the waterfront esplanade,
required under Subsection G below, that is constructed or to be
constructed over water. The floor area used in such
calculations shall not include any gross floor area devoted to
parking that complies with the requirements of Subsection
F(6)(a) in this section.
(4) Open space. Not less than 50% of the total dry land area in any
MW-B District shall be devoted to public or private open space, or
to a combination thereof, maintained for active and passive
pedestrian use, consisting of park and esplanade areas, landscaped
plazas, gardens, sitting areas and similar types of areas, excluding
at-grade parking lots and public or private streets and roadways.
For the purposes of this section, the total dry land area shall not
include the area of any portion of the waterfront esplanade,
required under Subsection G below, that is constructed or to be
constructed over water.
(5) Building coverage. The maximum building coverage permitted in
an MW-B District shall be 25% of the total dry land area. For the
purposes of this section, building coverage shall not include
parking areas covered by private or public open spaces or plazas
that are suitably landscaped in accordance with Subsection K(2)
below, and total dry land area shall not include the area of any
portion of the waterfront esplanade, required under Subsection G
below, which is constructed or to be constructed over water.
(6) Off-street parking and loading.
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:589
(a) All parking spaces shall either be fully enclosed and concealed
beneath or within buildings, or shall be substantially screened
by the use of architectural materials or plantings.
(b) Uncovered, unenclosed parking spaces situated at grade or on
parking decks or platforms shall not comprise more than 15%
of the total number of parking spaces constructed in an MW-B
District, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board at
the time of site development plan approval under Subsection J
below.
(c) The following parking requirements are applicable within an
MW-B District, except where modified under the provisions of
§ 295-27. Size of parking spaces shall be as defined in § 295-29.
Permitted Use Minimum Off-Street Parking
Medical or dental office
(other than accessory to
residential use)
6 spaces for each 1,000 square feet
of floor area
Multifamily dwelling 1 1/4 space per studio/efficiency
unit; 1 1/2 space per 1 bedroom
unit; 1 3/4 space per 2 bedroom
unit; 2 spaces per 3 or more
bedroom unit
Multifamily dwelling
reserved for senior
citizen occupancy
2/3 space per unit
Office for business or
professional use (other
than a doctor's or
dentist's office or office
accessory to residential
use)
3 1/3 spaces for each 1,000 square
feet of floor area
Professional office or
office or home
occupation permitted in
a residential unit
In addition to space required for
the principal residential use and
other permitted uses, 4 spaces for
each doctor or dentist, 2 spaces for
each practitioner of any other
permitted occupation
Restaurant or other
place serving food and
drink
1 space per 100 square feet of
dining floor area or 1 space per 4
dining area seats, whichever is
greater
Retail or service
business
1 space per 250 square feet of
floor area
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:590
Permitted Use Minimum Off-Street Parking
Sports and health club 1 space per 2,000 square feet of
floor area of a tennis or racquetball
facility, and 1 space per 250 square
feet of floor area of other sports or
health club use, provided that at
the time of site development plan
approval the Village Board may
reduce either or both of such
parking requirements if it
determines that a reduction is
appropriate because of anticipated
shared or combined use of parking
by members or customers who
utilize the various types of sports
or health facilities included in the
club
(d) With respect to any building, structure or use for which the
required number of parking spaces is not specifically set forth
in the above schedule, the Planning Board in the course of site
plan review shall determine the number of off-street parking
spaces required, which number shall bear a reasonable
relation to the minimum off-street parking requirements for
specified uses as set forth in the above schedule.
(e) All off-street parking facilities serving principal and accessory
uses shall comply with §§ 295-22 through 295-38 of this
chapter. This entire Subsection F(6), including the foregoing
schedule setting forth the parking requirements applicable
within an MW-B District, supersedes the requirements set
forth in § 295-36 of this chapter.
(f) The provisions of § 295-38B of this chapter, pertaining to offstreet
loading, shall be applicable within the MW-B District,
provided that the loading spaces required for not more than
15,000 square feet of professional or business office gross floor
area may be combined with loading spaces required for
convenience retail and personal service stores, and that only
two loading spaces are required for convenience retail and
personal service stores containing not more than 15,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(7) Setback from river.
(a) All uses constructed on the subject property shall conform to a
setback from the shoreline of at least 100 feet, provided that
such minimum setback shall be 60 feet along the easterly
(inland) side of any cove or indentation existing as of the date
on which the petition for change of zone is submitted to the
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:591
Village Board. No buildings, structures or visible equipment
[except for outdoor recreation equipment situated in private
open space areas within such setback, and except for
equipment included in public facilities required under
Subsection G(1), (2) and (5) below] shall be permitted in the
setback area, and no projection from a building or structure
shall be permitted in such setback area, except for balconies
at least 10 feet above grade and as provided in § 295-20B(1)
through (3), provided that exceptions to the restrictions set
forth above in this sentence may be permitted by the Planning
Board, as part of the site development plan review process, for
a restaurant, water-dependent uses, fast-food booths, kiosks
or gazebos or a sports and health club constructed or
reconstructed substantially on the site of an existing sports or
health facility.
(b) In order to eliminate or reduce obstruction of views of the
Hudson River and its New Jersey shore and of views north and
south along the Hudson River, and in order to prevent the
placement of taller buildings in excessively close proximity to
the waterfront esplanade required under Subsection G(1)
below, the Village Board may require, as a condition of any
change of zone to MW-B designation, that the foregoing onehundred-
foot setback be increased by up to 250 additional feet
and that the foregoing sixty-foot setback be increased up to
200 additional feet, in portions of the subject property situated
between the shoreline and any building or vertical surface of a
building having a proposed height in excess of 35 feet above
elevation 10 established in National Geodetic Datum (1929).
(8) Maximum floor area of personal service stores, banks, convenience
retail stores and restaurants. The gross floor area of personal
service stores, convenience retail stores, banks and automatic
teller machine facilities constructed in an MW-B District, excluding
storage areas situated below such stores or facilities in basements
or in portions of structures that are used primarily for parking and
which comply with Subsection F(6)(a) of this section, shall not
exceed 15,000 square feet. The gross floor area of all restaurant
uses constructed in an MW-B District in the aggregate shall not
exceed 7,500 square feet.
(9) Shoreline.
(a) With respect to any upland or landfill portion of a subject
property that abuts decking in place over the Hudson River as
of July 1, 1989, the term "shoreline" means the westernmost
edge of such decking, provided that if the concept plan
submitted pursuant to Subsection H(1) below indicates that
the applicant proposes to remove a portion of such decking
without replacing the same, then for such area of the subject
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:592
property the shoreline shall be deemed to be the westernmost
edge of the remaining decking.
(b) With respect to any upland, landfill or submerged portion of a
subject property lying inland (easterly) from vertical timber
piles which were in place in the Hudson River as of July 1,
1989, and which formerly were fender piles or which formerly
supported decking that is no longer in place, the term
"shoreline" means a line projected across the westernmost
edge of the westernmost pilings, along a northerly-southerly
axis, provided that if the concept plan submitted pursuant to
Subsection H(1) below indicates that the applicant does not
intend to construct new decking over all of such pilings, then
for such area of the subject property the shoreline shall be
deemed to be the westerly edge of the development actually
proposed by such applicant.
(c) With respect to any other portion of a property, the term
"shoreline" means either:
[1] The westernmost edge of the top of any retaining wall or
bulkhead that abuts such portion of the subject property
and which was in place in the Hudson River as of July 1,
1989; or
[2] In the absence of any such retaining wall or bulkhead, the
mean high water line of the Hudson River along the
riverbank of such portion of the subject property.
(d) The provisions of Subsection F(9)(c) above also shall be
applicable to any upland or landfill portion of the subject
property which lies inland (easterly) from existing decking or
existing vertical deck pilings, but which, under the concept
plan submitted under Subsection H(1) below, will not abut any
new or existing decking.
(e) If the subject property contains coves or inlets, then the term
"shoreline" shall include the water edge of any new decking,
retaining walls or bulkheads proposed to be constructed along
the banks of such coves or inlets. If no new or replacement
decking, retaining walls or bulkheads are proposed to be
constructed or replaced along any bank of such cove or inlet,
then the term "shoreline" shall apply to the water edge of any
existing decking, retaining wall or bulkhead situated on such
bank. If no decking, retaining wall or bulkhead exists along the
bank of a cove or inlet, and no new decking, retaining wall or
bulkhead is proposed to be constructed or replaced along such
bank, then the shoreline along such bank shall be the mean
high waterline along such bank.
G. Required benefits, amenities and mitigation measures.
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:593
(1) Waterfront esplanade.
(a) The owner of the subject property shall construct, at no cost to
the Village, along the entire length of the shoreline and
abutting the shoreline a public esplanade which shall contain a
pedestrian walkway or pathway having an average width of not
less than 25 feet. The waterfront esplanade shall be at least 25
feet wide along at least 80% of its length, and shall not be less
than 15 feet wide at any point. The waterfront esplanade shall
consist principally of paved or wood surfaces, but shall also
include landscaped areas, sitting areas, benches, gazebos and
suitable lighting facilities. The waterfront esplanade shall
conform to the applicable design standards set forth in
Subsection K below.
(b) If the development is constructed in phases or stages, then the
portion of the waterfront esplanade extending along and
abutting the entire length of the shoreline opposite any part of
each such phase or stage shall be constructed as part of such
phase or stage. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this
Subsection G(1), the waterfront esplanade may be situated
inland from the shoreline in the immediate vicinity of the ramp
included in the public boat-launching facility required under
Subsection G(5) below, but only to the extent necessary to
permit the safe and efficient operation of such ramp.
(c) At the time of enactment by the Village Board of an amendment
to the Zoning Map116 changing the zoning district classification
of the subject property to MW-B, there shall be dedicated to
the Village, at no cost to the Village, a perpetual surface
easement for the purpose of assuring public access to and
public use and enjoyment of the waterfront esplanade in its
entirety. Such easement, or accompanying recorded
agreement satisfactory in form and substance to the Village
Attorney, also shall provide for the maintenance and repair of
the waterfront esplanade by the owner of the subject property,
its successors and assigns in perpetuity and shall provide that
if the owner of the subject property or its successors or assigns
fail to perform such maintenance and repair work, then the
Village shall have the right to perform such work and recover
its costs incurred for such work from the owner, its successors
or assigns. The easement also shall give the Village the right to
construct or complete construction of the waterfront
esplanade in the event of failure by the owner, its successors or
assigns to do so.
(d) At the time of the aforesaid dedication, the Village Board may
require that the owner provide, or agree to provide at a later
specified time, bonds, letters of credit, deposits or other
116. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:594
security for the performance of the foregoing construction,
maintenance and repair obligations, satisfactory in form and
substance to the Village Attorney, provided that such security
instruments or agreement shall take into account the phases or
stages in which the waterfront esplanade is to be constructed.
The easement shall recognize the Village's authority to
establish regulations for the use of the waterfront esplanade,
including, without limitation, times of opening and closing. The
easement also shall require the connection of the waterfront
esplanade easement area and any esplanade improvements
thereon to any similar abutting easement area and
improvements then existing or subsequently created in any
abutting property in an MW-A or MW-B District. The terms of
such easement and the detailed conditions of such dedication
shall be subject to approval by the Village Board, and shall
be set forth in one or more instruments satisfactory to the
Village Attorney and executed by the owner in proper form
for recording in the Westchester County Clerk's office, Land
Records Division.
(2) Public park.
(a) The owner of the subject property shall construct thereon, at
no cost to the Village, a park having a dry land area
constituting not less than 18% of the entire dry land area of the
subject property, provided that, for purposes of the preceding
sentence, the dry land area of the subject property shall not be
deemed to include the area of any portion of the waterfront
esplanade constructed or to be constructed over water, and the
area of the waterfront esplanade shall be excluded from the
dry land area of the park, except that such exclusion shall not
apply to any portion of the waterfront esplanade that abuts or
extends into the proposed park and that consists of dry land
area in excess of the area determined by multiplying the length
of the waterfront esplanade required under Subsection G(1)
above by the minimum average width required under such
Subsection G(1). The park may consist of a single contiguous
area or of two or more noncontiguous areas linked by the
waterfront esplanade.
(b) The park shall be devoted primarily to uses such as sitting,
strolling, picnic use, children's playground and other passive
recreation uses. Not less than 50% of the area of such park
shall consist of unpaved, planted open space. The remaining
area of the park may contain walkways, playgrounds,
pedestrian plazas and similar recreation or pedestrian
improvements that shall be open to the air, and fast-food
booths or kiosks approved by the Planning Board under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:595
(c) The park shall have convenient and readily visible access from
a public street or from a public open space over which the
public shall have a right of pedestrian access, assured by the
easement to be granted to the Village as described below in
this Subsection G(2). The park shall abut and provide access to
the waterfront esplanade required under Subsection G(1)
above and shall conform to the applicable design standards set
forth in Subsection K below.
(d) If the development is constructed in phases or stages, then the
portion of the park between the waterfront esplanade and any
part of each such phase or stage, as shown on the concept plan
included in any petition approved by the Village Board under
Subsection H(4) below, shall be constructed as part of such
phase or stage.
(e) At the time of enactment by the Village Board of an amendment
to the Zoning Map changing the zoning district classification of
the subject property to MW-B, there shall be dedicated to the
Village, at no cost to the Village, a perpetual surface easement
for the purpose of assuring public access to and public use and
enjoyment of the park in its entirety. Such easement also shall
provide for the maintenance and repair of the park by the
owner of the subject property, its successors and assigns in
perpetuity, and shall give the Village the right to construct or
complete construction of the park and to perform such
maintenance and repair work in the event of failure by the
owner or its successors and assigns to do so. Such easement
also shall acknowledge the Village's authority and
responsibility to establish regulations for the use of the park,
including, without limitation, times of opening and closing. The
terms of such easement and the detailed conditions of such
dedication shall be subject to approval by the Village Board.
The provisions of Subsection G(1) of this chapter applicable to
performance of work by the Village, recovery of Village costs,
security for performance and completion of construction,
maintenance and repair work, and the form and execution of
instruments in connection with the waterfront esplanade, also
shall be applicable in connection with the park.
(3) Long-term major maintenance and repair of bulkheads, decks,
pilings and rip-rap slopes.
(a) At the time of enactment by the Village Board of an amendment
to the Zoning Map117 changing the zoning district classification
of the subject property to MW-B, there shall be dedicated to
the Village, at no cost to the Village, a perpetual easement
granting to the Village efficient access to any bulkheads,
platforms, rip-rap slopes, decking and support pilings for
117. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:596
decking beneath or adjacent to the waterfront esplanade along
the entire length of the shoreline of the subject property,
together with the right to maintain, repair and replace such
bulkheads, platforms, rip-rap slopes, decking and support
pilings for decking. The terms of such easement and the
detailed conditions of such dedication shall be subject to
approval by the Village Board, and shall be set forth in one
or more instruments satisfactory to the Village Attorney and
executed by the owner in proper form for recording in the
Westchester County Clerk's office, Land Records Division.
(b) The owner shall submit to the Village Board, as part of the
concept plan required under Subsection H(1) below, a detailed,
itemized estimate of the costs of the major long-term major
maintenance, repair and replacement, on an ongoing basis, of
such bulkheads, platforms, rip-rap slopes, decking and support
pilings for decking, and for regular inspections thereof, and for
maintaining insurance thereon as provided in Subsection
G(3)(f) below. In connection with its review of the concept plan,
the Village Board shall review such cost estimate with the
assistance of such expert consultants as the Village shall
engage for such purpose. The owner shall reimburse the
Village for any costs incurred by the Village for payment of fees
and expenses of such consultants.
(c) At the time of the first issuance by the Village of a temporary
certificate of occupancy for any phase of the proposed
development or for any portion of such phase, the owner shall
be required to contribute to a fund established by the Village a
lump sum dollar amount which, in combination with interest
earned thereon compounded and added to the principal of such
fund, will be sufficient to cover, on an ongoing basis, the longterm
major repair and maintenance cost for bulkheads,
platforms, rip-rap slopes, decking and support pilings for
decking along the riverfront adjacent to such development
phase, and along other portions of the riverfront to the extent
necessary for the protection of such facilities adjacent to such
development phase. Such contributed moneys and retained
interest shall be held by the Village in a separate interestbearing
account to be used by the Village for the purposes of
this Subsection G(3), or disbursed by the Village (subject to
appropriate controls) to any other entity which performs longterm
major maintenance and repair work as described above.
The requirements of this Subsection G(3) shall be included in
the conditions established by the Village Board for any change
of zone to MW-B designation.
(d) Prior to the issuance of any building, excavation or utility
permit for the proposed development or any phase or stage
thereof, the owner shall deliver to the Village, as security for
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:597
the payment required under Subsection G(3)(b) above with
respect to such phase or stage, a clean, unconditional,
irrevocable letter of credit in the aggregate amount which the
Village Board estimates will be payable by the owner under
Subsection G(3)(c) above over the entire construction period
of the proposed development. Such letter of credit, and any
extension or renewal thereof, shall include provisions
authorizing the Village to draw the full amount thereof upon
delivering to the issuer a certification that the letter of credit
has not been extended or renewed on the foregoing terms and
conditions at least 30 days prior to its date of expiration, or
upon delivering to the issuer a certification that the owner has
not made any contribution required hereunder when required
to do so. The form and substance of such letter of credit, and
any extension or renewal thereof, shall be subject to approval
by the Village Attorney.
(e) If, in order to provide funds to assure the long-term safety and
proper structural support of the waterfront esplanade and park
required under Subsection G(1) and (2) above, a local benefit
assessment area is established by the Village pursuant to the
provisions of the Village Law or Municipal Home Rule Law of
the State of New York, or under any other state legislation of
general or special applicability, then the Village shall continue
to maintain the separate Village account established under
Subsection G(3)(c) above, but funds previously collected and
accumulated in such account will be considered in determining
the amount of financing to be raised through the local benefit
assessment. The annual charge assessed by the Village against
a property or properties benefited by the continued existence
and safety of the waterfront esplanade and park will be based
on the degree of such benefit conferred upon that property or
properties as determined by the Village Board in accordance
with applicable law.
(f) Moneys held in the separate Village account referred to in
Subsection G(3)(c) above may be used by the Village to pay the
cost of maintaining liability and casualty insurance and other
types of insurance reasonably required by the Village in
amounts reasonably satisfactory to the Village, with respect to
the bulkheads, platforms, rip-rap slopes, decking and support
pilings for decking referred to above in this section.
(g) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter, the
owner, its successors and assigns shall be responsible for
regular, ordinary maintenance, repair and inspection of
bulkheads, platforms, rip rap slopes, decking and support
pilings for decking, and moneys held in the separate Village
account referred to in Subsection G(3)(c) above shall not be
available for such purpose.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:598
(4) Initial repair or replacement of bulkheads, platforms, rip-rap
slopes, decking and support pilings for decking.
(a) At the time of enactment by the Village Board of an amendment
to the Zoning Map changing the zoning district classification of
any property to MW-B, the Village Board may require, as a
condition of such amendment, that the owner repair or replace,
as part of the proposed development and at no cost to the
Village, deteriorated bulkheads, platforms, rip-rap slopes,
decking and support pilings for decking along the entire length
of the Hudson River waterfront within the subject property.
(b) At the time of site development plan approval for the proposed
development or for any phase thereof, or the commencement
of any repair or replacement work referred to in Subsection
G(4)(a) above, whichever occurs earlier, the owner of the
subject property also shall deliver to the Village an instrument,
duly executed and in proper form for recording in the
Westchester County Clerk's office, Land Records Division,
satisfactory in form and substance to the Village Attorney,
granting to the Village the right to enter upon the subject
property and to perform or complete thereon the repair and
replacement of bulkheads, platforms, rip-rap slopes, decking
and support pilings for decking along all or any portion of the
Hudson River waterfront within the subject property, if the
owner fails to perform or complete such repair or replacement
work as part of the proposed development within the time
period specified in the easement instrument.
(c) Prior to the issuance of any building, excavation or utility
permit for the first phase of the proposed development, or the
commencement of such repair or replacement work, whichever
is earlier, the owner shall deliver to the Village, as security for
the performance of such repair or replacement work, a clean,
unconditional, irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the
estimated cost, as determined by the Village, of such repair or
replacement work to be performed along the entire Hudson
River waterfront of the subject property. Such letter of credit,
and any extension or renewal thereof, shall include provisions
authorizing the Village to draw the full amount thereof upon
delivering to the issuer a certification that the letter of credit
has not been extended or renewed on the foregoing terms and
conditions within at least 30 days prior to its date of expiration,
or upon delivering to the issuer a certification that such repair
and replacement work has not been performed and completed
in a timely manner. The amount of such letter of credit shall be
subject to reduction as such repair and replacement work
progresses, but at all times shall be sufficient to cover the cost
of the uncompleted portion of such work. The form and
substance of such letter of credit, and the form and substance
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:599
of any accompanying agreement concerning such letter of
credit, and any extension or renewal thereof, shall be subject
to approval by the Village Attorney. The requirements of
Subsection G(3) above pertaining to security for funds to be
contributed, and the requirements of this Subsection G(4)(c),
may be augmented, extended or otherwise modified by the
Village Board in a manner consistent with the purposes of such
requirements.
(5) Public boat-launching facility. The owner of the subject property
shall construct and shall dedicate to the Village, through the
granting of a perpetual surface easement in the manner provided in
Subsection G(1) and (2) above, and at no cost to the Village, an
appropriately equipped and accessible boat-launching facility for
use by the Village as a public facility. The site of such facility shall
encompass not less than one acre and shall be contiguous with the
public park required under Subsection G(2) above. The public boatlaunching
facility shall include, and the easement shall require,
vehicular and pedestrian routes to and from such facility,
landscaped areas and parking spaces sufficient to serve such
facility. Such parking spaces shall be reserved exclusively for
persons visiting or using such facility, provided that, at the
discretion of the Village Board, some or all of such spaces may be
designated for use by visitors to the public park on a part-time or
permanent basis. Such easement shall contain provisions
recognizing the Village's authority to establish and enforce
regulations for the use of the boat-launching facility, including,
without limitation, times of opening and closing and restrictions on
eligibility of users.
(6) Neighborhood services. In recognition of the level of residential
density permitted in an MW-B District and in order to provide for
the safety and convenience of residents in an MW-B District and to
prevent undue congestion in the commercial center of the Village,
the Village Board may require, as a condition of rezoning for MW-B
designation, that not less than 1,000 square feet of floor area
devoted to personal service stores and convenience retail stores
shall be required for every 40 dwelling units constructed in such
district.
(7) Emergency access. As a condition of changing the zoning district
classification of any property to MW-B designation, the Village
Board shall require that the proposed development include or be
connected to one or more on-site or off-site secondary emergency
access routes.
(8) Community space. As a condition of changing the zoning district
classification of any property to MW-B designation, the Village
Board may require that the proposed development include not less
than 5,000 square feet of indoor community space suitable for
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:600
social, civic, educational and cultural meetings and activities, for
use by Village residents.
(9) Other conditions. The Village Board may impose such other
reasonable conditions as it deems necessary in furtherance of
public health, safety and welfare, including, without limitation,
conditions implementing mitigation measures set forth in findings
adopted by the lead agency for environmental review of the
proposed rezoning and related actions in accordance with Title 8 of
the Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York.
Such conditions may include requirements that the owner of the
subject property construct or contribute to the Village funds to be
used for construction by the Village of improvements intended to
mitigate the projected impacts of the proposed rezoning, including,
without limitation, the improvements of nearby municipal facilities
as may be necessary to avoid adverse traffic, safety, noise and air
quality conditions in the vicinity of such facilities. Such conditions
also may include requirements for funding or refunding from,
without limitation, the proceeds of grants, insurance payments,
awards for damages in environmental litigation or other
environmental proceedings, received or to be received by the
applicant or the Village, for costs incurred or proposed to be
incurred by the applicant or the Village for environmental
remediation or mitigation measures performed or provided on
waterfront lands adjacent to the subject property if the Village
Board shall determine that such off-site work will mitigate the
environmental impacts of the development of the subject property,
or alleviate environmental conditions on the adjacent property that
may adversely affect the safe and appropriate development of the
subject property.
(10) Recorded covenants; easements.
(a) In addition to any instruments referred to in Subsection G(1)
through (9) above in this chapter, the Village Board may
require as a condition of rezoning for MW-B use that any
requirements or conditions set forth in any of such subsections
shall be incorporated and defined in more specific detail in one
or more declarations of covenants or similar instrument
satisfactory to the Village Attorney executed by the owner of
the subject property and recorded in the Westchester County
Clerk's office, Land Records Division.
(b) Easements, covenants, declarations or agreements required to
be recorded under this chapter shall not be subject or
subordinate to any liens, mortgages or other encumbrances.
Such prohibition shall be implemented in such manner as shall
be acceptable to the Village Attorney.
H. Procedure for rezoning to Marine Waterfront-B designation. Upon the
petition of an owner of property that meets the eligibility standards set
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:601
forth in Subsection B above, the Village Board may change the zoning
district classification of such property to MW-B designation by enacting
an amendment to the Zoning Map,118 in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 295-157 of this chapter. The provisions of this
section shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the Village Board
to make such change on its own initiative, in accordance with such
procedures set forth in § 295-157.
(1) Petition for zoning change. Petition for the rezoning of property to
MW-B designation shall be made to the Village Board. The petition
shall be accompanied by and shall include and incorporate a
concept plan consisting of drawings, illustrations and narrative
describing the petitioner's proposed development of the entire
property for which rezoning is requested. All drawings and
illustrations included in the concept plan shall be drawn to scale,
but need not have the precision of a finished engineering drawing
or a site plan. The concept plan shall include all items listed below:
(a) An outline of the road system and pedestrian walkways
including any extension of roads which must conform to all
Village requirements and any proposed emergency access
routes.
(b) Delineation of the areas to be devoted to specific uses,
indicating the type and number of dwelling units and bedrooms
of residential uses; the type and floor area of nonresidential
uses; proposed parking facilities, including the capacity and
the vehicular access features of such parking facilities; and the
location, height, design concept and other principal
characteristics of all proposed buildings and structures.
(c) Description of proposed park, esplanade and other recreation
facilities and open spaces and proposed provisions for the longterm
and short-term maintenance of such facilities and project
infrastructure.
(d) An illustrative site plan indicating the physical elements of the
proposed development referred to in Subsection H(1)(a), (b)
and (c) above, and proposed visual and acoustical screening,
including, without limitation, proposed treatment of plazas,
decks, platforms and roofs or parking structures.
(e) The proposed water, storm and sanitary sewer systems and
how they are proposed to be connected to the system of
adjoining areas.
(f) Environmental characteristics of the property, including
topography, areas of slope in excess of 20%, soils, rock
outcrops, streams, swamps, lakes, ponds and other wetlands
118. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:602
and all proposed alterations of said environmental
characteristics.
(g) Estimates of the school-age population, and the guidelines and
data on which the estimates are based.
(h) Description of dwelling units to be reserved for senior citizen
households, including the number, size, locations and
amenities of such dwelling units.
(i) Estimates of peak-hour traffic generation derived from the
proposed development and its relation to surrounding roads
and intersections, including methods proposed for alleviating
traffic impacts, including those caused by construction
activities.
(j) If the development is to be staged or phased, a clear indication
of the proposed timing of each stage or phase and the
improvements included therein.
(k) Description of any off-site facilities or improvements to be
provided by the applicant.
(l) Perspective drawings and narrative indicating the visual
impact of the proposed development as viewed from the
Hudson River and higher elevations inland of the subject
property, including impacts on existing view corridors.
(m) Survey map prepared by a New York licensed surveyor
depicting and describing by metes and bounds the shoreline of
the subject property in accordance with the definition of
"shoreline" set forth in Subsection F(9) of this section.
(n) Description and samples of exterior construction and paving
materials.
(o) Evidence of how the proposed zoning for MW-B designation
would accomplish the purposes set forth in Subsection A and
satisfy the requirements of Subsection G above.
(p) Explanation required under Subsection F(2)(e) above,
pertaining to rooftop elevator equipment, and a description of
the proposed method of enclosing any such equipment.
(q) A preliminary statement of how the applicant intends to
comply with the architectural and landscaping guidelines set
forth in Subsection K(1) and (2) of this section.
(r) Such other pertinent materials, including but not limited to
computer-assisted design representations and a statement of
the manner in which environmental mitigation measures are to
be implemented, as the Village Board shall require in
connection with its review of the application.
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:603
(2) Environmental procedures.
(a) All proceedings conducted under Subsections H and J shall
comply with all applicable requirements of the New York State
Environmental Quality Review Act119 and regulations
promulgated thereunder. If it is determined by a lead agency
designated under such Act and regulations that a draft
environmental impact statement must be prepared in
connection with any petition or application hereunder, then
such petition or application shall not be deemed to be complete
until such draft environmental impact statement has been
accepted as complete by such lead agency.
(b) The Village Board, in its discretion, may allow omission from
the concept plan of any information, plan or illustration
required under Subsection H(1) above, if such information,
plan or illustration is set forth, at pages indicated by the
petitioner, in a draft environmental impact statement that has
been prepared by the petitioner in compliance with the New
York State Environmental Quality Review Act either in
response to a requirement of the lead agency for
environmental review of the proposed rezoning or on the
petitioner's own initiative, and which is accepted as complete
by the lead agency, provided that, if a final environmental
impact statement has been accepted as complete by such lead
agency prior to submission of the petition, then the
environmental impact statement referred to above in this
subsection shall be deemed to be such final environmental
impact statement.
(c) If the Village Board or any other governmental entity
determines that the subject property contains chemical
contamination of such type or in such concentration as to
require further investigation and cleanup activities, then the
Village Board shall require, at the time of remapping the
subject property for MW-B designation, evidence satisfactory
to the Village Attorney that the petitioner has executed a
consent order or consent decree in form issued by the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, and
that such order or decree contains a remediation program
satisfactory to the Village Board.
(3) Fees. Every petition shall be accompanied by a fee in such amount
as the Village Board may from time to time determine120 to help
defray the costs of processing the application. The petitioner also
shall be required to bear the reasonable expense of any technical
assistance that the Village deems necessary to assist in the review
of technical aspects of the application.
119. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law Article 8.
120. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:604
(4) Decision of Village Board.
(a) The Village Board shall refer the petition with all
accompanying documents and materials required under
Subsection H(1) above to the Planning Board for a report and
recommendation. The Planning Board, with the assistance of
the Architectural Review Board and such other Village boards,
departments or officials as it shall deem appropriate, shall
review the petition and all related documents and materials
and shall render a report to the Village Board. The Planning
Board may, at its discretion, recommend conditions or
improvements in the concept plan for review by the Village
Board in its recommendation as to the appropriateness of the
requested rezoning.
(b) Upon receipt of a report from the Planning Board, the Village
Board shall set a date for and conduct a public hearing in
accordance with § 295-157C of this chapter for the purpose of
considering an amendment to the Zoning Map121 to change the
zoning district classification of the subject property to MW-B
designation. The Village Board may attach such conditions as
are reasonably necessary or appropriate to assure that the
goals, objectives, requirements and standards of the MW-B
District classification, including, without limitation, those set
forth in Subsection G above, are met and achieved. The Village
Board may require that any or all of such conditions be
incorporated in a covenant or covenants satisfactory to the
Village Attorney and executed by the owner of the subject
property and recorded in the Westchester County Clerk's
office, Land Records Division. In the event that a covenant or
portion of a covenant is held to be unenforceable, the validity
or enforceability of the remaining portion of such covenant or
other covenants shall not be affected. If approved by the
Village Board, the zoning amendment, with conditions, if any,
shall be enacted by the Village Board as an amendment to the
Zoning Map in accordance with the procedures set forth in
§ 295-157 of this chapter and such regulations as the Village
has adopted or may in the future adopt. Each newly created
MW-B District shall be considered a separate MW-B District for
the purposes of this chapter, regardless of whether or not it is
located adjacent to another MW-B District.
I. Incentive density.
(1) General provisions.
(a) The Village Board has determined that, because of their size
and riverfront location, properties eligible for MW-B
designation encompass a major portion of the Village's
121. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:605
development potential, that such properties represent the
most significant opportunity to encourage the development of
middle-income and senior citizen dwelling units in the Village
and thereby achieve certain of the public purposes of the MWB
District classification; and that, therefore, to the extent that
the development of large riverfront properties fails to achieve
such public purpose, the opportunity to achieve such purpose
will be reduced.
(b) The Village Board has determined that, in order to achieve
additional real property tax revenues needed to offset
additional costs of public services that may result from the
scale of development permitted in an MW-B District, it is
appropriate to encourage the construction in such district of
dwelling units that will be owned in fee simple.
(c) The Village Board has determined that, in order to encourage
the provision of business office uses that are conducive to longterm
support by the occupants thereof for public and
community facilities and for amenities in an MW-B District; the
establishment of flexible employee work hours and other
traffic-control measures resulting in reduced traffic
congestion; and reduction of traffic resulting from delivery,
trash removal and other services to occupants, it is appropriate
to provide an incentive for the provision in such district of
business office facilities occupied principally by a single
tenant, owner-occupant or other single occupant.
(d) In order to provide an incentive that will encourage the
development of middle-income dwelling units, senior citizen
dwelling units or dwelling units that are to be owned in fee
simple, or a combination of such types of dwelling units, the
Village Board may allow, by special use permit and following a
public hearing held on notice duly published and given as
provided in § 295-143 of this chapter, an increased residential
density and floor area ratio as set forth in Subsection I(3)
below, subject to the provision of such types of dwelling units
as public benefit features, as more fully set forth in Subsection
I(2) and (3) below.
(e) In order to provide an incentive that will encourage the
provision of business office facilities that are to be occupied
principally by a single tenant, owner-occupant or other single
occupant, the Village Board may allow, by special use permit
and following a public hearing held on notice duly published
and given as provided in § 295-143 of this chapter, an
increased floor area ratio for business and professional office
use as more fully set forth in Subsection I(2) and (3) below.
(f) The Village Board also may, in its discretion, choose not to
allow any incentive increase in an MW-B District. Action by the
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:606
Village Board on an application for any such increase shall be
taken only after review of the proposed public benefit features
by the Planning Board and submission of a report and
recommendation by said Board to the Village Board. Final
site plan approval by the Planning Board shall not occur until
after the special use permit determination by the Village Board
with respect to any proposed incentive density. The Village
Board may, in its discretion, conduct such special use permit
procedures concurrently with the procedures for change of
zone set forth above in this chapter. The Village Board may
require that the applicant execute a declaration or agreement,
to be recorded in the Westchester County Clerk's office, Land
Records Division, assuring the permanency of the public
feature or features for which incentive density is approved.
Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter, and
in order to preserve the opportunity to review the potential
density of development in the light of changing demographic,
economic and development conditions, the right to apply for a
special use permit allowing incentive density with respect to
a property in an MW-B District shall expire one year following
the date of action by the Village Board changing the zoning
district classification of such property to MW-B designation.
(2) Public benefit features. The public benefit features for which
incentive density increases may be granted in an MW-B District are
set forth in Subsection I(2)(a), (b) and (c) below:
(a) Middle-income dwelling units.
[1] The provision of dwelling units limited as to price or
rental, and limited in occupancy to middle-income families,
shall constitute a public benefit feature under this
Subsection I(2). Such dwelling units may be provided in or
outside of the subject property, and must be made
available to Village of Hastings-on-Hudson residents on a
first-priority basis. A family shall be considered a middleincome
family if its aggregate income, including the total
of all current annual income of all family members from
any source whatsoever at the time of application, but
excluding the earnings of working minors (under 21 years
of age) attending school full time, shall not exceed the
following multiple of the median annual wages paid by the
Village to all of its full-time employees during the
preceding calendar year:
Size of Family
Multiple of Median Annual
Wages
1-person family 1.1
2-person family 1.4
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:607
Size of Family
Multiple of Median Annual
Wages
3-person family 1.7
4-person family 1.8
5-person family 2.0
6-person family 2.2
7-person family 2.4
8-or-more-person family 2.5
[2] For property or other investments that are not returning
measurable income (excluding normal household personal
possessions), a yearly income of 8% of the fair market
value of the investment shall be included in the family's
aggregate income. A "middle-income dwelling unit" shall
be defined as a unit having a monthly rent which, after
excluding utilities (gas, oil, electricity, water and sewage)
does not exceed 1.75% of the applicable maximum annual
family income determined under the preceding sentence;
or a unit having a gross sale price not exceeding two times
such income. Upon subsequent resale or re-rental, such
dwelling units shall remain subject to the limitations and
requirements of this Subsection I(2)(a), or to such other or
additional requirements as the Village Board may establish
as a condition of the special permit, to assure that the
objectives of this Subsection I(2)(a) are achieved in a
permanent manner. At the time of granting any special use
permit in connection with dwelling units limited in
occupancy to middle-income families, the Village Board
may impose conditions providing, without limitation, for
variation by the Village Board of any of the foregoing
income, rental or price levels by up to 15% to reflect
updated demographic, census or marketing data; or
detailed eligibility rules supplementing the provisions of
this Subsection I(2)(a) as shall be necessary and
appropriate in order to implement and achieve the
purposes of such provisions.
(b) The provision of dwelling units limited in occupancy to senior
citizen households, with priority for Hastings-on-Hudson
residents, also shall constitute a public benefit feature under
this Subsection I(2). Such dwelling units shall be suitable for
senior citizen occupancy, and shall remain subject to the
limitations and requirements of this Subsection I(2)(b), or to
such other or additional requirements as the Village Board may
establish as a condition of the special use permit, to assure that
the objectives of this subsection I(2)(b) are achieved in a
permanent manner. In considering such suitability, the Village
Board shall take into account the nature and extent of special
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:608
features provided for senior citizen use both within the
individual dwelling units and in the development as a whole,
the availability of a variety of unit sizes, the location of such
units within the development and in relation to ease of access
to convenience retail and personal service stores, the proposed
pricing of the senior citizen units and the effectiveness and
fairness of the proposed priority arrangement for Hastings-on-
Hudson residents. For the purposes of this section, a "senior
citizen household" is defined as a household in which at least
one member residing or proposing to reside in a reserved
dwelling unit has attained the age of 65 years or more on the
date that such household initially occupies the dwelling unit.
At the time of granting any special use permit in connection
with dwelling units limited in occupancy to senior citizen
households, the Village Board may impose conditions providing
for more detailed eligibility rules supplementing the provisions
of this Subsection I(2)(b) as shall be necessary and appropriate
in order to implement and achieve the purposes of such
provisions.
(c) The provision of more than 85 dwelling units (including but not
limited to townhouses) intended to be owned in fee simple shall
constitute a public benefit feature under this Subsection I(2).
Such units shall remain subject to the limitations of this
Subsection I(2)(c), or to such other or additional requirements
as the Village Board may establish as a condition of the special
permit, to assure that the objectives of this Subsection I(2)(c)
are achieved in a permanent manner.
(d) The provision of business office facilities in which not less than
65% of the permitted gross floor area, as the same may be
increased under this Subsection I(2) and (3) below, is to be
occupied by a single tenant, owner-occupant or other single
occupant shall constitute a public benefit feature under this
Subsection I(2). Such office facilities shall remain subject to
the limitations of this Subsection I(2)(d), and to such other or
additional requirements as the Village Board may establish as
a condition of the special use permit, to assure, so far as is
practicable, that the objectives of this Subsection I(2)(d) are
achieved on a long-term basis.
(3) Amount of increase.
(a) For the provision of public benefits described in Subsection
I(2)(a), (b) or (c) above, or for the provision of a combination of
such public benefits, the number of permitted dwelling units
determined under Subsection F(1) above may be increased by
up to an additional 16 1/2% in the aggregate, and the
maximum floor area ratio set forth in Subsection F(3)(a) above
[excluding any increase thereof under Subsection I(3)(b)
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:609
below] may be increased by up to an additional 13% in the
aggregate.
(b) For the provision of public benefits described in Subsection
I(2)(d) above, the maximum floor area ratio set forth in
Subsection F(3)(c) of this section may be increased by an
additional 12%, provided that all of such increase shall be used
for business office facilities occupied as described in said
Subsection I(2)(d). If a twelve-percent increase in floor area
ratio is approved under the preceding sentence, then the
maximum floor area ratio set forth in Subsection F(3)(a) of this
section, as the same may be increased under Subsection I(3)(a)
above in this section, shall be increased to the extent necessary
to reflect the additional permitted floor area resulting from
such twelve-percent increase.
(4) General criteria for incentive density. In determining the specific
amount of density incentive increase that may be granted, if any,
the Village Board shall take into consideration the conditions and
standards set forth in § 295-87 and the following:
(a) The number, extent and combination of public benefit features
to be provided.
(b) The need for the provision of such public benefits by the
applicant, at that time, and the relative merits of alternative
means of obtaining such benefits then available to the Village.
(c) The degree of compatibility of such public benefit features with
other goals, objectives, limitations, standards and
requirements and guidelines set forth in this chapter with
respect to development in an MW-B District.
(d) The quality and variety of design of the proposed public benefit
features, and assurances of quality of construction of the
dwelling units, as determined by the Planning Board in the
course of its review under Subsection K below.
(e) The amount of incentive density increase necessary to more
than offset the cost or economic penalty of providing the public
benefit features, thereby creating the incentive for providing
such features.
(f) With respect to middle-income or senior citizen dwelling units,
the effectiveness and fairness of the procedure for determining
eligibility for occupancy of such dwelling units and the
proposed priority arrangement for Village residents.
(g) The effectiveness of legal mechanisms for assuring that the
reservation of dwelling units for their public benefit purpose
will be permanent.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:610
(h) The integration of the proposed middle-income, senior citizen
or fee simple ownership dwelling units into the overall
development or neighborhood in which they are to be located.
(i) With respect to middle-income or senior citizen dwelling units,
the suitability of the proposed location, and equipping of such
dwelling units.
(j) With respect to dwelling units intended to be owned in fee
simple, the anticipated level of real property tax revenues to be
generated by such dwelling units.
(k) With respect to business office facilities that are to be occupied
principally by a single tenant or owner-occupant, the degree of
assurance that such occupancy actually will occur and the
probable duration of such occupancy, as evidenced by, among
other things, executed leases, agreements and other
documents.
(5) Economic analysis. In order to facilitate the economic analysis of an
application for density increase, the Village Board may engage its
own independent experts either to prepare such analyses or to
review those prepared by the applicant. The reasonable cost of
such expert assistance shall be reimbursed to the Village by the
applicant.
J. Site development plan approval in an MW-B District.
(1) Application. After the Village Board has amended the Village
Zoning Map122 to change the zoning district classification of a
property to MW-B designation, the owner shall submit an
application for site development plan approval to the Planning
Board in accordance with §§ 295-104 through 295-114 of this
chapter. In addition to the information and materials required to be
submitted to the Planning Board under § 295-106 of this chapter,
such application shall include or be supplemented by such
computer-assisted design representations as the Planning Board
may request in connection with its review of the application. The
Planning Board shall take into account any conditions imposed on
the applicant by the Village Board in connection with the Zoning
Map amendment. The Planning Board may incorporate any
conditions of site development plan approval in declarations or
agreements satisfactory to the Village Attorney, to be executed by
the applicant and recorded in the Westchester County Clerk's
office, Land Records Division.
(2) Standards of review. The Planning Board shall not approve an
application for site plan approval for property in an MW-B District
unless the standards for site plan approval set forth in § 295-109
below are met, and unless the Planning Board ensures through
122. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:611
conditions imposed in connection with such approval that the
additional requirements and standards set forth in Subsection K
are met. As a condition of site plan approval, the Planning Board
may require one or more bonds or letters of credit containing
terms satisfactory to said Board as security for implementation
of the traffic, infrastructure, amenities, landscaping, public open
space and recreation elements of the approved site development
plan and related environmental mitigation measures. The Planning
Board also may require the imposition of fees for the inspection
of construction on the subject property. The foregoing provisions
of this section concerning security and fees shall be implemented
in such manner as to avoid duplication of any similar measures
previously required by the Village Board in connection with any
Zoning Map amendment or special permit proceeding.
K. Design review. Because of the visual prominence of development in an
MW-B District, the importance of preserving dramatic views that may
be affected by such development, and the proximity of the riverfront to
the commercial and civic center of the Village, the Planning Board as
part of the site plan review process shall apply the special design
guidelines set forth below in this section. It is the objective of the
design guidelines to establish a general design framework that will
preserve and enhance scenic views, assure an attractive environment
for public access to the waterfront, respect the architectural character
and scale of buildings in the Village center area and preserve the
economic value of properties in such area. In reviewing applications for
site plan approval for properties in an MW-B District, the Planning
Board may attach more or less weight to any guideline in relation to
other guidelines, as may be appropriate under the particular
circumstances presented by a specific application. The guidelines are
set forth in Subsection K(1) through (4) below:
(1) Architectural character and preservation of views. Development in
an MW-B District shall be designed in such a way as to respect the
scale and character of the existing Village, preserve and enhance
views of the Hudson River and the Palisades as seen from upland
areas and enhance views of the subject property as seen from the
Palisades and the river. In applying such standards, the Planning
Board shall consider the extent to which an application for site plan
approval contains architectural features consistent with such
standards and with the objectives and purposes set forth herein,
including, without limitation, the following architectural features:
(a) Design of buildings as an integrated part of overall site design
related to the downtown area of the Village and other
surrounding development, and to topographical conditions.
(b) Orientation of taller buildings in an east/west direction in order
to avoid the creation of high, continuous visual barriers.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:612
(c) The siting of buildings to respect important views north, south
and west from public facilities such as Fulton Park, the Village
Municipal Building and Library, the Warburton Avenue Bridge,
Washington Avenue and Warburton Avenue south of
Washington Avenue, and from on-site areas devoted to park,
esplanade, retail or community use.
(d) The siting of taller buildings in proximity to upland areas of
higher elevation lying inland of the subject property.
(e) Where appropriate because of existing or potential uses on
adjacent dry land areas, the provision of adequate setbacks
along boundaries with such areas, to allow for landscaped
buffers and screening.
(f) Limitation of length of buildings and variation of building
heights, including stepdown of building heights in a riverward
direction.
(g) Use of setbacks and indentations of walls and facades to help
achieve a pedestrian-scaled environment, particularly in areas
devoted to park, esplanade, retail or community use.
(h) Use of pitched roofs, dormer windows, gables and other
architectural elements in order to provide visual interest and
reduce the apparent scale of the development.
(2) Landscaping. In addition to the requirements set forth above in
§§ 295-45, 295-46 and 295-32, there shall be a coordinated
landscape design incorporating the landscape treatment for all
open spaces, walks, access roads and parking areas in an MW-B
District into a continuous and integrated design, which shall relate
properly to proposed buildings. Open spaces shall be located so as
to take into consideration existing views and the creation and
preservation of centrally located landscaped areas, parks and
plazas. In applying such standards, the Planning Board shall
consider the manner and extent to which an application for site
plan approval contains landscaping features consistent with such
standards and with the purposes set forth herein, including,
without limitation, the following landscape features:
(a) Landscape treatment of plazas, pedestrian areas, esplanades,
courtyards, park areas and similar areas, including a mix of
shade trees and other plant material such as ground cover and
shrubs, with proper regard for factors such as microclimate,
function of area and required maintenance, in determining the
species, scale and planting pattern.
(b) Screening new development on the subject property from
adjacent properties and appropriate screening between
residential and nonresidential uses within the subject property.
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-84
257:613
(c) The use in esplanades, walks, plazas, parking lots and other
surface areas of paving materials that offer some variety of
pigments and textures that are in harmony with nearby
proposed buildings and paved areas and are safe for
pedestrian traffic, including the handicapped.
(d) The use of covered and trellised outdoor spaces such as
loggias, arcades and colonnades in order to provide shade,
transition between indoors and outdoors and to add visual
interest, shadow and depth to building elevations.
(e) Planting of sidewalks on public or private streets with
regularly spaced, salt-tolerant shade trees.
(f) Softening of the visual impact of parking areas by screening of
all parking areas from street view, by interrupting continuous
rows of parking spaces with planting, by creating planted
canopies over parking areas and by compliance with additional
requirements set forth in § 295-32 of this chapter.
(3) Lighting. All exterior lighting in an MW-B District, including the
lighting of signs, shall be directed away from residential units and
from adjoining streets and should be so located and shielded that
the light sources are not directly visible from any adjoining street
or property or from the Hudson River and that any such
illumination does not cause glare observable from neighboring
properties. The Planning Board may restrict hours of lighting and
types of fixtures.
(4) Signs.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, signs may be
lighted, provided that the lights are so located and shielded
that the sources are not directly visible from points beyond the
boundaries of the lot on which they are located. In no case,
however, shall such signs include any flashing or intermittent
lights; lights of changing degrees of intensity; illuminated
tubing; or strings of light outlining rooflines, doors, windows or
wall edges of any buildings; nor shall such signs be of a type
that has the whole or any part in motion by rotating, fluttering
or any other means, except that customary seasonal lighting
and decorations shall be permitted.
(b) Signs shall not obscure any sign displayed by a public
authority, nor interfere with access of light or air to any
window in any building, nor obstruct any opening in any
building required by law for ingress or egress.
(c) No signs or lighting of signs shall be permitted if the approving
authority finds that they may be mistaken for traffic signal
devices.
§ 295-84 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-84
257:614
§ 295-85. Personal Wireless Service Facilities Overlay (PWSF)
District. [Added 2-17-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
(d) In addition to compliance with the above, a sign plan must be
submitted to the Planning Board, as part of the application for
site plan approval, describing the size, number, content and
placement of all signs to be used in the MW-B District. The use
of all signs must be in accordance with the general design
guidelines as set forth above in Subsection K(1), (2) and (3) of
this section.
L. Applicability of other provisions to an MW-B District.
(1) General regulations. All the general regulations set forth in this
chapter shall apply in their entirety to an MW-B District except as
expressly set forth in the provisions of Subsections A through L,
inclusive, of this section, and except as set forth below:
(a) In applying § 295-18D within an MW-B District, the approving
authority shall be the Planning Board, except in instances in
which the Village Board is designated under this chapter as the
approving authority.
(b) In applying § 295-27 within an MW-B District, the approving
authority shall be the Village Board.
(c) In applying §§ 295-86 through 295-97 within an MW-B District,
the approving authority shall be the Village Board.
(d) In an MW-B District, the height limitations set forth in
§ 295-21A shall be measured in feet above elevation 10
established in National Geodetic Vertical Datum (1929).
(e) In an MW-B District, § 295-36 is superseded by Subsection
F(6).
(f) In the MW-B District, the time of expiration of any special use
permit shall be as established by the Village Board as a
condition of such special use permit, notwithstanding any
contrary provisions of § 295-96 of this chapter.
(g) In an MW-B District, the provisions of §§ 295-82 and
295-67B(1) through (3) of this chapter shall not be applicable.
(2) Description of applicability. References in Subsections A through L
of this section confirming the applicability of any specific provisions
of this chapter shall not be deemed to imply the nonapplicability of
any other provisions of this chapter, unless such nonapplicability is
expressly indicated.
A. Purpose. The Personal Wireless Service Facilities Overlay District is an
overlay district intended to provide a suitable choice of locations for the
§ 295-84 TATTOOING § 295-85
257:615
establishment, construction and maintenance of personal wireless
service facilities.
B. Permitted uses. Except as specified in Subsection N (Special Permits for
sites outside the Personal Wireless Service Facilities Overlay District),
all new personal wireless service facilities, and all additions and/or
modifications to currently existing personal wireless service facilities,
shall be allowed only in the Personal Wireless Service Facilities Overlay
District, and only pursuant to a special permit issued by the Planning
Board, in accordance with the criteria set forth in this section.
C. Application requirements. Applicants for special permits under this
section shall file with the Village Building Inspector six copies, and with
the Planning Board 13 copies, of the following documents:
(1) Site plan. A site plan, in conformance with applicable site plan
submission requirements contained in § 295-106 of this chapter.
The site plan shall show elevations, height, width, depth, type of
materials, color schemes and other relevant information for all
existing and proposed structures, equipment, parking and other
improvements. The site plan shall also include a description of the
proposed personal wireless service facility and such other
information that the Planning Board requires.
(2) Environmental assessment form. A completed environmental
assessment form (EAF), including the visual EAF addendum.
Particular attention shall be given to visibility from key viewpoints
identified in the visual EAF addendum, existing tree lines and
proposed elevations.
(3) Visual impact graphic information. Graphic information that
accurately portrays the visual impact of the personal wireless
service facility from various vantage points selected by the Village
Building Inspector. This graphic information should be provided in
the form of photographs or computer-generated images with the
personal wireless service facility superimposed.
(4) Landscape plan. A landscape plan delineating the existing trees or
areas of existing trees to be preserved, the location and dimensions
of proposed planting areas, including the size, type and number of
trees and shrubs to be planted, curbs, fences, buffers, screening
elevations of fences and materials used. For towers or monopoles,
the landscape plan shall also address the criteria set forth in
Subsection G.
(5) Plan for fencing and signage. A plan showing any fencing and
signage required by Subsection F(6).
(6) Map of proposed coverage and existing facilities. A map showing
the area of coverage of the proposed facility and listing all existing
personal wireless service facilities owned or operated by the
applicant in the Village and bordering municipalities containing
§ 295-85 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-85
257:616
personal wireless service facilities, and a detailed report indicating
why the proposed personal wireless service facility is required to
provide service to locations within the Village that the applicant is
not able to serve with existing facilities that are located within and
outside the Village, by collocation and otherwise.
(7) Documentation of other personal wireless service facility sites. If a
new site for a personal wireless service facility is proposed, the
applicant shall submit a report setting forth in detail:
(a) An inventory of existing personal wireless service facilities
within the Village that are within a reasonable distance from
the proposed facility with respect to coverage, to the extent
that this information is available to the applicant from the
Building Department files and other sources.
(b) An inventory of existing personal wireless service facilities in
other municipalities that can be utilized or modified in order to
provide coverage to the locations the applicant is seeking to
serve, to the extent that this information is available to the
applicant.
(c) A report on the possibilities and opportunities for collocation
as an alternative to a new site.
(8) Report on existing tall structures. If a new site for a personal
wireless service facility is proposed, the applicant shall submit a
report that, in detail:
(a) Identifies all existing tall structures, such as water tanks,
utility poles, church spires, etc., in the Personal Wireless
Service Facilities Overlay District; and
(b) Outlines the possibilities for use of those tall structures as an
alternative to new construction, including a statement as to
whether the owner of the tall structures would permit the
location of the proposed personal wireless service facility on
that structure.
(9) Documentation of proposed height. Documentation sufficient to
demonstrate that the proposed height is the minimum height
necessary to provide service to locations that the applicant is not
able to serve with existing facilities within and outside the Village.
(10) Structural engineering report. A report prepared by a New York
State licensed professional engineer specializing in structural
engineering as to the structural integrity of the personal wireless
service facility and its compliance with the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(a) In the case of a tower or monopole, the structural engineering
report shall describe the structure's height and design,
§ 295-85 TATTOOING § 295-85
257:617
including a cross-section of the structure, demonstrate the
structure's compliance with applicable structural standards
and describe the structure's capacity, including the number of
antennas it can accommodate and the precise point at which
the antenna shall be mounted.
(b) In the case of an antenna mounted on an existing structure, the
structural engineering report shall indicate the ability of the
existing structure to accept the antenna, any modifications to
the existing structure that may be required, the proposed
method of affixing the antenna to the structure and the precise
point at which the antenna shall be mounted. In addition, the
report shall certify that the proposed personal wireless service
facility will not diminish the structural integrity and safety of
the existing structure.
(11) Engineering analysis of radio emissions.
(a) An engineering analysis of the radio emissions, and a
propagation map for the proposed personal wireless service
facility. The analysis shall be prepared and signed by a New
York State licensed professional engineer specializing in
electrical engineering or a qualified radio technician or health
physicist with expertise in radio-communication facilities and
electromagnetic energy. The results from the analysis must
clearly show that the power density levels of the
electromagnetic energy generated from the proposed facility
are within the allowable limits established by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) or, in the absence of limits
established by the FCC, by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI), which are in effect at the time of the
application.
(b) If the proposed personal wireless service facility would be
collocated with an existing facility or would be located within
250 feet of another personal wireless service facility, the
cumulative effects of the facilities must also be analyzed. The
power density analysis shall be based on the assumption that
all antennas mounted on the proposed facility and any other
facility within 250 feet are simultaneously transmitting radio
energy at a power level equal to the maximum antenna power
rating specified by the antenna manufacturer.
(12) Statement regarding noninterference. A certified statement by a
New York State licensed professional engineer specializing in
electrical engineering or a qualified radio technician that
installation of the personal wireless service facility will not
interfere with the radio or television service enjoyed by adjacent
residential and nonresidential properties or with public safety
telecommunications.
§ 295-85 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-85
257:618
(13) Statement regarding collocation. For a new tower or monopole, a
statement by the applicant that the applicant and its successors in
interest will:
(a) Negotiate in good faith for shared use of the proposed personal
wireless service facility by other personal wireless service
providers in the future;
(b) Respond in a timely and comprehensive manner to a request
for information from a potential shared use applicant;
(c) Allow shared use of the new tower if it is technically and
economically feasible and if another personal wireless service
provider agrees, in writing, to pay charges; and
(d) Make no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based
on generally accepted accounting principles. The charge may
include but is not limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site
selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site
design, construction and maintenance financing, return on
equity and depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the
tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without
causing electromagnetic interference.
D. Public hearing.
(1) The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the
application within 62 days after the completed application is
received by the Building Inspector. The hearing shall be held upon
the same notice as that required for a zoning variance.
(2) In addition to the notice required for a zoning variance, the
applicant shall give 14 days' written notice to the legislative body of
each municipality that borders the Village, as well as to the County
Planning Board. Notice shall include the exact location of the
proposed personal wireless service facility and a general
description of the project.
E. Architectural Review Board. The Architectural Review Board shall
review the completed application, as required by Chapter 101, Article
III, of the Code of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
F. Criteria for special permit applications. Applicants for special permits
for establishment or construction of personal wireless service facilities
shall meet all of the following criteria:
(1) Necessity. The proposed personal wireless service facility is
required to provide service to locations within the Village that the
applicant is not able to serve with existing facilities that are located
within and outside the Village, by collocation and otherwise.
(2) Collocation.
§ 295-85 TATTOOING § 295-85
257:619
(a) The collocation of existing personal wireless service facilities
only within the Personal Wireless Service Facilities Overlay
District shall be strongly preferred to the construction of new
personal wireless service facilities.
(b) Approval of a proposal to share space on an existing personal
wireless service facility within the Personal Wireless Service
Facilities Overlay District shall be conditioned upon the
applicant's agreement to pay the reasonable costs of adapting
an existing facility to a new shared use. These costs can
include but are not limited to structural reinforcement,
prevention of transmission or receiver interference, additional
site screening and other changes required to accommodate
shared use.
(c) If a new site for a personal wireless service facility is proposed,
the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed personal
wireless service facility cannot be accommodated on an
existing personal wireless service facility within the Village or
on an existing facility in another municipality due to one or
more of the following reasons:
[1] Service to the locations to which the applicant seeks to
provide service cannot be provided by existing facilities
within or outside the Village.
[2] Adequate and reliable service cannot be provided from
existing sites in a financially and technologically feasible
manner consistent with the applicant's system
requirements.
[3] Existing sites cannot accommodate the proposed personal
wireless service facility due to structural or other
engineering limitations, such as frequency
incompatibilities.
[4] The applicant has been unable to come to a reasonable
agreement to collocate on another personal wireless
service facility. The applicant shall provide the names,
addresses, phone numbers and FAX numbers of other
service providers approached, along with a written
statement as to why an agreement to collocate could not
be reached.
[5] Other reasons make it impracticable to place the proposed
equipment on an existing and approved personal wireless
service facility within the Village or existing facilities in
other municipalities.
(3) Location on existing tall structure. Where collocation is
unavailable, location of a personal wireless service facility on a
preexisting tall structure, such as a water tank, utility pole, church
§ 295-85 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-85
257:620
spire, etc., shall be preferred to the construction of a tower or
monopole. The applicant must demonstrate that it has made good
faith efforts to locate the personal wireless service facility on each
existing tall structure in the Personal Wireless Service Facilities
Overlay District, but that, for physical, technical and/or financial
reasons, or because of the inability to obtain a lease, the personal
wireless service facility cannot be accommodated on any existing
tall structure in the PWSF District.
(4) Maximum height and size.
(a) Unless the Federal Communications Commission promulgates
rules to the contrary or the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board that a greater height is
necessary, the maximum height for an antenna mounted on
another structure shall be six feet above the highest point of
the building or structure on which it is installed. The maximum
height for a tower or monopole shall be 125 feet above ground
level or the minimum height necessary to provide service to
locations that the applicant is not able to serve with existing
facilities within and outside the Village, whichever is less. The
Planning Board may permit a tower or monopole to be higher
than the minimum necessary to provide service to such
locations if such additional height is necessary to
accommodate collocation of other personal wireless service
facilities on the same tower or monopole.
(b) Accessory structures shall be the minimum size necessary to
house the equipment for the PWSF, but in no event shall they
be larger than 250 square feet (inside dimensions) per carrier.
(5) Setbacks. Personal wireless service facilities, including accessory
structures, shall be set back as far as practicable from the nearest
residential dwelling.
(6) Security and signage. Personal wireless service facilities shall be
fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents
unauthorized access by the general public. A sign no larger than
two square feet shall be posted on a personal wireless service
facility to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate
area of the presence of an antenna that has transmit capabilities.
The sign shall also contain the name(s) and emergency telephone
number(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the personal wireless
service facility. In addition, if the personal wireless service facility
is mounted on a roof, any door having access to the roof shall bear a
similar sign. If a fence is required around the personal wireless
service facility, the entrance to the enclosure shall bear a similar
sign.
(7) Placement. Unless wall-mounted on an existing roof-mounted
mechanical enclosure or similar appurtenance, all antennas
§ 295-85 TATTOOING § 295-85
257:621
mounted on a roof shall be located so that visibility of the antenna
is limited to the greatest extent practicable, consistent with the
needs of the antenna to transmit an unobstructed signal. Antennas
wall-mounted on a roof-mount mechanical enclosure or similar
appurtenance shall not exceed the height of the appurtenance at
the point of installation.
(8) Future collocation. New personal wireless service facilities shall be
designed to accommodate additional antennas for purposes of
collocating.
(9) Design guidelines. The proposed personal wireless service facility
shall meet the design guidelines set forth in Subsection G.
(10) Structural engineering standards. The proposed personal wireless
service facility shall meet the structural engineering standards
referred to in Subsection C(10).
(11) Emissions standards. The power density levels of the
electromagnetic energy generated from the proposed personal
wireless service facility must be within the allowable limits
established by the FCC.
G. Design guidelines. The proposed personal wireless service facility shall
meet the following design guidelines:
(1) Finish/colors:
(a) Towers or monopoles not requiring Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) painting or marking shall either have a
galvanized finish or be painted gray or blue-gray above the
surrounding tree line and gray, green or tannish brown below
the surrounding tree line.
(b) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower or
monopole, the antenna and supporting electrical and
mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is
identical to or compatible with the color of the supporting
structure, so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
(2) Illumination. No signals, lights or illumination shall be permitted on
personal wireless service facilities unless required by the FAA or
other federal, state or local authority. Lighting may be permitted,
however, at an accessory equipment shelter if the Planning Board
determines that it is necessary for the security of the personal
wireless services facility. When lighting is used, it shall be shielded
to prevent undue impact on the surrounding neighborhood.
(3) Architectural compatibility.
(a) Where a personal wireless service facility is to be attached to
an existing building or structure, such facility shall be
§ 295-85 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-85
257:622
integrated into such existing building or structure in a manner
that blends with the architectural characteristics of the
building or structure to the maximum extent practicable.
(b) Accessory structures shall be designed to blend with the
architectural characteristics of neighboring residential
structures.
(4) Landscaping.
(a) Accessory structures shall be landscaped with evergreen trees
or shrubs of sufficient size and density to screen the accessory
structure from residential property or public spaces.
(b) For towers or monopoles, vegetative screening shall be
provided to effectively screen the tower base, including
fencing. At a minimum, screening shall consist of one row of
native evergreen shrubs or evergreen trees capable of forming
a continuous hedge at least 10 feet in height within two years
after planting. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute of
or in supplement toward meeting landscaping requirements.
Additional screening may be required to screen portions of the
structure from nearby residential property or important views.
All landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure good
health and viability.
(5) Visibility. All personal wireless service facilities shall be sited to
have the least possible adverse visual effect on the environment.
(6) Signage. The signage required by Subsection F(6) must be
approved by the Architectural Review Board. No other signage,
including advertising, shall be permitted on personal wireless
service facilities, unless required by federal or state regulation.
H. Technical assistance. The Planning Board may obtain professional
planning, technical or engineering advice to assist it in its review of an
application under this section. The expenses of this professional advice
shall be paid by the applicant.
I. Planning Board determination.
(1) The Planning Board may approve, approve with conditions or
disapprove the application for a special permit within 62 days after
the public hearing. The period in which the Planning Board may
take action may be extended with the consent of the applicant.
(2) In granting a special permit under this section, the Planning Board
may impose reasonable conditions that are directly related to and
incidental to the proposed personal wireless service facility.
J. Construction and abandonment.
§ 295-85 TATTOOING § 295-85
257:623
(1) Time limit for completion. A building permit must be obtained
within 12 months after approval of a special permit for a personal
wireless service facility, and construction of such facility must be
completed within 24 months after such approval. The special
permit shall automatically expire in the event that the Building
Department has not granted such permit and construction of the
facility is not completed within the periods set forth above.
(2) Abandonment. In the event that the use of any personal wireless
service facility has been discontinued for a period of 180
consecutive days or more, the facility shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be
made by the Building Inspector, who shall have the right to request
documentation from the owner/operator of the facility regarding
usage of that facility. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator
shall remove the facility at its own expense, and, failing prompt
removal, the Village may remove the facility at the owner/
operator's expense. All special permits, variances and approvals of
any nature granted by the Village shall automatically expire as of
the date of abandonment of the facility.
K. Compliance with other laws.
(1) The owner or operator of every personal wireless service facility for
which a special permit under this section is issued shall submit to
the Building Department copies of all licenses and permits required
by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the
design, construction, location and operation of such personal
wireless service facility and shall submit evidence of renewal or
extension thereof when granted.
(2) Evidence of compliance with FCC emissions standards shall be
submitted to the Building Department on a yearly basis.
L. Expiration of special permit.
(1) A special permit issued under this section shall be deemed to
authorize only the particular use or uses specified in the permit and
shall expire upon termination of the use.
(2) A special permit may not be assigned or transferred unless the
assignment and transfer is approved by the Planning Board.
M. Registration. The Building Department shall maintain a file of all
special permits issued under this section, which file shall include all
documents submitted in connection with the application for the special
permit. If the name or address of the owner or operator of any personal
wireless service facility is changed, the operator must notify the
Building Department, in writing, of the change within 30 days.
N. Special permits for sites outside the Personal Wireless Service Facilities
Overlay District. In addition to the requirements stated in Subsections
§ 295-85 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-85
257:624
A through G, personal wireless service facilities at sites outside the
Personal Wireless Service Facilities Overlay District shall require a
variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall be permitted
only if a New York State licensed professional engineer specializing
in electrical engineering or a qualified radio technician with expertise
in radio-communication facilities establishes to the satisfaction of the
approving agency all of the following:
(1) That the personal wireless service facility is needed to provide
coverage to an area of the Village that currently has inadequate
coverage and is of the minimum height and aesthetic intrusion
necessary to provide that coverage.
(2) That all reasonable measures in siting the personal wireless service
facility within the Personal Wireless Service Facilities Overlay
District have been exhausted.
(3) That technical or space limitations prevent location or collocation
in the Personal Wireless Service Facilities Overlay District.
O. Alteration of an existing personal wireless service facility. Alteration of
an existing personal wireless service facility that results in an increase
in the size, height or electromagnetic emission of the personal wireless
service facility shall be permitted only after application to the Planning
Board, which shall review the matter as if the alteration were an
entirely new application for a special permit.
P. Bond required. As a condition of granting any special permit for the
construction of a tower or monopole under this section, the Planning
Board shall require the applicant to post a bond, in the amount
determined by the Planning Board, based on engineering estimates, to
cover the cost of removing and disposing of the tower or monopole. The
bond shall be maintained for so long as the tower or monopole remains
in place. From time to time the Planning Board may adjust the amount
of the bond and require the submission of a new or modified bond based
on engineering estimates of the cost of removing and disposition of the
tower or monopole.
Q. Exemptions from this section. The following are exempt from the
provisions of this section:
(1) Machines and equipment designed and marketed as consumer
products, such as walkie-talkies, ham radios not used for
commercial purposes, remote control toys and cellular phones.
(2) Hand-held, mobile, marine and portable radio-communication
transmitters and/or receivers.
(3) Two-way radios utilized for temporary or emergency service
communications.
(4) Two-way radios utilized for government service communications.
§ 295-85 TATTOOING § 295-85
257:625
§ 295-85.1. Gateway Cluster Overlay District. [Added 1-5-2016 by
L.L. No. 1-2016]
(5) Backup wireless transmitters connected to an alarm monitoring
service that transmits to a remote monitoring center in the event of
an emergency when the telephone lines are inoperable.
(6) Over-the-air receive-only devices in compliance with FCC rules and
standards.
A. Purpose. The Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson
adopted in 2011 identified large tracts located within the Village's
Gateways as representing important viewsheds along major roadways
and also indicated that these parcels contain important natural
resources which should be protected and preserved. The use of
clustering for future development of these parcels will help to preserve
the natural and scenic qualities of these parcels and preserve the
character of the Gateways to the Village.
B. Authorization. In connection with any application for subdivision of a
property within the Gateway Cluster Overlay District, the Planning
Board of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson is hereby authorized,
pursuant to New York State Village Law § 7-738 to modify applicable
provisions of this chapter to enable and encourage flexibility of design
and development of land in such manner as to preserve the natural and
scenic qualities of open space lands, including open meadows,
woodlands, scenic views and wetlands. Any subdivision designed under
this article shall indicate on the final plat that it is a cluster subdivision.
C. Mandatory clustering. The Planning Board shall require an applicant to
submit a cluster plan utilizing the provisions of this section and § 7-738
for the development of parcels four acres or greater in size located
within the Gateway Cluster Overlay District. The Planning Board, at its
discretion, may mandate cluster development of a parcel of four acres
or less in size in order to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of
open lands.
D. Density determination. A cluster development shall result in a
permitted number of building lots or dwelling units which shall in no
case exceed the number which could be permitted, in the Planning
Board's judgment, if the land were subdivided into lots conforming to
the minimum lot size and density requirements of the Zoning Code
applicable in the underlying zoning district. The applicant shall submit
a conventional subdivision layout to determine the maximum density for
the cluster subdivision. The conventional layout must consider
environmental constraints on development as well as roads, utilities
and other attributes which would impact the density of a conventional
subdivision.
E. Development standards and controls.
§ 295-85 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-85.1
257:626
(1) In connection with approval of a subdivision plat pursuant to this
section and § 7-738, the Planning Board is hereby authorized to
modify the minimum lot size and width, required yards and lot
coverage; however, the maximum building height shall not be
modified. The Planning Board shall also have the authority to
modify requirements for widths of roads, provided that adequate
provision is made for fire and emergency access.
(2) In applying the provisions hereof, the Planning Board shall have the
authority to permit detached, semiattached and attached housing
units.
(3) A buffer of 150 feet shall be provided along the lot frontage on all
streets, and a fifty-foot buffer shall be provided around the
perimeter of any cluster subdivision from all other property lines.
No structures except for entrance roads or driveways shall be
permitted within such buffer. At the discretion of the Planning
Board, the buffer can be maintained in its natural state or
landscaped pursuant to an approved landscape plan.
(4) Permitted uses shall include all uses permitted in the underlying
zoning district and as permitted therein.
(5) The cluster subdivision shall result in restricted open spaces as
determined by the Planning Board. All open space, recreation or
common areas shall be restricted, managed and maintained in
accordance with a form of legal ownership and restrictions to be
approved by the Planning Board and the Village Attorney.
(6) The procedure to be followed for approval of a cluster subdivision
shall be the same as for approval of a conventional subdivision
pursuant to Article XIII of this chapter, and all provisions thereof
not modified by this section shall apply.
(7) The Planning Board shall ensure that clustering hereunder
preserves the natural and scenic qualities of open space lands,
including open meadows, woodlands, scenic views and wetlands.
§ 295-85.1 TATTOOING § 295-85.1
257:627

ARTICLE X
Special Use Permits
§ 295-86. Board of Appeals authorization.
Subject to the provisions of this article and the other provisions of this
chapter, and except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the Board of
Appeals may issue a special use permit for any use requiring such a permit.
All such uses are declared to possess characteristics of such unique and
special forms that each application for a special use permit shall be
considered as an individual case.
§ 295-87. Permit standards.
No special use permit shall be granted unless the special use meets, in
addition to all other provisions of this chapter, the following standards:
§ 295-88. Existing violations.
No special use permit shall be issued with respect to any lot on which there
is an existing violation of this chapter.
§ 295-89. Application for special use permit.
Each application for a special use permit shall be accompanied by a fee
in an amount set by the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 295-152 of this
chapter and by a site plan conforming to the requirements of § 295-106 and
shall be filed with the Building Inspector, who, within 10 days, shall refer
the application to the Board of Appeals and the Planning Board.
A. The use shall be of such a nature, intensity, size and location that in
general it will be in harmony with the character of the district in which
the property lies and with the orderly development of that district and
will not be detrimental to the orderly development, use or value of
adjacent land and buildings.
B. The location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences, and the
nature and extent of existing and proposed plantings on the site, shall
be such that they will not be detrimental to the character or the orderly
development of the district in which they lie, and will not be detrimental
to the orderly development, use or value of adjacent land and buildings.
C. The use shall not pose a danger to health, safety and welfare, shall not
create undue pedestrian or vehicular traffic hazards and shall not
include any display or signs, noise, fumes, vibrations or lights that will
hinder the character or the orderly development of the district in which
the property lies or impair the use, enjoyment or value of adjacent land
and buildings.
§ 295-86 TATTOOING § 295-90
257:629
§ 295-90. Action by Planning Board.
Within 45 days after the referral of the application for a special use permit
(unless extended with the consent of the applicant), the Planning Board
shall transmit to the Board of Appeals an advisory report setting forth the
Planning Board's recommendations with respect to the application.
§ 295-91. Action by Board of Appeals; disapproval by County
Planning Board.
§ 295-92. Permit conditions.
In issuing a special use permit, the Board of Appeals may impose any
conditions that it deems necessary to accomplish the reasonable application
of the standards set forth in § 295-87, and to assure conformity with all
other requirements of the law, including this chapter. Such conditions may
include, without limitation, a requirement that the special use permit be
periodically renewed or that it terminate at the end of a stated period.
§ 295-93. Application for area variance.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, where a proposed
special use permit contains one or more features that do not comply with
the zoning regulations, application may be made to the Zoning Board of
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on the
proposed application within 62 days after the application is received by
the Building Inspector. The hearing shall be held upon the same notice
as that required for a zoning variance.
B. The Board of Appeals shall decide upon the application within 62 days
after the final hearing on the application. The time within which the
Board of Appeals must render its decision may be extended by mutual
consent of the applicant and the Board.
C. The Board of Appeals shall issue the special use permit if it finds that all
requirements of this chapter have been met, in particular, without
limitation, the requirements of Article IX with respect to principal uses
requiring special use permits and § 295-87 above. The Board of Appeals
shall deny any application that, in the judgment of the Board, does not
meet the requirements of this chapter.
D. If the County Planning Board, in appearing before the Board of Appeals
at the public hearing, disapproves of the issuance of the special use
permit or recommends changes or modifications thereof, then the
permit shall not be issued without the adoption of a resolution by the
Board of Appeals.
E. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals on the special use permit
application shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk within five
business days after the day the decision is rendered, and a copy of the
decision shall be mailed to the applicant.
§ 295-90 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-93
257:630
Appeals for an area variance pursuant to § 295-146 of this chapter, without
the necessity of a decision or determination of an administrative official
charged with enforcement of the zoning regulations.
§ 295-94. Extensions and renewals.
Any extensions or renewals of a special use permit shall be subject to the
same requirements and procedures as the original issuance of the special
use permit.
§ 295-95. Public utility substations, transmission and distribution
lines and water towers.
§ 295-96. Expiration of special use permits.
A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use
or uses specified in the permit and shall expire in the same manner as
variances.
§ 295-97. Compliance with SEQRA.
In considering any application for a special use permit, the Board of Appeals
shall comply with the provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review
Act123 and its implementing regulations.
A. Applicants for special use permits to establish public utility substations,
but not personal wire service facilities, water towers, high tension lines
or overhead cables in residential zones shall prepare and submit with
their application for the special use permit sufficient evidence to permit
the Board of Appeals to arrive at a finding, in addition to all other
findings required by this chapter, that: [Amended 2-17-1998 by L.L.
No. 1-1998]
(1) Service cannot be supplied adequately and reasonably by location
of facilities in a business or industrial district;
(2) A public necessity exists for such facilities in the residential area;
and
(3) The particular site for which application is made is the least
objectionable of possible sites from the public standpoint and takes
into consideration future, as well as present, needs.
B. The applicant for a permit to install a new, enlarged or replacement
substation or water tower shall include as part of the application a
current study of the feasibility of installing such facilities underground
and shall, if required by the Board of Appeals, furnish such other data,
studies and reports as will enable the Board of Appeals to determine
whether the particular facility for which the permit is sought should be
required to be placed underground.
123. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law Article 8.
§ 295-93 TATTOOING § 295-97
257:631

ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 295-98. Compliance required.
Except as permitted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to § 295-146, no
commission, board, agency, officer or employee of the Village shall approve,
grant or issue any permit, license, certificate or other authorization for
construction, reconstruction, alteration, renovation, demolition,
enlargement, moving or removing of any building or structure, or for any
use of land, building or structure, that would not be in full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, license, certificate or other
authorization issued, granted or approved in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be null and void and of no effect without the necessity of
any proceedings or revocation or nullification thereof.
§ 295-99. Building Inspector.
A. Designation, powers and duties. Unless otherwise provided by law, the
Building Inspector, appointed pursuant to Chapter 101, Article I, of the
Village Code, or any other person designated by the Board of Trustees
for the purpose, shall, in addition to performing any other duties
prescribed by law, enforce the provisions of this chapter and any rules
and regulations made in furtherance thereof. In enforcing this chapter,
the Building Inspector or such other designated person may from time
to time inspect any building, structure or premises at any reasonable
hour. The Building Inspector shall also attend all meetings of the Board
of Appeals and may request the assistance of any other municipal
department.
B. Reports and records.
(1) The Building Inspector shall keep a permanent record, including all
pertinent maps and plans, of all building permits, certificates of
completion, and certificates of occupancy and of all applications for
building permits and certificates. [Amended 6-3-2008 by L.L.
No. 7-2008]
(2) The Building Inspector shall also keep a permanent record of all
violations of this chapter, whether reported by private citizens or
by any board, agency, officer or employee of the Village, and of the
disposition of the violations.
(3) The Building Inspector shall make a monthly written report to the
Village Manager and the Board of Trustees in which (s)he sets forth
the number and type of building permits, certificates of completion,
and certificates of occupancy issued and lists the status and
disposition of all reported violations of this chapter. [Amended
6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
§ 295-98 TATTOOING § 295-100
257:633
§ 295-100. Necessity of building permits, certificates of occupancy,
and certificates of completion. [Amended 6-3-2008 by L.L. No.
7-2008; 8-5-2008 by L.L. No. 24-2008; 11-16-2010 by L.L. No.
8-2010]
§ 295-101. Building permits.
A. No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, renovate, demolish,
enlarge, move or remove any building, structure or driveway, or any
portion of any building, structure or driveway, or pave any portion of a
lot without a building permit, nor shall any person occupy or use any
building, structure or premises, or any portion of any building,
structure or premises, hereafter constructed, reconstructed, altered,
renovated, demolished, enlarged, moved or removed, without a
certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion. Notwithstanding
the above, a building permit shall not be required to repair or repave a
driveway, so long as the dimensions of the driveway are not being
altered.
B. Except where the Board of Appeals granted a variance pursuant to
§ 295-146, no building permit, certificate of completion or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure, driveway, paving
or premises where the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
demolition, renovation, enlargement, moving, removing, use or
occupation thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
C. No building permit, certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued unless the proposed and completed work is in
substantial conformance with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and the State Energy Conservation
Construction Code.
D. No building permit, certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued until the applicant has complied with all of the
provisions of this chapter, including, without limitation, obtaining any
approvals required by this chapter from the Planning Board, the Board
of Appeals, the Architectural Review Board, and the Board of Trustees
and complying with any conditions to which those approvals are
subject.
E. Any person who fails to apply for a building permit, certificate of
completion or certificate of occupancy as required by and in accordance
with this chapter and who proceeds to construct, reconstruct, alter,
renovate, demolish, enlarge, move or remove a building, structure or
driveway or any part thereof, or who proceeds to occupy or use such a
building, or structure or driveway or a part thereof, or who paves any
portion of the lot, or who proceeds to occupy or use or change the use of
land, shall be in violation of this chapter.
A. Applications.
§ 295-100 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-101
257:634
(1) All applications for building permits shall comply with the
requirements of the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code of
the State of New York and, in addition, shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
(2) All applications for building permits shall be made to the Building
Inspector, in writing, with three copies, on official forms by the fee
owner of the property. [Amended 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
(3) All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by three
sets of construction plans that define the scope of the proposed
work. [Added 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008124]
(4) All applications for building permits, except those for signs, shall
be accompanied by three copies of a layout or plot plan, drawn to
scale, showing: [Amended 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
(a) The actual shape, dimensions, radii, angles and area of the lot
on which the building or structure is situated or proposed.
(b) The block and lot numbers as they appear on the official Village
tax map.
(c) The exact size and locations on the lot of all existing and
proposed buildings, structures, alterations, wells and septic
systems.
(d) The dimensions of all yards in relation to the subject buildings
and structures and the distances between those buildings and
structures and all other existing and proposed buildings and
structures on the same lot.
(e) The existing and intended use of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures, the existing and intended use of the
land and the number of dwelling units the proposed buildings
and structures are designed to accommodate.
(f) Such topographic or other information with regard to the
building, the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to
determine that the proposed construction will conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
(5) All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a
written statement by the applicant demonstrating that the
proposed work will comply with all of the applicable rules and
regulations of all governmental agencies having jurisdiction over
the subject of the application, including, but not limited to, the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code. [Amended
6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
124. Editor's Note: This Local Law also redesignated former Subsection A(3) through (7) as
Subsection A(4) through (8), respectively.
§ 295-101 TATTOOING § 295-101
257:635
(6) Applications for building permits to construct new buildings or
additions to existing buildings shall be accompanied by three
copies of an accurate survey prepared by a licensed engineer or
land surveyor. [Amended 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
(7) Where the construction or alteration for which the building permit
is sought will cost more than $10,000, or exceed 30,000 cubic feet,
the plans and specifications required by this section shall be
prepared by, and bear the seal of, a registered architect or a
licensed professional engineer duly qualified to practice as such in
the State of New York.
(8) All applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a fee
in the amount and manner set forth in § 295-152 below.
B. Action on the application.
(1) An application for a building permit shall be either granted or
denied within 10 days after it is filed.
(2) If a building permit is denied, the Building Inspector shall state, in
writing, the reasons for the denial.
(3) If a building permit is issued, it shall show on its face the use for
which the permit is granted, any variances granted by the Board of
Appeals and any conditions imposed by the Planning Board, Board
of Appeals or Board of Trustees. The building permit shall include
the directive that the Building Department shall be notified
immediately in the event of changes occurring during construction.
[Amended 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
(4) Upon issuance of the building permit, the Building Inspector shall
return one approved copy of all submitted documents to the
applicant, appropriately endorsed, and forward one approved copy
to the Village Assessor. The applicant shall maintain one set of the
documents at the work site so as to be available for use by the
Building Inspector. [Amended 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
(5) All work shall be performed in accordance with the construction
documents that were submitted with and accepted as part of the
application for the building permit. The building permit shall
contain such a directive. [Added 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
(6) The building permit must be visibly displayed at the work site and
remain visible until the authorized work is completed. [Added
6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
C. Expiration and extension.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Subsection C(3) below, a building
permit shall automatically lapse and become null and void if
construction, pursuant to the building permit, has not begun within
12 months after the issuance of the building permit or if
§ 295-101 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-101
257:636
construction is not completed within 24 months after the issuance
of the building permit. Completion of construction shall mean that
all conditions necessary for a certificate of occupancy or certificate
of completion have been met. [Amended 6-3-2008 by L.L. No.
7-2008]
(2) If a building permit is rendered null and void pursuant to
Subsection C(1) above, the owner of the property shall be required
to remove all incomplete buildings and structures and to restore
the property to its condition at the time the building permit was
issued.
(3) Upon written application, the Building Inspector may, at his or her
discretion, extend a building permit for not more than a total of six
months, where, in his or her opinion, there are reasonable grounds
for granting the extension.
D. If the Building Inspector determines that a building permit was issued
in error or that it was issued on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, or that the work for which a building permit
was issued violates this chapter or the Uniform Code or the Energy
Code, the Building Inspector shall revoke the building permit or
suspend the building permit until such time as the permit holder
demonstrates that: [Added 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008125]
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter, the Uniform Code and the Energy Code;
and
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of this chapter, the Uniform Code and the
Energy Code.
E. Revocation. Where the Building Board finds that a building permit has
been improperly or unlawfully issued by the Building Inspector, the
Building Board may revoke the permit. The fact that the permit is null
and void pursuant to §§ 295-98 or Subsection C of this section, or
pursuant to some other provisions of law, shall not affect the Building
Board's power of revocation.
F. Certified plot plan. Upon completion of the footings of a building,
accessory building or pool, the owner of the property or an authorized
agent may be required by the Building Inspector to submit a certified
plot plan, prepared by an engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice
in the State of New York, showing the location of those footings on the
lot. No building, accessory building or pool shall thereafter be
constructed above those footings until the plot plan survey has been
approved by the Building Inspector as complying with the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
125. Editor's Note: This Local Law also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D
and E as Subsections E and F, respectively.
§ 295-101 TATTOOING § 295-101.1
257:637
§ 295-101.1. Construction inspections. [Added 6-3-2008 by L.L. No.
7-2008]
§ 295-101.2. Stop-work orders. [Added 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
A. Work shall remain accessible and exposed until inspected and accepted
by the Building Inspector, the Fire Inspector, or their designees. The
permit holder shall notify the Building Inspector when any element of
work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for inspection.
B. The Building Inspector, Fire Inspector, or their designees shall inspect
the following elements of the construction process where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Compliance with the State Energy Conservation Construction
Code; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall be noted as
satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be notified as to
where the work fails to comply with this chapter, the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or the State Energy
Conservation Construction Code. Work not in compliance with any
applicable provision of this chapter, the Uniform Code or Energy Code
shall remain exposed until such work shall have been brought into
compliance with all applicable provisions of such code, reinspected, and
found satisfactory as completed.
A. The Building Inspector and Fire Inspector are authorized to issue stopwork
orders pursuant to this section. A stop-work order shall be issued
to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Building Inspector or the Fire
Inspector to be contrary to any applicable provision of this chapter,
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code, or any other
applicable state or local law, without regard to whether such work
§ 295-101.1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-101.2
257:638
§ 295-102. Certificates of occupancy; certificates of completion.
[Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005; 6-3-2008 by L.L. No. 7-2008]
is or is not work for which a building permit is required, and
without regard to whether a building permit has or has not been
issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector, without
regard to whether such work is or is not work for which a building
permit is required, and without regard to whether a building
permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required that is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Stop-work orders shall be in writing, be dated and signed by the
Building Inspector or Fire Inspector, state the reason or reasons for
issuance, and if applicable, state the conditions that must be satisfied
before work will be permitted to resume.
C. The Building Inspector or Fire Inspector shall cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served personally or by certified mail on
the owner of the affected property, the permit holder, or the person
responsible for the work at the job site. The Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the
stop-work order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the owner of the affected
property, the permit holder and any other person performing, taking
part in or assisting in the work shall immediately cease all work that is
the subject of the stop-work order.
E. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be the exclusive remedy
available to address any event described in Subsection A of this section,
and the authority to issue a stop-work order shall be in addition to, and
not in substitution for or limitation of, the right and authority to pursue
any other remedy or impose any other penalty under this chapter or
under any other applicable local law or New York State law. Any such
other remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
at the time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Requirement of certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion;
effect. [Amended 11-16-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
§ 295-101.2 TATTOOING § 295-102
257:639
(1) A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize, and is
required for, initial, continued and changed occupancy and use of
the building, structure or land to which it applies.
(2) A certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion shall be
required for any work that is the subject of a building permit or that
requires Architectural Review Board approval.
(3) The certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall
continue in effect as long as the building, structure or land, and the
use thereof, remain in full compliance with this chapter; with the
requirements and conditions of any site plan approvals, variances,
special use permits, and Architectural Review Board approvals;
and with all the other applicable laws, including, without limitation,
any applicable building, plumbing and electrical codes.
(4) Upon the service of notice by the Building Inspector that any
building, structure or land, or any use thereof, violates the
provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law, including the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and the
State Energy Conservation Construction Code, the certificate of
occupancy or certificate of completion for that building, structure,
land or use shall immediately become null and void.
B. Applications. All applications for certificates of occupancy and
certificates of completion shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code, shall be
made in writing on official Village forms and shall be filed with the
Village Manager, and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by
the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 295-152 of this chapter.
C. Action on the application.
(1) Within 10 business days after an application for a certificate of
occupancy or certificate of completion has been filed, the Building
Inspector shall make all inspections necessary to ensure that the
building, structure, premises or use for which the certificate is
sought complies with this chapter, the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, the State Energy Conservation
Construction Code, and all other applicable chapters of the
Hastings-on-Hudson Code.
(2) Within five business days after the Building Inspector has
completed those inspections, the Village Manager shall either issue
the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion or deny the
application and shall forthwith notify the applicant, in writing, of
the Village Manager's decision. That notification shall either be
delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or any other method of delivery providing proof of
delivery.
§ 295-102 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-102
257:640
§ 295-103. Planning Board.
(3) If the application is denied, the Village Manager shall state, in
writing, the reasons for the denial.
(4) If the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion is issued,
it shall state that the building, structure or premises, or the
relevant part thereof, and the proposed use thereof are in complete
conformity with this chapter, the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, the State Energy Conservation
Construction Code, and all other applicable laws the enforcement
of which the Village is charged with.
D. Pending violations. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued with
regard to any building, structure or premises against which there are
pending violations of this chapter or of the applicable building codes.
E. Temporary certificates. Under such rules and regulations as may be
established by the Board of Trustees, a temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued by the Village Manager for part of a building
for a stated period, not to exceed six months, except as provided in
§ 295-51 above. In no event, however, shall a temporary certificate of
occupancy be issued unless the Building Inspector determines:
(1) That the building or structure or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate may be occupied safely;
(2) That any fire protection equipment that has been installed is
operational; and
(3) That all required means of egress from the building or structure
have been provided.
F. If it is determined that a certificate of completion, certificate of
occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy was issued in error or
that it was issued on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete
information, or for any other reason, and if the relevant deficiencies are
not corrected to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector within such
period of time as shall be specified by the Village Manager, the Village
Manager shall revoke or suspend such certificate.
A. Establishment and organization.
(1) The Planning Board heretofore established pursuant to Village Law
is hereby continued with all powers and duties prescribed by law,
including this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall continue to consist of seven members
appointed by the Village Manager for five-year terms. The members
of the Planning Board in office at the time this chapter takes effect
shall continue in office until the end of the term for which they are
§ 295-102 TATTOOING § 295-103
257:641
appointed and until their successors have been appointed and have
been duly qualified.
(3) The Village Manager shall appoint one member of the Planning
Board as Chairperson. If the Village Manager fails to do so, the
Planning Board shall elect a Chairperson from its own members.
(4) All meetings of the Planning Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Planning Board may
determine. The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Acting
Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
(5) No person who is a member of the Board of Trustees shall be
eligible for membership on the Planning Board.
(6) Any member of the Planning Board may be removed by the Village
Manager for cause and after a public hearing.
(7) In the event of a vacancy in office, the Village Manager shall
appoint a successor who shall serve for the unexpired term of the
member whose place has become vacant.
(8) No person shall be disqualified from serving as a member of the
Village Planning Board by reason of serving as a member of the
Town or County Planning Board.
B. Powers and duties. The Planning Board shall have all the powers and
duties prescribed by law and by this chapter, including, without
limitation, the following:
(1) The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove site plans in accordance
with §§ 295-104 through 295-114 of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove subdivision plats showing
lots, blocks or sites, with or without roads within the area of the
Village, in accordance with §§ 295-115 through 295-138 of this
chapter.
(3) The Planning Board shall have the power to issue accessory
apartment permits in accordance with § 295-67D of this chapter.
[Added 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(4) The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove applications for special
permits for personal wireless service facilities in accordance with
§ 295-85 of this chapter. [Added 2-17-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
(5) The Planning Board shall have the power to make such
investigations, maps, reports and recommendations relating to the
planning and development of the Village as it deems desirable and
§ 295-103 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-103
257:642
conduct public hearings in connection therewith, provided that
the total expenditures of the Planning Board shall not exceed the
appropriation for its expenses.
(6) The Planning Board may prepare and change a Comprehensive
Master Plan for the development of the entire area of the Village,
which Master Plan shall show desirable streets, bridges and
transportation terminals and facilities and tunnels and the
approaches thereto, viaducts, parks, public reservations, roadway
in parks, sites for public buildings and structures, zoning districts,
pierhead and bulkhead lines, waterways and routes of public
utilities and such other features, existing and proposed, as will
provide for the improvement of the Village and its future growth,
protection and development, and will afford adequate facilities for
the public housing, transportation, distribution, comfort,
convenience, public health, safety and general welfare of its
population.
(7) The Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations in respect to
procedure before it and in respect to any subject matter over which
it has jurisdiction, after public hearing by the Planning Board and
subject to the approval of the Village Manager.
(8) The Planning Board shall have the power to employ experts, clerks
and a secretary, and to pay for their services and such other
expenses as may be necessary and proper, not exceeding in all the
appropriation that may be made for the Planning Board.
(9) The Planning Board may advertise and hold public hearings when it
desires.
(10) The Planning Board shall have the power to reduce or waive
parking requirements in accordance with § 295-24B of this chapter.
[Added 1-21-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ 295-103 TATTOOING § 295-103
257:643

ARTICLE XII
Site Plan Approval
§ 295-104. Necessity of site plan approval. [Amended 12-17-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996; 8-6-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
A. Except as provided in Subsections C and D below, a site plan, approved
by the Planning Board, shall be required for:
(1) The construction, reconstruction, alteration, renovation,
demolition, or enlargement, moving or removing of any building or
structure, except for interior work that does not change the
exterior of the building.
(2) The construction or alteration of a driveway or parking space.
(3) The alteration of a building in such a way as to create an additional
dwelling unit, except for accessory apartments created pursuant to
§ 295-67D and requiring an accessory apartment permit.
(4) Any land use not involving a building or structure.
B. Where a site plan has been approved by the Planning Board, no building
or structure on the property encompassed within that site plan, or on
any portion of that property, shall at any time be constructed,
reconstructed, altered, renovated, demolished, enlarged, moved,
removed or used, nor shall any land partially or wholly encompassed
within an approved site plan be used, unless expressly permitted by the
site plan or by an amended site plan. In particular, without limitation,
no building, structure or land encompassed within a site plan shall at
any time be altered so as to no longer comply with a condition
contained in an approved site plan without Planning Board approval of
an amended site plan expressly permitting that alteration.
C. Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection A above, no site plan
shall be required for the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
renovation, demolition or enlargement of a single-family dwelling, or a
driveway, parking space, or structure accessory to a single-family
dwelling, provided that the owner of the lot certifies, in writing, that
(s)he has no intention to construct or to have constructed, at that time
or in the future, either on that lot and/or any adjacent lots, more than
one single-family dwelling. For purposes of this subsection, "owner"
includes the record owner and any contract vendee, lessee, assignee,
licensee, subsidiary, parent or affiliate of the record owner.
D. Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection A above, no site plan
shall be required for the reconstruction, alteration, renovation,
demolition or enlargement of a two-family dwelling, or a driveway,
parking space, or structure accessory to a two-family dwelling, unless
the alteration or enlargement results in the creation of an additional
dwelling unit.
§ 295-104 TATTOOING § 295-104
257:645
§ 295-105. Amendments and revisions of site plans.
Amendments and revisions of site plans shall be subject to the same
requirements and procedures as site plans submitted for the first time for
approval.
§ 295-106. Application.
At least 15 days before the Planning Board meeting to which the site plan or
an amendment to the site plan is to be presented, the applicant shall submit
to the Building Inspector six copies of:
E. Where a site plan is required by this section, no building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the site plan has been
approved by the Planning Board and until all of the requirements and
conditions of the site plan have been met. Continued conformance with
the site plan, including all conditions contained in it, shall be a
requirement of the continued validity of the building permit and
certificate of occupancy.
F. Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection A above, no site plan
approval shall be required for the construction of roof-mounted solar
panels. [Added 11-7-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
A. The application for site plan approval on official Village forms signed by
the fee owner of the property, which application shall include, among
other things:
(1) The names of all record owners of all adjacent properties and the
sheet, lot, block and section number of those properties and the
property to be developed.
(2) A list of any deviations from the requirements of this chapter.
(3) A completed New York State Environmental Quality Review Act
assessment form.
B. Any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended to cover all or any
part of the property to be developed.
C. A planting plan prepared by an architect or landscape architect
certified by the State of New York.
D. A vicinity map, at a scale of not less than 200 feet to the inch, showing
buildings on contiguous lots.
E. A detailed site plan showing, at a scale of not less than 20 feet to the
inch on sheets not to exceed 30 inches by 40 inches, the applicant's
entire property and adjacent properties and existing streets and
indicating:
(1) The title of the development, if any; the date the plan was prepared;
the North point; the scale; and the name and address of the record
§ 295-104 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-106
257:646
owner, the engineer, the architect, the land planner, the surveyor
and the person who prepared the site plan.
(2) The location of all existing and proposed lot lines, easements,
reservations and areas dedicated to public uses.
(3) All existing municipal school district, zoning district and special
district boundaries.
(4) The location of yards required by this chapter and indicating
whether and by how much such yards are greater or less than the
actual proposed yards.
(5) The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings
and structures, including, without limitation, the height of all
buildings and structures and the width of all courts.
(6) The existing and proposed use of all land and the existing and
proposed use and exterior design of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures, including, without limitation, the
proposed grades, facades and other architectural features, and the
location and attachment of mechanical equipment and other
appurtenances to the exterior or at the roof.
(7) The existing and proposed division of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures into units of separate occupancy.
(8) The location of all existing watercourses, marshes, wooded areas,
rock outcrops, single trees with a diameter of eight inches or more
measured three feet above the base of the trunk, and all other
significant existing land features.
(9) The location, layout and surfacing of all existing and proposed
driveways, paving and off-street parking and loading areas,
including individual parking spaces.
(10) The location, size and type of all landscaping, screening and buffer
areas.
(11) The location of all existing and proposed outdoor storage areas,
including snow storage in parking areas.
(12) The location of all proposed streets, with profiles indicating
grading and cross-sections showing the width of the roadway, the
location and width of all sidewalks and the location and size of
utility lines.
(13) The location of all existing and proposed water mains, valves,
hydrants, culverts, drains and sewer lines, or alternate means of
water supply and sewer disposal and treatments, with pipe sizes,
grades, direction of flow and location of connection to public
utilities.
§ 295-106 TATTOOING § 295-106
257:647
§ 295-107. Action by Planning Board.
(14) The location, height and design of all existing and proposed fences
and retaining walls.
(15) The location, direction, power, design and time of all existing and
proposed exterior lighting.
(16) The location, design and size of all existing and proposed signs.
(17) The location of all other existing and proposed site improvements.
(18) Existing soils and existing and proposed topography of the site,
including existing and proposed contours, with intervals of five feet
or less, referred to a datum satisfactory to the Planning Board.
Where the variations in the proposed elevation above or below the
average level of the street in front of the property exceed 10 feet,
the application shall be accompanied by a map, certified by a
licensed surveyor, showing the contours at two-foot intervals.
(19) All other pertinent information.
F. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required by
Chapter 250 of the Code of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson. [Added
12-11-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007126]
G. Any other information or documents required by the Planning Board for
a review of the site plan.
H. A fee in the amount set by the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 295-152
of this chapter. The application shall not be considered as complete or
officially submitted until all of the information, documents and fees
required by this section have been received, in proper form, by the
Building Inspector.
I. The Planning Board may waive any of the required submissions if it
finds, because of the special circumstances of a particular case, that the
information is not necessary to assist the Planning Board in making its
decision, or that compliance with the requirements may cause
extraordinary and unnecessary hardship. [Added 8-6-2013 by L.L.
No. 5-2013]
A. The Building Inspector shall refer the application for site plan approval,
together with the other documents required by § 295-106, to the
Planning Board within five days after receipt.
B. Within 62 days after receipt by the Building Inspector of the completed
application, the Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing held
upon the same notice as that required for a zoning variance.
126. Editor's Note: This Local Law also redesignated former Subsections F and G as
Subsections G and H, respectively.
§ 295-106 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-107
257:648
§ 295-108. Planning Board site plans.
In furtherance of any investigation, or in connection with any map, report
or recommendations made by the Planning Board relating to planning and
development of the Village, the Planning Board may, on its own initiative,
propose a general or specific site plan for a particular area where site plan
approval may be required in the future, using as a guide the requirements
of this chapter.
§ 295-109. Standards for site plan approval.
In acting upon any application for site plan approval, the Planning Board
shall consider the site layout and overall appearance of all buildings,
structures and land in the proposed development in relation to the public
health, safety and general welfare and the comfort and convenience of
the public in general and the residents of the immediate neighborhood in
particular. The Planning Board shall not approve any site plan unless the
Planning Board determines that that site plan, as modified by the Planning
Board and as subject to conditions imposed by the Planning Board, meets
the following standards:
C. Within 62 days after such hearing, the Planning Board shall review and
approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the site plan;
provided, however, that the time within which the Planning Board must
render its decision may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant
and the Planning Board.
D. The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk within five business days after such decision is rendered,
and a copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant. [Amended
6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
E. Within 15 days of the approval of a site plan, the Planning Board shall
file with the Building Inspector one copy of the approved plan, with the
approval noted thereon, and one copy of the Planning Board's
resolution approving the site plan, including a list of any conditions to
which the approval is subject. One copy of the plan and resolution shall
be made available to the applicant.
A. The site layout and overall appearance of all buildings, structures and
land in the proposed development are such that they will have a
harmonious relationship with existing or permitted development of
contiguous land and of adjacent neighborhoods and will have no
material adverse effect upon the desirability of such neighborhoods for
the uses contemplated by the comprehensive zoning plan.
B. The historical, scenic and community character of the Village and of
individual buildings and sites shall be preserved.
C. The environment, including air, water, land and living resources, shall
be protected to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 295-107 TATTOOING § 295-109
257:649
§ 295-110. Site plan conditions.
The Planning Board shall attach such conditions and safeguards to the
approval of any site plan as are, in its opinion, necessary to assure initial
and continued compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter,
including a requirement that the applicant post a bond under such terms
and conditions as the Planning Board shall determine.
§ 295-111. Expiration of approvals.
§ 295-112. Reservation of parkland.
D. The safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic will be ensured.
E. The parking and loading requirements of this chapter are met.
F. The purposes and intent of this chapter will be met, to the end that the
value of buildings and land will be conserved and the most appropriate
use of land will be encouraged.
A. Subject to the provisions of Subsection C below, site plan approvals
granted pursuant to this chapter shall automatically lapse and become
null and void if a building permit in accordance with the approved site
plan is not obtained within 12 months after the site plan approval or, if
no building permit is required, if a certificate of occupancy in
accordance with the approved site plan is not obtained within 12
months after the site plan approval.
B. Subject to the provisions of Subsection C below, site plans approved
before the effective date of this chapter will lapse and become null and
void if a building permit in accordance with the approved site plan is
not obtained within 12 months after the effective date of this chapter or,
if no building permit is required, if a certificate of occupancy in
accordance with the approved site plan is not obtained within 12
months after the effective date of this chapter.
C. Upon written application, the Planning Board may, at its discretion,
extend the approval of a site plan where, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, there are reasonable grounds for granting the extension. Each
extension, however, may not be for a period longer than 12 months.
A. General standards.
(1) The Planning Board may require that a site plan containing
residential units also contain a park or parks suitably located for
playground or other recreational purposes.
(2) Before the Planning Board may require that land be reserved for
park, playground or other recreational purposes, the Planning
Board must make a finding that such requirement is warranted.
Such a finding shall include an evaluation of the present and
anticipated future needs for park and recreational purposes in the
§ 295-109 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-112
257:650
§ 295-112.1. Affordable and workforce housing set-aside. [Added
7-17-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001; amended 2-1-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011;
1-8-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Village, based on the projected population growth to which the
particular site plan will contribute.
B. Ownership of park area. The ownership of reservations for park
purposes shall be clearly indicated on the site plan and established in a
manner satisfactory to the Planning Board so as to assure their proper
future continuation and maintenance.
C. Cash payment in lieu of reservation.
(1) Where the Planning Board makes a finding that the proposed site
plan presents a proper case for requiring a park or parks suitably
located for playground or other recreational purposes, but that a
suitable park or parks of adequate size cannot be properly located
on such site plan, the Planning Board may require, as a condition to
approval of the site plan, a payment to the Village of a sum of
money determined by the Board of Trustees.
(2) In making the determination of suitability, the Planning Board shall
assess the size and suitability of lands shown on the site plan which
could be possible locations for park or recreational facilities, as
well as practical factors, including whether there is a need for
additional facilities in the immediate neighborhood.
(3) Any moneys required by the Planning Board in lieu of land for park,
playground or other recreational purposes pursuant to this section
shall be deposited into a trust fund to be used by the Village
exclusively for park, playground or other recreational purposes,
including the acquisition of property.
(4) Credit for land set aside in subdivision approval. Notwithstanding
Subsections A through C of this section, if the land included in a
site plan under review is a portion of a subdivision plat that has
been reviewed and approved, the Planning Board shall credit the
applicant for any land set aside for parkland or money donated in
lieu thereof under such subdivision plat approval. In the event of
resubdivision of such plat, nothing shall preclude the additional
reservation of parkland or money donated in lieu thereof.
D. This section shall not apply to affordable housing units or workforce
housing units, as defined in this chapter. [Added 1-8-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
A. Set-aside requirement. Before the Planning Board may approve a site
plan for a residential development containing eight or more dwelling
units, whether in single-family, two-family or multifamily buildings,
such site plan shall show affordable and workforce housing units as
follows:
§ 295-112 TATTOOING § 295-112.1
257:651
(1) Fifteen percent of all units in such development shall meet either
the definition of an "affordable housing unit" or a "workforce
housing unit." At least 2/3 of these units shall be affordable housing
units. The remaining 1/3 may be either affordable housing units or
workforce housing units. The calculation of the required number of
affordable and workforce housing units shall in each case be
rounded to the closest whole number, that is, 1.1 to 1.4 units would
be rounded down to one unit, and 1.5 to 1.9 units would be rounded
up to two units. [Amended 1-20-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
(2) Affordable housing units and workforce housing units shall
generally be distributed evenly throughout the development.
Notwithstanding, the Planning Board may use discretion in
reviewing and approving distribution.
(3) The exterior appearance of affordable housing units and workforce
housing units shall not distinguish them as a class from other units.
(4) Affordable housing units and workforce housing units shall be
distributed among one-, two-, three- or four-bedroom units in the
same proportion as all other units in the development, unless a
different proportion is approved by the Planning Board as being
better suited to the housing needs of the Village.
(5) Alternatives to set-aside. There is a strong preference that units be
on site. However, where the Planning Board determines that the
on-site location of affordable and workforce housing units is not
practical, the Planning Board may:
(a) Require the applicant to construct the affordable and
workforce housing units at another location in the Village; or
(b) Require the applicant to pay a fee equal to the cost necessary
to acquire a site and to develop the required number of
affordable and workforce housing units into a special
affordable housing fund.
(6) Minimum floor area.
(a) The minimum gross floor area per affordable and workforce
housing unit shall not be less than 80% of the average floor
area of nonrestricted housing units in the development and not
less than the following unless the applicant can establish to the
satisfaction of the Village that the development is subject to
maximum floor area requirements imposed by federal, state or
county funding sources or a different floor area requirement is
approved by the Planning Board as being better suited to the
housing needs of the Village:
§ 295-112.1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-112.1
257:652
Dwelling Unit
Minimum Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Efficiency 450
One-bedroom 675
Two-bedroom 850
Three-bedroom 1,100 (must include at least 1.5
baths)
Four-bedroom 1,300 (must include at least 1.5
baths)
(b) For purposes of this section, paved terraces or balconies may
be counted toward the minimum gross floor area requirement
in an amount not to exceed 1/3 of the square footage of such
terraces or balconies.
(7) Occupancy standards. For affordable and workforce housing units,
the following occupancy schedule shall apply, so long as these
standards comply with the New York State Building, Fire and
Property Maintenance codes:
Number of Bedrooms Number of Persons
Efficiency Minimum 1; maximum 1
One-bedroom Minimum 1; maximum 3
Two-bedroom Minimum 2; maximum 5
Three-bedroom Minimum 3; maximum 7
Four-bedroom Minimum 4; maximum 9.
(8) Reduced lot size. Notwithstanding Article IX of this chapter, a
single-family affordable or workforce housing unit may be located
on a lot meeting 75% of the minimum lot area for the single-family
homes in the development.
(9) Density bonus. The Planning Board may permit the number of
dwelling units and bedrooms to exceed the maximum number of
dwelling units and bedrooms otherwise permitted by the Zoning
Code, but in no event by more than 10%, if for every market-rate
dwelling unit in excess of the maximum, one affordable housing
unit is also provided.
(10) Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for the
affordable and workforce housing units must be issued at or before
the certificate of occupancy for the market-rate units, except that
for a subdivision development being constructed in phases, the
certificates of occupancy for the required 15% of the affordable and
workforce housing units in each phase must be issued before the
certificates of occupancy for the market-rated units.
§ 295-112.1 TATTOOING § 295-112.1
257:653
B. Administration.
(1) Time period of affordability. Units designated as affordable or
workforce housing units must remain affordable for a minimum of
100 years from the date of the initial certificate of occupancy for
rental properties and from the date of original sale for for-purchase
units.
(2) Primary residence. Any affordable housing unit or workforce
housing unit shall be the primary residence of the resident
household selected to occupy the unit.
(3) No priorities. No preferences shall be utilized to prioritize the
selection of income-eligible tenants or purchasers for affordable or
workforce housing units. This section shall not apply to affordable
housing units created before March 1, 2012.
(4) Maximum sales price/rent.
(a) The maximum gross sale price for an affordable housing unit
shall be based on an annual housing cost, including common
charges, principal, interest, taxes, and insurance, that does not
exceed 33% of 70% of the AMI, adjusted for the median
household size for the unit, as set forth in § 295-112.1A(7).
(b) The maximum monthly rent for a rental affordable housing
unit, plus any tenant-paid utilities, shall not exceed 30% of 60%
of the AMI, adjusted for the median household size for the unit,
as set forth in § 295-112.1A(7).
(c) The maximum gross sale price for a workforce housing unit
shall be based on an annual housing cost, including common
charges, principal, interest, taxes, and insurance, that does not
exceed 33% of 100% of the AMI, adjusted for the median
household size for the unit, as set forth in § 295-112.1A(7).
(d) The maximum monthly rent for a workforce housing unit, plus
any tenant-paid utilities, shall not exceed 30% of 80% of the
AMI, adjusted for the median household size for the unit, as set
forth in § 295-112.1A(7).
(5) Rental units.
(a) A person renting an affordable housing unit or workforce
housing unit shall sign a lease for a term of no more than two
years. As long as a renter remains eligible and has complied
with the terms of the lease, the renter shall be offered renewal
leases for a term of no more than two years each.
(b) Renewal of a lease shall be subject to the conditions of federal,
state or county provisions that may be imposed by the terms of
development funding agreements, if any, or to the provisions of
other applicable local law.
§ 295-112.1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-112.1
257:654
(c) If no such provisions are applicable and if a renter's annual
gross income should subsequently exceed the maximum then
allowable, as defined in this section, then the renter may
complete his/her current lease term, and shall be offered a
nonrestricted rental unit in the development, if available, at
the end of such lease term. If no such unit is available at said
time, the renter may be allowed to sign one additional one-year
lease for the affordable housing unit s/he occupies but shall not
be offered a renewal of the lease beyond the expiration of that
additional one-year lease term. If, however, the renter's income
falls below the maximum during the additional one-year term,
the renter shall be offered a two-year renewal lease.
(d) Every new or renewal lease must be approved by the Hastingson-
Hudson Affordable Housing Development Fund Co., Inc., to
ensure compliance with the income guidelines and other
requirements of this affordable and workforce housing setaside
section.
(e) The owner of any multifamily building subject to this section
shall annually certify to the satisfaction of the Hastings-on-
Hudson Affordable Housing Development Fund Co., Inc., that
the requisite number of affordable and workforce rental units
have been rented to income-eligible tenants as required by this
section and that any new tenants of the affordable and
workforce units meet the income guidelines in effect when said
new tenants take occupancy. Annual certifications shall include
unit designations and occupant names and shall be signed by
the owner of the building.
(6) Sale of individually owned units.
(a) In the case of owner-occupied affordable or workforce housing
units, the title to such property shall be restricted so that in the
event of any resale by the home buyer or any successor, the
resale price shall not exceed the then-maximum sales price for
said unit, as determined in this section, or the sum of:
[1] The net purchase price (i.e., gross sale price minus any
subsidies) paid for the unit by the owner increased by the
percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index
for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers in the New
York-Northern New Jersey Area, as published by the
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (the Index) on any
date between the month that was two months earlier than
the date on which the seller acquired the unit and the
month that was two months earlier than the month in
which the seller contracts to sell the unit. If the Bureau
stops publishing this Index, and fails to designate a
successor index, the Village will designate a substitute
index; and [Amended 2-5-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 295-112.1 TATTOOING § 295-112.1
257:655
[2] The cost of major capital improvements made by the seller
of the unit while said seller owned the unit, as evidenced
by paid receipts depreciated on a straight-line basis over a
fifteen-year period from the date of completion; provided,
however, that the improvements were approved by the
Affordable Housing Development Fund Co., Inc.
(b) Notwithstanding Subsection B(6)(a)[1] and [2], in no event
shall the resale price exceed the maximum sales price as
determined by § 295-112.1B(4).
(7) Property restriction. A property containing any affordable or
workforce housing unit must be restricted by using a mechanism
such as a declaration of restrictive covenants, in recordable form
acceptable to the Village Attorney, which shall ensure that the units
shall remain subject to affordable regulations for the minimum onehundred-
year period of affordability. Among other provisions, the
covenants shall require that the unit be the primary residence of
the resident household selected to occupy the unit. Upon approval,
such declaration shall be recorded against the property containing
the affordable or workforce unit prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit on the property.
(8) The developer and/or owner is responsible for the affirmative
marketing of the affordable and workforce housing units and shall
solicit income-eligible households in accordance with the
requirements, policies and protocols established in the.
Westchester County Fair and Affordable Housing Affirmative
Marketing Plan so as to ensure outreach to racially and ethnically
diverse households.
(9) The Village Board of Trustees shall be responsible for the
affordable housing requirements of this affordable and workforce
housing set-aside section and shall have the authority to
promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
implement them.
(10) The Village Board of Trustees may designate such additional
person(s), authorities and procedures as necessary to monitor
compliance with the provisions of this section.
C. Expedited project review process.
(1) Pre-application meeting. The applicant for a development including
affordable and/or workforce housing units shall be entitled to
attend at least one pre-application meeting at which
representatives will be in attendance from each municipal
department, agency, board, committee and staff expected to play a
role in the review and approval of the development application and
construction. The purpose of this meeting will be to expedite the
application review process through:
§ 295-112.1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-112.1
257:656
§ 295-113. Application for area variance.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, where a proposed
site plan contains one or more features that do not comply with the zoning
regulations, application may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals for an
area variance, pursuant to § 295-146 of this chapter, without the necessity
of a decision or determination of an administrative official charged with
enforcement of the zoning regulations.
§ 295-114. Compliance with SEQRA.
In considering any site plan, the Planning Board shall comply with the
provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act127 and its
implementing regulations.
(a) The early identification of issues, concerns, code compliance
and coordination matters that may arise during the review and
approval process.
(b) The establishment of a comprehensive review process outline,
proposed meeting schedule and conceptual timeline.
(2) Meeting schedule and timeline. Municipal departments, agencies,
boards, committees and staff shall endeavor to honor the proposed
meeting schedule and conceptual timeline established as an
outcome of the pre-application to the greatest extent possible,
subject to the demonstrated cooperation of the applicant to adhere
to same. Should the approval process extend beyond one year, an
application for a development including affordable and/or
workforce housing units shall be entitled to at least one additional
meeting per year with the same departments, agencies, boards,
committees, and staff to review any and all items discussed at
previous pre-application meetings.
D. The limited sales value or rent levels of affordable housing units or
workforce housing units shall be taken into consideration by the Village
Assessor in determining the basis for assessment on such units.
127. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law Article 8.
§ 295-112.1 TATTOOING § 295-114
257:657

ARTICLE XIII
Subdivision of Land
§ 295-115. Necessity of Planning Board approval.
Land within the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson may be subdivided into lots,
blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, only if approved by
the Planning Board in accordance with the procedures and requirements as
set forth in §§ 295-115 through 295-138 of this chapter (also referred to as
"subdivision regulations"), and only if the approved plat is duly filed in the
office of the County Clerk of Westchester County, New York. Construction,
excavation, filling, regrading, clearing of vegetation or other similar
activities related to a proposed subdivision shall not begin within any area
proposed or intended for subdivision until said subdivision shall have been
approved by the Planning Board.
§ 295-116. Resubdivision.
A resubdivision, as defined herein, is subject to the same procedure, rules
and regulations applicable to a subdivision.
§ 295-117. Statement of policy.
It is declared to be the policy of the Village to consider land subdivisions
as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and economical development of
the Village. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can
be used safely for building or development purposes without danger to
health or peril from fire, flood or other menace, and without resulting in
significant damage to the ecology of the area in which it is located. Proper
provision shall be made for drainage, water, sewerage, electric, telephone,
gas and other needed improvements. The proposed streets shall compose
a convenient system conforming to the Zoning Map128 of the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson. Streets shall be of such width, grade and location
as to accommodate the prospective traffic, to afford adequate light and
air and to facilitate fire and police protection. In proper cases, and when
required by the Planning Board, a park or parks of suitable location, size
and character for playground or other recreational purposes shall be shown
on the subdivision plat.
§ 295-118. Issuance of building permits.
No permit shall be issued for the erection of any building within a proposed
subdivision until said subdivision has been duly approved by the Planning
Board and filed in the office of the County Clerk, except that the Building
Inspector may issue a building permit for a single building based upon the
entire tract of land where there is no other existing building within the
proposed subdivision and where the proposed building is in accordance
with an approved preliminary plat.
128. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-115 TATTOOING § 295-119
257:659
§ 295-119. Definitions.
For the purpose of these subdivision regulations (§§ 295-115 through
295-138 of this chapter), certain words and terms used herein are defined
as follows. (NOTE: Except where specifically defined herein, all words and
terms shall carry their customary meanings.)
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Village of Hastingson-
Hudson, or his or her duly authorized representative.
BUILDING LOT — Any lot upon which a principal residential or commercial
building can be constructed in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS — The maps and engineering drawings, described
in Section A-4 of Appendix A to these subdivision regulations,129
accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and
design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with
these subdivision regulations.
FINAL PLAT — A drawing, in final form, as described in Section A-3 of
Appendix A to these regulations, showing a proposed subdivision and
containing all of the information required by these or other applicable
subdivision regulations and certified by a licensed land surveyor or
registered engineer.
LOT — A parcel of land not divided by streets.
MAINTENANCE BOND — A bond to assure the maintenance of required
subdivision improvements following dedication of such improvements for
such period as required by the Planning Board.
OFFICIAL SUBMISSION DATE — The date when a subdivision plat,
accompanied by all other information required with the application for
subdivision approval, is received by the Building Inspector.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A bond, as required by § 7-730 of the Village Law,
to assure the full and satisfactory completion of all required subdivision
improvements as specified in the Planning Board resolution of approval,
such bond to run for a term fixed by the Planning Board and with surety,
form, sufficiency and manner of execution approved by the Board of
Trustees.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in
Section A-1 of Appendix A to these subdivision regulations,130 showing the
basic features of a proposed subdivision.
129. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
130. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 295-119 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-119
257:660
RESUBDIVISION — Any change of existing property lines or of property
lines shown on a plat approved by the Planning Board and filed in the office
of the County Clerk.
STREET — An existing state, county or Village road or highway, a street
shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Board or a street shown on
a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to
October 26, 1953.
STREET, BUSINESS — A street that serves or is designed to serve as access
to abutting business, commercial or industrial properties.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street that serves or is designed to serve
primarily the function of carrying traffic from minor streets to major streets.
STREET, DEAD-END — A street or a portion of a street with only one
vehicular traffic outlet.
STREET, MINOR — A street that serves or is designed to serve primarily as
access to abutting residential properties.
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the street rightof-
way designed to be used by vehicular traffic.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL — A street that serves or is designed to serve as
access to abutting residential properties.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH — The distance between property lines
measured at right angles to the center line of the street.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land, regardless of use, into
two or more lots, plots, blocks, sites or parcels, with or without the creation
of new streets, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership or building development, and shall include resubdivision as
defined herein.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS — The regulations included in §§ 295-115
through 295-138 of this chapter.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Superintendent of Public
Works of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
VILLAGE CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS — The
standards and specifications adopted by the Board of Trustees for the
construction of streets and related subdivision improvements, and all
amendments thereto.
WETLANDS — An area having wetland soils and/or vegetation or identified
as having poorly drained soils on maps of the Westchester County Soil and
Water Conservation District or other county, state or federal agency.
ZONING MAP — The map established by the Board of Trustees under
§ 7-724 of the Village Law showing the streets, highways and parks
theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law, and any amendments
thereto adopted by the Board of Trustees or additions thereto resulting from
the approval of subdivision plats by the Planning Board and the subsequent
filing of such approved plats.131
§ 295-119 TATTOOING § 295-120
257:661
§ 295-120. Application procedures; application and action on
preliminary plat and final plat.
A. General procedures. Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, and
before any contract for the sale is carried out or title to any part thereof
is transferred, the subdividing owner or his or her duly authorized
agent shall proceed to secure approval of the proposed subdivision in
accordance with the following steps:
(1) Initial conference and review (recommended but not required).
(2) Preparation of preliminary plat.
(3) Preparation of final plat.
B. Initial conference and review. This step is recommended for the benefit
of the applicant, but it is not required. If followed, the procedure shall
be as follows:
(1) Initial conference. The applicant shall notify the Building Inspector,
at least one week in advance of a regular Planning Board meeting,
of the applicant's desire to be placed on the agenda for an initial
conference. At such conference, the applicant shall present a
sketch layout of the proposed subdivision. It shall include a site
location sketch (at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet) indicating
the applicant's entire holdings in relation to neighboring streets
and properties, and shall show the general nature of the proposed
arrangement of streets, lots, recreation areas and the proposed
concept for providing utility service. The sketch layout shall be
drawn on a topographic map with a vertical contour interval of no
more than five feet, at a scale of no smaller than one inch equals
100 feet. It shall be submitted in five copies.
(2) Field trip. After the initial conference, the Planning Board may
schedule a field trip to the proposed subdivision site. The applicant
or a representative should attend the site inspection and, prior to
it, should have the center line of all proposed streets located by
temporary stakes.
(3) Planning Board recommendations. At or subsequent to the field
trip, the Planning Board shall advise the applicant or
representative of the additions and modifications, if any, which
should be made if an application for subdivision approval is to be
submitted.
C. Preliminary plat.
(1) Application. Prior to requesting approval of a proposed final
subdivision plat, the applicant shall file an application for approval
of a preliminary plat, in duplicate, on forms available from the
131. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-120 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-120
257:662
Building Inspector. Such application shall be filed with the Building
Inspector at least two weeks prior to the regular Planning Board
meeting at which it will be considered and shall:
(a) Be accompanied by a preliminary application fee, payable to
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson, in the amount fixed by the
Board of Trustees pursuant to § 295-152 of this chapter.
(b) Comply with all requirements of these subdivision regulations
and this Code. [Amended 12-16-2008 by L.L. No. 28-2008]
(c) Be accompanied by 10 copies each of the preliminary plat,
including all contiguous land of the applicant, and preliminary
construction plans, showing all items listed in Sections A-1 and
A-2 of Appendix A to these subdivision regulations.132
(d) Be accompanied by a completed state environmental quality
review form, available from the Building Inspector.
(e) Be accompanied by a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP), if required by Chapter 250 of the Code of the Village
of Hastings-on-Hudson. [Added 12-11-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
(2) Field trip. The Planning Board may schedule a field inspection of
the proposed subdivision, as described in Subsection B(2) of this
section.
(3) Action on preliminary plat application. Within 62 days after the
receipt of a completed preliminary plat and all accompanying
material by the Building Inspector, the Planning Board shall hold a
public hearing on the application.
(4) Public notice. The Building Inspector shall:
(a) Submit notice to a newspaper of general circulation in the
Village and mail copies of the notice to all adjoining property
owners and to the clerk of any municipality when the land to be
subdivided is within 500 feet thereof, such notice to be
published and copies mailed at least 10 days prior to the public
hearing;
(b) File a copy of the preliminary plat and construction plans at the
Village Clerk's office for public review at least 10 days prior to
the public hearing; and
(c) Submit a copy of the preliminary plat and construction plans to
the County Planning Board where a proposed road within the
subdivision intersects with a state or county highway, or where
drainage lines connect directly into any channel lines
established by the county, such plat and construction plans to
132. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 295-120 TATTOOING § 295-120
257:663
be received at least 10 days prior to the date of the public
hearing.
(5) Action on preliminary plat application. Within 62 days after the
public hearing, the Planning Board shall approve, with or without
modification, or disapprove the preliminary plat application by
resolution which shall set forth any conditions to which the
approval is subject, or the reasons for disapproval. When approving
a preliminary plat with modification, the Planning Board shall state
in the resolution any modifications it deems necessary for
submission of the plat in final form. The time in which the Planning
Board must take action may be extended by the consent of the
property owner and the Planning Board.
(6) Filing of decision on preliminary plat. Within five business days
after the date of the adoption of the resolution stating the decision
of the Planning Board on the preliminary plat, the Chairperson or
other duly authorized member of the Planning Board shall cause a
copy of the resolution to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
[Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(7) Expiration of approval. Approval of a preliminary plat application
expires if the owner has not submitted a proposed plan in final form
within six months of the date of approval of the preliminary plat.
(8) Default approval of preliminary plat. In the event that the Planning
Board fails to take action on a preliminary plat within the time
prescribed, or within such extended period established by the
mutual consent of the owner and the Planning Board, the
preliminary plat shall be deemed granted preliminary approval. A
certificate of the Village Clerk as to the date of submission, and the
failure of the Planning Board to take action within the prescribed
time, shall be issued on demand and shall be sufficient in lieu of
written endorsement or other evidence of approval.
D. Final plat.
(1) Application. Application for final subdivision plat approval shall be
filed with the Building Inspector. Such application shall comply
with the modifications, if any, required by the Planning Board at the
time of preliminary plat approval and shall be submitted in
duplicate on forms available from the Building Inspector.
(2) Items to accompany application. Application for final plat approval
shall be accompanied by the following:
(a) Ten copies each of a final subdivision plat and final
construction plans conforming to all requirements of Sections
A-3 and A-4 of Appendix A to these subdivision regulations,133
as well as all conditions, if any, of preliminary plat approval.
133. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 295-120 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-120
257:664
(b) A final subdivision application fee, payable to the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson, in an amount fixed by the Board of
Trustees pursuant to § 295-152 of this chapter.
(c) Proof of ownership by the applicant of the premises affected by
the application and certificate of title company covering all
interests, liens and objections to title, if any.
(d) Where subdivision roads and/or other improvements are
involved and where the applicant intends to post a
performance bond to cover the cost of such improvements, a
statement from the applicant's engineer giving the estimated
cost of construction, together with the quantities and unit costs
used in making the estimate.
(e) An engineering inspection fee, payable to the Village of
Hastings-on-Hudson, as fixed by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to § 295-152 of this chapter.
(f) A fee covering the costs to the Village of engineering
consulting services required for the engineering review of the
proposed subdivision.
(g) Where streets or park areas are included within the proposed
subdivision, a formal offer of cession to the Village of all such
streets and park areas, in form approved by the Village
Attorney, except where the proposed final subdivision plat has
a notation to the effect that no offer of dedication of such street
and park areas, or any of them, is made to the public.
(h) Where there is no park area shown on the proposed plat, a
recreation fee, payable to the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson,
in the amount specified in the fee schedule as adopted by the
Village Board of Trustees.
(i) A written agreement, in form satisfactory to the Village
Attorney, permitting entry by the Village onto any streets,
easements and park areas, for the purpose of inspecting and
installing any required improvements in the event of the failure
of the applicant to make such installations, or to properly
maintain such installations until such time as the Village
assumes the responsibility for them.
(j) A list of any and all waivers of the provisions of these
subdivision regulations that the applicant requests the
Planning Board to grant in his or her specific case, with the
reasons therefor.
(k) A completed environmental assessment form or draft
environmental impact statement, as required by the Planning
Board under the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQRA).134
§ 295-120 TATTOOING § 295-120
257:665
(l) Stamped envelopes addressed to each of the owners of
property abutting or across the road from the subdivision.
(m) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required
by Chapter 250 of the Code of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson. [Added 12-11-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
(3) Action by Planning Board: final plats that are in substantial
agreement with approved preliminary plat. When a final plat is
submitted that the Planning Board deems to be in substantial
agreement with a preliminary plat approved pursuant to these
subdivision regulations, the Planning Board shall by resolution
conditionally approve, with or without modification, disapprove or
grant final approval and authorize the signing of such plat within
62 days after receipt of the completed final plat and all
accompanying material by the Building Inspector. The grounds for
modification, if any, or the grounds for disapproval shall be stated
in the resolution of the Planning Board. The time in which the
Planning Board must take action may be extended by mutual
consent of the property owner and the Planning Board. Within five
business days after the date of the adoption of the resolution
stating the decision of the Planning Board on the final plat, the
Chairperson or other duly authorized member of the Planning
Board shall cause a copy of the resolution to be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk. [Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(4) Action by Planning Board: final plats that are not in substantial
agreement with approved preliminary plats. When a final plat is
submitted that the Planning Board deems not to be in substantial
agreement with a preliminary plat approved pursuant to these
subdivision regulations, the following shall apply:
(a) The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on such plat not
later than 62 days after receipt of the completed final plat and
all accompanying material by the Building Inspector. The
hearing shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village at least 10 days before such
hearing.
(b) The Planning Board shall by resolution conditionally approve,
with or without modification, disapprove or grant final
approval and authorize the signing of such plat within 62 days
after the date of the public hearing. The grounds for
modification, if any, or the grounds for disapproval shall be
stated in the resolution of the Planning Board. The time in
which the Planning Board must take action may be extended by
mutual consent of the property owner and the Planning Board.
134. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law Article 8.
§ 295-120 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-120
257:666
(c) Within five business days after the date of the adoption of the
resolution stating the decision of the Planning Board on the
final plat, the Chairperson or other duly authorized member of
the Planning Board shall cause a copy of the resolution to be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk. [Added 6-15-1999 by
L.L. No. 3-1999]
(d) Final plats not in substantial agreement with preliminary plats
may require further review under the State Environmental
Quality Review Act.
(5) Approval by default. In the event that the Planning Board fails to
take action on a final plat within the time prescribed, or within such
extended period established by the mutual consent of the owner
and the Planning Board, the plat shall be deemed approved. A
certificate of the Village Clerk as to the date of submission, and the
failure of the Planning Board to take action within the prescribed
time, shall be issued on demand and shall be sufficient in lieu of
written endorsement or other evidence of approval. Such approval
shall expire within 62 days unless the applicant files the plat in the
office of the Westchester County Clerk, Division of Land Records,
within that sixty-two-day period.
(6) Conditional approval of final plats.
(a) Certification of plat.
[1] Upon resolution granting conditional approval of a final
plat, the Planning Board shall empower the Chairperson or
another member of the Planning Board to sign the plat
subject to completion of any requirements as may be
stated in the resolution.
[2] Within five days after the resolution, the plat shall be
certified by the Secretary of the Planning Board as
conditionally approved and a copy shall be filed in the
office of the Planning Board. A copy of the resolution shall
be mailed to the owner, which copy shall include a
statement of requirements which, when completed, will
authorize the signing of the conditionally approved final
plat.
(b) Duration of approval. Upon completion of such requirements,
the plat shall be signed by the duly authorized member of the
Planning Board. Conditional approval of a final plat shall expire
180 days after the date of the resolution granting conditional
approval unless the requirements have been certified as
completed.
(c) Extension of time. The Planning Board may extend the time in
which a conditionally approved plat in final form must be
submitted for signature if, in its opinion, such extension is
§ 295-120 TATTOOING § 295-120
257:667
warranted. The Planning Board may not extend the time for
more than two additional periods of 90 days each.
(7) Approval of plat in sections. In granting conditional or final
approval of a plat in final form, the Planning Board may permit the
plat to be subdivided and developed in two or more sections. In its
resolution granting such approval, the Planning Board may state
that such requirements as it deems necessary to ensure the orderly
development of the plat be completed before said sections may be
signed by the authorized member of the Planning Board.
Conditional or final approval of the sections of a final plat may be
granted concurrently with conditional or final approval of the
entire plat, subject to any requirements imposed by the Planning
Board.
(8) Action by applicant. Based upon the Planning Board resolution, the
applicant shall have the final subdivision plat and construction
plans revised, if necessary, in accordance with said resolution, and
submit 10 copies of such revised maps to the Building Inspector.
Any performance bond or security agreement that is to be posted
shall be submitted to the Village Attorney. The Village Attorney
shall be responsible for determining and certifying to the Planning
Board whether or not the surety, form, sufficiency and manner of
execution of the bond or security agreement is acceptable to and
has been approved by the Board of Trustees.
(9) Approval of construction plans. The construction plans, revised as
necessary to meet the requirements of the Planning Board
resolution, shall be endorsed by the Planning Board Chairperson or
other duly authorized member of the Planning Board as "approved"
prior to the signing of the plat or the beginning of any construction
work within the proposed subdivision.
(10) Final approval of subdivision plat. The Chairperson or other duly
authorized member of the Planning Board shall endorse the
Planning Board's final approval of the plat only after all required
improvements have been completed in accordance with the
Planning Board's approval of the plat and construction plans, or
alternatively after a bond or other security in the required amount
and surety has been filed and after all other required conditions of
the resolution of approval, including the payment of all fees, have
been complied with. Said endorsement shall be by signature and
date on the original of the plat (which shall be returned to the
applicant for filing) and on a print of the plat (which shall be
retained in the record files of the Planning Board).
(11) Filing plat with County Clerk; expiration of approval.
(a) The applicant shall file the approved plat with the Westchester
County Clerk, Division of Land Records, within 62 days of the
§ 295-120 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-120
257:668
§ 295-121. Completion of improvements or filing of bond or
security.
date of Planning Board signing. The approval of any plat not so
filed shall expire 62 days after the date of signing.
(b) In the event the applicant shall file only a section of the
approved plat in the office of the County Clerk, the entire
approved plat shall be filed within 30 days of the filing of such
section with the Village Clerk in each Village in which any
portion of the land described in the plat is situated. Such
section shall encompass at least 10% of the total number of lots
contained in the approved plat, and the approval of the
remaining sections shall expire unless such sections are filed
within three years after the filing of the first section.
(12) Submission of copies of final plat. The applicant shall submit five
copies of the final plat, showing the endorsements of the County
Clerk, to the Building Inspector within 30 days of the date of filing.
A. Completion of improvements. After adoption of a resolution approving a
final subdivision plat, and before the plat is endorsed by the Planning
Board Chairperson or other duly authorized member, the applicant
shall be required to complete, at the applicant's expense and without
reimbursement by the Village or any special district, all street and other
improvements as shown on the approved construction plans or
otherwise specified in the resolution.
B. Filing of performance bond or security. As an alternative to the
installation of improvements, as provided in Subsection A, the applicant
shall file with the Board of Trustees a performance bond or other
security in an amount fixed by the Planning Board in its resolution as
sufficient to secure to the Village the satisfactory construction,
installation and completion of the required improvements.
C. Security where plat approved in sections.
(1) In the event that the applicant is authorized to file the approved
plat in sections, as provided in § 295-120 of these subdivision
regulations, approval of the plat may be granted upon installation
of the required improvements in the section of the plat filed in the
office of the County Clerk or upon the furnishing of security
covering the costs of such improvements.
(2) The applicant shall not be permitted to begin construction of
buildings in any other section until such section has been filed in
the office of the County Clerk and the required improvements have
been installed in such section or a security covering the cost of
such improvements is provided.
D. Term of bond or security agreement. Such performance bond or other
security shall run for the period within which the required
§ 295-120 TATTOOING § 295-121
257:669
§ 295-122. Failure to complete improvements.
improvements must be completed, but which shall not be longer than
three years. Such period shall be specified in the Planning Board
resolution.
E. Form of security agreement.
(1) Any such bond or security must be provided pursuant to a written
security agreement with the Village and must be approved by the
Village Board of Trustees. Such bond or security must also be
approved by the Village Attorney as to form, sufficiency and
manner of execution. Such security may be in the form of:
(a) A performance bond issued by a bonding or surety company;
(b) The deposit of funds in, or a certificate of deposit issued by, a
bank or trust company located and authorized to do business in
this state;
(c) An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank located and
authorized to do business in this state;
(d) Obligations of the United States of America; or
(e) Any obligations fully guaranteed as to interest and principal by
the United States of America and having a market value at
least equal to the full costs of such improvements.
(2) If not delivered to the Village, such security shall be held in a
Village account at a bank or trust company.
F. Requirements for improvements. All improvements shall be completed
to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, in accordance with the
approved construction plans and the requirements of these subdivision
regulations and the Village construction standards and specifications.
A. Where a bond or security is not filed. If all required improvements are
not completed within the period specified in the Planning Board
resolution of approval, such approval shall be deemed to have expired
unless, upon request of the applicant, the period has been extended by
resolution of the Planning Board.
B. Where a bond or security is filed. If all required improvements are not
completed within the term specified by the Planning Board and set forth
in the filed bond or security, and if no application for the extension of
such term has been made by the applicant and approved by the
Planning Board, the Board of Trustees may thereupon declare said
bond to be in default and collect the sum remaining payable thereunder
and, upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the Village shall install such
improvements as are covered by the bond or security and are
commensurate with the extent of building development that has taken
§ 295-121 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-122
257:670
§ 295-123. Modification of bond or security.
§ 295-124. Modification of requirements.
If at any time, either before or during the course of construction of the
required improvements, it is determined by the Planning Board that
unforeseen conditions make it necessary to modify the location or design of
any improvements, the Planning Board may modify the terms and conditions
of the approval so as to require such changes as may be necessary to comply
with the spirit and intent of the Planning Board's original approval and
to conform to accepted engineering practices. If such modification affects
the scope of work covered by a bond or security, the Planning Board may
require or allow appropriate modification of such bond or security.
§ 295-125. Inspection of improvements.
The Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designee shall be
responsible for inspecting required improvements during construction to
ensure their satisfactory completion and, upon such completion, shall
furnish the Planning Board with a statement to that effect. If the
Superintendent of Public Works determines that any of the required
improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the approved
plan, the applicant shall be responsible for properly completing said
improvements. Failure of the Superintendent of Public Works to carry out
inspections of required improvements during construction shall not in any
place in the subdivision but not exceeding, in cost, the amount of such
proceeds.
A. Extension of period specified in bond or security. The time period
specified for the completion of all required improvements, as set forth
in the bond or security, may be extended only by resolution of the
Planning Board upon request by the applicant setting forth, in detail,
the amount of work that has been completed, reasons for failure to
complete the remainder of the work within the specified period, the
maximum estimated time required to complete the remainder of the
work and the time-period extension that is requested.
B. Reduction of bond or security. An applicant may request, in writing, that
the Planning Board authorize a reduction in the amount of the bond or
security. Such request shall itemize the extent of required
improvements already completed, the estimated cost of improvements
remaining to be completed and the amount of bond reduction
requested. Then, upon approval of the Board of Trustees and after due
notice and public hearing, the Planning Board may, if it determines that
sufficient required improvements have been installed to warrant such
action, reduce the face amount of the bond or security by an
appropriate amount so that the new amount will cover the cost in full of
all required improvements remaining to be completed, and any security
deposited with the bond may be reduced proportionately.
§ 295-122 TATTOOING § 295-125
257:671
way relieve the applicant or the bonding company of their responsibilities
related to the proper construction of such improvements.
A. Inspection of stages of construction.
(1) To facilitate inspection of required improvements during
construction, the applicant shall notify the Superintendent of
Public Works or his or her designee at least three working days
before reaching each of the following stages of construction:
(a) Rough grading completed.
(b) Drainage and other underground facilities installed, but prior
to backfilling.
(c) After gravel base is spread and compacted.
(d) When each paved course is being applied.
(e) After completion of all improvements.
(2) The applicant shall not proceed to work on any stage subsequent to
the first stage until the work of the previous stage has been
inspected and approved by the Superintendent of Public Works or
his or her designee. In the case of any other improvements, the
Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designee shall inspect
the work at such progressive stages as (s)he shall specify, and shall
certify to the Planning Board that the work was inspected by him or
her and was in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications.
B. Certificate of construction. At such time as the applicant has completed
construction of all required improvements, the applicant shall furnish
to the Superintendent of Public Works three copies of "as built" plans
and profiles which show the actual location of all paved streets,
culverts, headwalls, drains, manholes, catch basins, sidewalks, curbs,
utility lines and equipment, monuments, street signs, street trees and
all other required improvements, as constructed, and all other
pertinent information, such as cross-sections of the streets at intervals
determined by the Superintendent of Public Works, the culvert and
drain grades, sewer grades, sidewalk and curb grades and invert
elevations at manholes. Such plans and profiles shall bear a dated
certification by a professional engineer or licensed surveyor to the
effect that the data shown thereon was accurately determined by field
survey. If the location or accuracy of improvements does not, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, fully comply with the approved
construction plans and specifications, the Planning Board shall have the
right to refuse to sign the final plat or release the bond until such
situation is corrected.
C. Inspection fee. To offset the costs incurred by the Village in conducting
inspections, all applicants for approval of submissions involving the
§ 295-125 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-125
257:672
§ 295-126. Future status of streets, parks and easements.
§ 295-127. Waiver of required improvements.
The Planning Board may waive, subject to appropriate conditions, the
provision of any or all such improvements and requirements as, in its
judgment of the special circumstances of a particular plat, are not requisite
in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare or which, in
its judgment, are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting
facilities adjacent or in proximity to the subdivision.
construction of streets and/or other improvements shall be required to
submit an inspection fee, payable to the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson,
in an amount to be determined by the Village Board by resolution and
set in the fee schedule.135 [Amended 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
A. Offers of cession. All streets, parks and easements shall be indicated on
the plat. In accordance with § 7-732 of the Village Law, the applicant
may add as part of the plat a notation, if the applicant so desires, to the
effect that no offer of dedication of such streets or parks, or any of
them, is made to the public. All offers of cession to the public of all
streets and parks not so marked shall be filed with the Planning Board
at the time of submission of the final application.
B. Petition for dedication. Upon completion of the subdivision and the
road(s), a petition in the form required by the Board of Trustees shall be
filed with such Board for the acceptance of parks or any other
reservations or easements.
C. Acceptance by Village. Acceptance of any offer of cession of streets or
parks shall rest with the Board of Trustees. In the event that the
applicant shall elect not to file the plat in the office of the County Clerk
within the period prescribed for such filing, then such formal offer of
cession shall be deemed void. The approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute nor imply the
acceptance by the Village of any streets, parks or other areas shown on
said plat and the Planning Board may require the addition of
appropriate notes to this effect on the plat.
D. Maintenance. In the event that no offer of cession to the public is made
for the streets, parks and required easements shown on the plat, there
shall be submitted with the final application copies of agreements or
other documents providing for the suitable maintenance of such
facilities and a statement of all rights that exist with respect to each of
them. The adequacy of such documents shall be subject to Planning
Board approval.
135. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-125 TATTOOING § 295-128
257:673
§ 295-128. Certificates of occupancy for structures fronting on
bonded streets.
A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a structure within a
subdivision where the improvements are guaranteed by a performance
bond or other security unless it is determined by the Planning Board that
both of the following conditions have been complied with:
§ 295-129. General requirements for subdivision design.
The Planning Board, in considering an application for the subdivision of
land, shall be guided by the following considerations and standards, which
standards shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the
convenience, health, safety and welfare of the Village:
A. Status of street improvements. The improvement of the street or streets
giving access to the structure has progressed to a stage deemed
adequate by the Planning Board to render safe all-weather vehicular
access for both routine and emergency purposes.
B. Maintenance agreements. Written agreements have been filed
providing for the maintenance of the bonded street or streets in such
all-weather passable condition, including snow removal and sanding,
during the period between the issuance of the certificate of occupancy
and the acceptance of the fully completed street by the Board of
Trustees. (NOTE: If the street is not to be offered for dedication to the
Village, such an agreement will have been required in accordance with
§ 295-126D of these subdivision regulations.)
A. Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that
it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood, drainage or other menace to neighboring
properties or the public health, safety and welfare. Land subject to such
hazards shall not be subdivided nor developed for residential purposes,
nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or
property, or aggravate a flood hazard, but such land may be set aside
for uses as shall not involve such danger nor produce unsatisfactory
living conditions.
B. Preservation of natural features.
(1) Land to be subdivided shall be designated in reasonable conformity
to existing topography in order to minimize grading, cut and fill,
and to retain, insofar as possible, the natural contours, to limit
stormwater runoff and to conserve the natural vegetative cover and
soil. No tree, topsoil or excavated material shall be removed from
its natural position except where necessary and incidental to the
improvement of lots and the construction of streets and related
facilities in accordance with the approved plan. Topsoil shall be
restored to a depth of at least six inches and properly seeded and
§ 295-128 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-129
257:674
§ 295-130. Location and design of streets.
fertilized in those disturbed areas not occupied by buildings or
structures.
(2) Existing natural features that are of ecological, aesthetic or scenic
value to residential development or to the Village as a whole, such
as wetlands, watercourses, water bodies, rock formations, stands
of trees, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be
preserved, insofar as possible, through harmonious design of the
subdivision and, where appropriate, the Planning Board may
require the inclusion of such features in permanent reservations.
C. Conformity to Village Zoning Map.136 Streets, parks and other
subdivision features shall conform to the Village Zoning Map.
D. Frontage on improved streets. The area proposed to be subdivided shall
have frontage on and direct access to a street duly placed on the Zoning
Map, and if such street be private, it shall be improved to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board or there shall be a bond held by the
Village to guarantee such improvement.
A. Location, width and improvements. Streets shall be suitably located, of
sufficient width and suitable grade and adequately improved to
accommodate the expected traffic and to afford satisfactory access to
police, fire-fighting, snow removal and other utility and road
maintenance equipment, and shall be coordinated so as to compose a
safe and convenient system.
B. Relation to topography. Streets shall be appropriately related to the
natural topography and shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as
possible of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. A
combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
C. Intersections. Cross (four-cornered) street intersections shall be
avoided insofar as possible, except at important traffic locations. A
distance at least equal to the minimum required lot width, but not less
than 150 feet, shall be maintained between center lines of offset
intersecting streets. Within 60 feet of the center of an intersection,
streets shall be at approximately right angles and grades shall be
limited to 1.5%. When two streets intersect at an angle of less than 75°,
special pavement, channelization, right-of-way and/or sight easement
restrictions may be required by the Planning Board.
D. Continuation of streets into adjacent properties.
(1) The arrangement of streets shall provide for their construction
between adjacent properties where such continuation is
determined necessary for proper traffic movement, effective fire
protection, efficient provision of utilities, snow removal and other
136. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-129 TATTOOING § 295-130
257:675
services. Alternatively, if a street continuation is not determined
to be warranted by the circumstances, or would result in unsafe
traffic conditions or otherwise jeopardize the public safety and
welfare, the Planning Board may require such street to be
terminated short of the boundary lines of the subdivision.
(2) Where a continuation of a street beyond the boundaries of a
subdivision is warranted but the adjacent property is undeveloped
and the street must dead-end temporarily, the Planning Board may
require that the right-of-way and all improvements be extended to
the property line. A temporary circular turnaround shall be
provided on all temporary dead-end streets in excess of 100 feet in
length, with a notation on the plat that land outside the normal
street right-of-way shall revert to abutting property owners upon
continuation of the street. The length of temporary dead-end
streets shall normally be limited to not more than double the
permitted length of permanent dead-end streets.
(3) Where a turnaround exists at the end of a street within an adjoining
development to which a proposed street is to connect, the applicant
may be required to remove the portions of the turnaround
pavement outside of the normal width of the traveled way, perform
any necessary reconstruction of the pavement edge, construct
continuations of any existing driveways to the new pavement edge
and regrade, seed and drain the disturbed areas in such a manner
as to blend them in with the surrounding landscape.
E. Permanent dead-end streets.
(1) Where a street does not extend to the boundary of a subdivision
and its future continuation is not required by the Planning Board, it
shall be separated from such boundary by a distance not less than
the minimum required lot depth. The Planning Board may require
the reservation of an easement to the boundary to accommodate
utilities, drainage facilities and/or pedestrian traffic. A circular
turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end
street.
(2) For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire
protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited
in length, exclusive of the turnaround, to eight times the minimum
lot width for the zoning district in which it is located.
F. Solar access considerations. To permit maximum solar access to
proposed lots and future buildings, wherever reasonably feasible,
consistent with other appropriate design considerations, new streets
shall be located on an east-west access. This encourages house siting
with the maximum exposure of roof and wall area to the sun. The
Planning Board shall also consider the slope of the property and the
nature and location of existing vegetation as they affect solar access.
§ 295-130 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-130
257:676
G. Street names. Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and
in spelling from other names in the Village so as not to cause confusion.
A street that is a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same
name. In general, street names shall conform to the following
classifications:
(1) Avenue, Street or Road: major or collector street.
(2) Drive or Lane: minor residential streets, except as follows:
(a) Court or Place: permanent dead-end street.
(b) Circle or Loop: street that returns to a starting point, or a
street both ends of which intersect another street at different
locations.
H. Design standards for new streets. Streets shall meet the design
standards set forth in the following table. Street classifications may be
determined by the Planning Board. Standards are not shown for streets
that would be built by the state or county.
Design Standards for New Streets
Residential
Streets Business Streets
Minimum right-of-way width
(feet)
Minor street 50 60
Collector street 60 70
Minimum traveled way width
(feet)
Minor street 24 40
Collector street 30 48
Maximum grade
Minor street 10% 8%
Collector street 8% 6%
Turnaround 5% 3%
Minimum grade 1 to 1 1/2% 1 to 1 1/2%
Minimum center-line radius of
horizontal curves (feet)
Minor street 200 250
Collector street 350 400
Minimum right-of-way radius at
intersections (feet)
Minor street 25 30
Collector street 30 35
§ 295-130 TATTOOING § 295-130
257:677
§ 295-131. Improvements.
Design Standards for New Streets
Residential
Streets Business Streets
Minimum pavement radius at
intersections (feet)
Minor street 15 20
Collector street 20 25
Minimum length of vertical
curves (feet)
Minor street, crest curve 100, but not less than 20, for each
1% algebraic difference in grade
Minor street, sag curve 75, but not less
than 15 for each
1% algebraic
difference in
grade
Same as crest
curve
Collector street, crest curve 150, but not less
than 30 for each
1% algebraic
difference in
grade
Collector street, sag curve 100, but not less
than 25 for each
1% algebraic
difference in
grade
Same as crest
curve
Minimum length of tangent
between reverse curves (feet)
Main street 100 150
Collector street 200 250
Minimum diameter of
turnaround right-of-way (feet)
Permanent dead-end 120 130
Temporary dead-end 100 110
Minimum diameter of
turnaround pavement (feet)
Permanent dead-end 95 110
Temporary dead-end 80 95
A. Street improvements. Streets shall be graded and improved with
pavement, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street lighting standards, street
§ 295-130 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-131
257:678
signs, street trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, fire
alarm signal devices, fire hydrants and other utilities, except that the
Planning Board may waive, subject to appropriate conditions, such
improvements as it considers are not requisite in the interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. The subdivider shall install
underground service connections to the property line of each lot before
the street is paved. Except where waivers are granted, all such grading
and street improvements shall conform in all respects to these
subdivision regulations and to the Village construction standards and
specifications.
B. Drainage improvements.
(1) The subdivider may be required by the Planning Board to carry
away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may
exist either previous to or as a result of the subdivision. Such
drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way, where
feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate
width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the Village
construction standards and specifications.
(2) Drainage facilities shall, in each case, be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from their entire upstream drainage
area, whether inside or outside the subdivision, based on a onehundred-
year storm and assuming conditions of maximum potential
development within the watershed as permitted by this chapter.
The applicant shall be responsible for submitting such
computations to the Superintendent of Public Works in sufficient
detail to make possible the ready determination of the adequacy of
the proposed drainage installations and the Superintendent of
Public Works shall be responsible for reviewing these and
preparing recommendations for the Planning Board.
(3) The Planning Board may also require the subdivider to prepare a
study of the effects of the subdivision on existing downstream
drainage facilities. Where such study or the Planning Board, after
an independent analysis, determines that the additional runoff
incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an
existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Board shall
notify the owner of such downstream facility of such potential
condition and may withhold approval of the subdivision until
provision has been made for the correction of said potential
condition.
C. Underground utilities. In order to assure greater safety and improved
appearance, all utility lines and related equipment for providing power
and communication services shall be installed underground in the
manner prescribed by the regulations of the utility company having
jurisdiction. Underground utility lines shall be located outside of the
traveled way of the streets but, except in unusual circumstances, within
the street right-of-way. Underground service connections shall be
§ 295-131 TATTOOING § 295-131
257:679
provided to the property line of each lot before the street is paved and
may pass under the traveled way of the street.
D. Other improvements.
(1) Monuments.
(a) Monuments shall be required wherever deemed necessary by
the Planning Board to enable all property lines to be readily
reproduced on the ground. In general, monuments shall be
located no more than 500 feet apart on street lines, preferably
at street, lot or easement corners or at points of curvature or
tangency on curved streets, and spaced to be within sight of
one another along lines entirely within the street right-of-way.
(b) Monuments shall be set vertically in solid ground three inches
above the ground surface with accurate reference to a
permanently identifiable fixed point, and shall meet or exceed
the construction requirements specified in the Village
construction standards and specifications.
(2) Traffic control and street signs. Traffic control and street signs
shall be provided by the subdivider and placed at all intersections,
within the street right-of-way, and in other locations as required by
the approving authority. In the case of traffic control signs, their
type and location shall be approved by the Chief of Police of the
Village of Hastings-on-Hudson and, in the case of street signs, by
the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Hastings-on-
Hudson.
(3) Street lighting standards. When required by the Planning Board,
street lighting standards, of a design and location specified in the
Village construction standards and specifications, shall be provided
and installed by the subdivider.
(4) Sanitary sewers and sewerage facilities, water mains and water
supply facilities and fire hydrants. Where required by the Planning
Board, the subdivider shall install sanitary sewers and sewerage
facilities and/or water mains and water supply facilities and fire
hydrants of the type and in a manner specified in the Village
construction standards and specifications.
(5) Fire alarm signal devices. Where required by the Planning Board,
the subdivider shall install fire alarm signal devices, including
necessary ducts, cables and other connecting facilities, of a type
and in a manner and location prescribed by the appropriate fire
district or other municipal agency having jurisdiction.
(6) Street trees. The Planning Board may require the planting of street
trees. Such trees shall be of a hardwood variety indigenous to the
neighborhood, and shall be at least five inches' caliper at a height
of five feet above ground level. Where they are required by the
§ 295-131 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-131
257:680
§ 295-132. Lot specifications.
Planning Board, such trees shall be planted along both sides of the
street, within the street right-of-way and spaced approximately 40
feet on center.
(7) School bus pickup areas. The Planning Board may require that the
subdivider reserve, clear, grade, pave and otherwise improve an
area of such size and location as will provide a safe and suitable
place for the use of children awaiting school buses. In general, the
size of such area shall not be less than 100 square feet, and no
dimensions shall be less than eight feet. Such area shall be
included within the street right-of-way and shall be maintained by
the holder of fee title to the street. The layout and design shall be
subject to Planning Board approval.
A. Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulty, for reasons of topography or other conditions,
in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with this
chapter, the Wetlands Law and the County Health Department
regulations.
B. Driveways. Approximate driveway locations shall be shown on the
construction plans. The maximum driveway gradient to the building site
shall not exceed the limits contained in § 295-40 of this chapter, and the
intersection of driveways with the road shall be so oriented and graded
that vehicles may use the driveways safely. The Planning Board may
require that the applicant submit necessary topographic and design
information to demonstrate that the lot layout will allow driveways that
meet these criteria and provide proper drainage.
C. Lot dimensions.
(1) Except as provided elsewhere in these subdivision regulations or
otherwise permitted by the Board of Trustees, lot area and
dimensions shall comply with at least the minimum standards of
this chapter for the district in which they are located. Where lots
are more than double the minimum required area, the Planning
Board may require that they be arranged so as to allow for further
subdivision and the opening of future streets where necessary to
serve such potential lots, all in compliance with this chapter and
these subdivision regulations. Where, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, lots of larger than minimum size are required for purposes
of proper drainage, water supply, waste disposal or the
preservation of important ecological features, the Planning Board
may require such oversized lots as a condition of plat approval.
(2) Side lot lines shall generally be at right angles to street lines (or
radial to curving street lines) unless the Planning Board allows a
variation from this rule to give a better street or lot arrangement.
Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for
§ 295-131 TATTOOING § 295-132
257:681
erection of buildings observing the minimum front yard setback
from both streets.
(3) Where a proposed subdivision includes an existing residence larger
in size than can appropriately be placed on a lot of the minimum
size permitted in the zoning district, the Planning Board may
require that the lot be of such size and relationship to the proposed
street system that the structure will be an appropriate and
harmonious part of the subdivision.
D. Access from collector streets. Lots shall not, in general, derive access
from a collector street, but shall front on a minor interior street. When
driveway access from a collector street may be necessary for two or
more adjoining lots, the Planning Board may require that such lots be
served by a combined access drive in order to limit the possible traffic
hazard on such street. Any such driveways, where permitted, shall be
designed in such a way as to provide adequate and convenient area for
the turnaround of vehicles so as to avoid requiring them to back into
traffic on such streets.
E. Double frontage lots. Lots fronting on two streets, other than corner
lots, shall be avoided except where deemed essential by the Planning
Board in order to provide separation of residential development from
major or collector streets, or to overcome problems of topography or
orientation. The Planning Board may require access limitations and/or
buffer landscaping for such double frontage lots where the Planning
Board determines that such measures would be appropriate.
F. Water bodies. If a subdivision contains a water body or portion thereof,
lot lines shall be drawn so as to distribute the entire ownership of the
water body among the fees of the adjacent lots, unless the Planning
Board approves an alternate plan whereby the ownership of and
responsibility for the safety of the water body is so placed that it will not
become a Village responsibility. No more than 25% of the minimum lot
area required under this chapter may be satisfied by land which is
under water or is defined as a wetland.
G. Access across a watercourse. Where a watercourse separates the
buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provision
shall be made for the installation of a bridge, culvert or other draining
facility, of a design approved by the Planning Board based upon, among
other considerations, recommendation of the Superintendent of Public
Works, to provide satisfactory access across such watercourse for fire,
police or other emergency equipment.
H. Subdivision with land in two or more zoning districts or municipalities.
(1) In general, a lot should not be divided by a zoning district or
municipal boundary. If it is, however, necessary for a zoning district
boundary to cross a lot, such lot shall be designed so that it can be
readily developed in accordance with the standards of the more
restrictive zoning district. If it is necessary for a municipal
§ 295-132 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-132
257:682
§ 295-133. Reservations and easements.
All reservations and easements shall be clearly indicated on the final
subdivision plat, along with appropriate notations indicating the rights
which exist with respect to each such reservation and/or easement.
boundary line to cross a lot, the Planning Board may require
suitable legal agreements to assure that the two portions of the lot
will not be separated in the future and that the portion of the lot
in the adjoining municipality will not be used for any purpose that
would make it nonconforming if the entire lot were located within
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.
(2) Whenever a subdivision includes land in two or more zoning
districts and/or municipalities, the location of the zoning district
and/or municipal boundary lines shall be shown on the plat and, in
addition, where zoning boundaries are involved, the following
notation shall be added: "Existing zoning boundaries as of
________________, ____."
A. Park reservations.
(1) General standards.
(a) The Planning Board may require that land be reserved within
subdivisions containing residential units for a park or parks
suitably located for playground or other recreational purposes.
Such locations shall be as designated on the Zoning Map,137 or
as otherwise deemed appropriate by the Planning Board. Each
reservation shall be of suitable size, dimensions, topography
and general character and shall have adequate street access
for the particular purpose or purposes envisioned by the
Planning Board. The area shall be shown and marked on the
plat as "Reserved for Park Purposes."
(b) Before the Planning Board may require that land be reserved
for park, playground or other recreational purposes, the
Planning Board must make a finding that such requirement is
warranted. Such a finding shall include an evaluation of the
present and anticipated future needs for park and recreational
facilities in the Village, based on the projected population
growth to which the particular subdivision plat will contribute.
(2) Minimum size.
(a) Areas for parks should be of reasonable size for neighborhood
playgrounds or other recreational uses. In general, not less
than 10% of the area of the subdivision shall be set aside for
these purposes.
137. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-132 TATTOOING § 295-133
257:683
(b) In general, sites reserved for park purposes shall have an area
of at least one acre. The Planning Board may require the
location of such areas along the boundary of a subdivision so
that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent
property is subdivided.
(3) Ownership of park area. The ownership of reservations for park
purposes shall be clearly indicated on the plat and established in a
manner satisfactory to the Planning Board so as to assure their
proper future continuation and maintenance.
(4) Cash payment in lieu of reservation.
(a) Where the Planning Board determines that a suitable park or
parks of adequate size cannot be properly located in a
subdivision, or where such a reservation is otherwise not
appropriate or practical, the Planning Board may require, as a
condition to approval of any such plat, a payment to the Village
of a sum determined for such cases by the Board of Trustees.
(b) In making the determination of suitability, the Planning Board
shall assess the size and suitability of land shown on the
subdivision plat which could be possible locations for park or
recreational facilities, as well as practical factors, including
whether there is a need for additional facilities in the
immediate neighborhood.
(c) Any moneys required by the Planning Board in lieu of land for
park, playground or other recreational purposes pursuant to
this section shall be deposited into a trust fund to be used by
the Village exclusively for park, playground or other
recreational purposes, including the acquisition of property.
(5) This Subsection A shall not apply to lots set aside for affordable
housing units or workforce housing units, as defined in this
chapter. [Added 1-8-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. Widening or realignment of existing streets. Where a subdivision
borders an existing street that is narrower than the recommended
right-of-way width as specified for such streets in these subdivision
regulations, or where a subdivision borders an existing street planned
for widening or realignment in such a way as to require the use of some
land in the subdivision, the Planning Board may require the subdivision
plat to show such areas that shall be marked "Reserved for Street
Realignment (or Widening) Purposes." Land reserved for such purposes
may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of this
chapter.
C. Utility and draining easements.
(1) Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities or drainage facilities within
§ 295-133 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-133
257:684
street rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements of at least
15 feet in width shall be provided for such utilities or drainage
facilities across properties outside the street lines and with
satisfactory access to the street. Drainage easements shall extend
from the street to the watercourse or other drainage facility, and
shall convey to the holder of fee title of the street the perpetual
right to discharge stormwater runoff from the street and the
surrounding area onto and over the affected premises by means of
pipes, culverts or ditches, or a combination thereof, together with
the right to enter said premises for the purpose of making such
installations and doing such maintenance work as the holder of
such fee title may deem necessary to adequately drain the street
and the surrounding area.
(2) When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be
secured in a form satisfactory to the Village Attorney and suitable
for recording in the office of the County Clerk.
D. Slope easements. Where determined appropriate by the Planning
Board, the Planning Board may permit an embankment alongside a
proposed street to extend beyond the normal right-of-way of such
street, provided that a slope easement is granted, conveying to the
holder of fee title of the street the right to enter the premises for the
purpose of maintaining such slope. Where the embankment slope is
located on private land outside the subdivision, such easement shall be
permitted only where the appropriate rights have been secured in a
form satisfactory to the Village Attorney and suitable for recording in
the office of the County Clerk.
E. Sight easements. Sight easements shall be provided across all street
corners, outside the street right-of-way, within the triangular area
formed by the nearest edges of street pavement and a straight line
between two points each 75 feet back from the theoretical intersection
of the edges of such pavement prolonged. The easements shall provide
that the holder of fee title to the abutting streets shall have the right to
enter the easement area for the purpose of clearing, pruning or
regrading so as to maintain a clear line of sight in either direction
across such triangular area between an observer's eye 3 1/2 feet above
the pavement surface on one street and an object one foot above the
pavement surface on the other. The initial establishment of clear sight
lines within the sight easement area shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider.
F. Easements for pedestrian access. The Planning Board may require, in
order to facilitate pedestrian access from streets to schools, parks or
neighboring areas, the reservation of perpetual unobstructed
easements of at least 10 feet in width for such purposes and the
construction of walkways thereon.
§ 295-133 TATTOOING § 295-133.1
257:685
§ 295-133.1. Affordable housing set-aside. [Added 1-8-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
§ 295-134. Self-imposed restrictions.
The subdivider may place restrictions on any of the land contained within
the subdivision that are greater than those required by this chapter. Such
restrictions shall be indicated on the final subdivision plat.
§ 295-135. Modification of regulations.
Where the Planning Board finds that, because of the special circumstances
of a particular case, extraordinary hardship may result from strict
compliance with these subdivision regulations, it may modify the
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured; provided, however, that any such modification will be consistent
with the spirit and intent of these subdivision regulations, all Village laws
and the Zoning Map of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.138 In permitting
any such modification, the Planning Board shall attach such conditions as
are, in its judgment, necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the
standard or requirement so modified.
§ 295-136. Application for area variance.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, where a plat contains
one or more lots that do not comply with the zoning regulations, application
may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals for an area variance pursuant
to § 295-146 of this chapter, without the necessity of a decision or
determination of an administrative official charged with the enforcement of
the zoning regulations. Where such an application is made to the Zoning
Board of Appeals, the Planning Board shall provide the Zoning Board with a
written recommendation concerning the proposed variance.
A. Any subdivision creating eight or more lots that is not also undergoing
site plan review shall require the set-aside of at least 15% of the lots for
the development of affordable housing units or workforce housing
units, as defined in § 295-5. At least 2/3 of such lots shall be set aside for
development as affordable housing units. The remaining 1/3 of such lots
shall be set aside for development as either affordable housing units or
workforce housing units. All such affordable and workforce housing
units shall be subject to the provisions of § 295-112.1 of this chapter.
B. The Planning Board shall include in the resolution granting subdivision
approval conditions to insure that construction of the affordable and/or
workforce housing units will be substantially completed before
certificates of occupancy are granted for houses on at least 20% of the
unrestricted lots.
138. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-133.1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-137
257:686
§ 295-137. Subdivision abandonment.
The owner of an approved subdivision may abandon such subdivision
pursuant to the provisions of § 560 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 295-138. Compliance with SEQRA.
In considering applications for subdivision approval, the Planning Board
shall comply with the provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review
Act139 and its implementing regulations.
139. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law Article 8.
§ 295-137 TATTOOING § 295-138
257:687

ARTICLE XIV
Board of Appeals; Variances
§ 295-139. Board of Appeals.
A. Establishment and organization.
(1) The Board of Appeals heretofore established pursuant to Village
Law is hereby continued with all powers and duties prescribed by
law and by this chapter.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall continue to consist of five members
appointed for five year terms. The members of the Board of Appeals
in office at the time this chapter takes effect shall continue in office
until the end of the term for which they are appointed and have
been duly qualified. No person shall serve on the Board of Appeals
for more than two consecutive terms. [Amended 6-15-1999 by
L.L. No. 3-1999]
(3) The Mayor shall appoint the Board of Appeals and the Chairperson
of the Board of Appeals, subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees. In the absence of a Chairperson, the Board of Appeals
may designate one of its members to serve as Acting Chairperson.
[Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(4) The Mayor shall appoint an alternate member of the Board of
Appeals, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, to serve
for a period of five years. The alternate member shall substitute for
a member of the Board of Appeals in the absence of a member or in
the event that a member is unable to participate because of a
conflict of interest. All provisions of this chapter relating to Zoning
Board of Appeals members' attendance, eligibility, vacancy in
office, removal and service on other boards shall also apply to the
alternate member. [Added 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(5) No person who is a member of the Board of Trustees shall be
eligible for membership on the Board of Appeals.
(6) Any member of the Board of Appeals may be removed by the Mayor
for cause and after a public hearing.
(7) In the event of a vacancy in office, the Mayor shall appoint a
successor, who shall serve for the unexpired term of the member
whose place has become vacant. [Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L.
No. 3-1999]
B. Meetings; minutes; records.
(1) All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of Appeals may
determine.
§ 295-139 TATTOOING § 295-139
257:689
(2) Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public to the
extent provided in Article 7 of the Public Officers Law.
(3) The Chairperson or, in his absence, the Acting Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
[Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(4) The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings. The
minutes shall show the vote of each member upon every question,
or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact. The Board of
Appeals shall also keep records of its examinations and other
official actions.
(5) Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and
every order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination
of the Board of Appeals shall be filed in the office of the Board and
with the Village Clerk and Village Manager within five business
days and shall be a public record. A copy of each decision on any
appeal shall also be filed with the Planning Board and the Building
Inspector.
(6) The Board of Appeals may employ such clerical or other staff
assistance, subject to the approval of the Village Manager, provided
that it shall not incur expenses beyond the amount of the
appropriation made and then available for that purpose.
(7) The Chairperson of the Board of Appeals may designate the
alternate member to substitute for a member of the Board of
Appeals when such member is absent or is unable to participate
because of a conflict of interest on an application or matter before
the Board of Appeals. When so designated, the alternate member
shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of a member of the
Board. Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of the
initial Zoning Board of Appeals meeting at which the substitution is
made. [Added 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
C. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and
duties prescribed by law and by this chapter, including, without
limitation, the following:
(1) Upon application by any person aggrieved or by an officer,
department, board or bureau of the Village, the Board of Appeals
shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the
administrative official charged with the enforcement of this
chapter. On such an appeal the Board of Appeals shall have the
power to decide any question involving the interpretation of any
provision of this chapter, including the determination of the exact
location of any district boundary if uncertainty with respect thereto
remains after exhausting the rules specified in § 295-8 above.
§ 295-139 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-139
257:690
§ 295-140. Time and notices of appeal; transmittal of record.
§ 295-141. (Reserved)140
§ 295-142. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board
(2) The Board of Appeals shall have the power to issue a special use
permit in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter,
including §§ 295-86 through 295-97 above.
(3) The Board of Appeals shall have the power, in passing on appeals,
to vary and modify the application of the provisions of this chapter
relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or
structures or the use of land, in accordance with §§ 295-140
through 295-147 below.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide all
matters referred to it upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter.
A. Appeals shall be taken within 60 days after the filing in the Village
Clerk's office of any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination of the administrative officer charged with enforcement of
this chapter, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all
of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken. [Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
B. All notices of appeal shall be made in writing on official Village forms,
accompanied by a fee in the amount set by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to § 295-152 of this chapter, and shall state:
(1) The relief requested and the grounds upon which the request is
based.
(2) The specific provisions of this chapter involved.
(3) The order, requirement, decision or determination to be reviewed.
(4) The exact interpretation of this chapter that is claimed.
(5) The details of any variance sought and the grounds for granting it.
C. Each notice of appeal shall certify the ownership of the property and
the nature of the interest of the applicant if other than the owner of
record.
140. Editor’s Note: Former § 295-141, Referral to Planning Board, was repealed 8-21-2018 by
L.L. No. 3-2018.
§ 295-139 TATTOOING § 295-142
257:691
of Appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or
her that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his
or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which
may granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application,
on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause
shown.
§ 295-143. Notice of hearing.
A. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and the Planning
Board at least 14 days before the hearing. The notice shall state the
time and place of the hearing, the street address, sheet, lot and block,
zoning district and location of the premises; the name of the applicant;
and a brief description of the nature of the appeal.
B. Not less than 10 days before the hearing date, that notice shall be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Village.
C. In addition, the applicant shall provide actual notice to certain property
owners as follows: [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005;
8-22-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
(1) The applicant shall either deliver by hand or send by certified mail
a copy of the notice of the hearing to all persons who, according to
the latest completed assessment roll of the Town of Greenburgh,
own property within a radius of 300 feet of the property lines of the
subject property; provided, however, that where, in the opinion of
the Building Inspector, the appeal may affect property located more
than 300 feet from the property lines of the subject property, the
applicant shall thus notify all owners of property within that
affected area, as determined by the Building Inspector, but need
not notify any person owning property more than 500 feet from the
property lines of the subject property.
(2) The notices shall be delivered by hand not less than 10 days, or
mailed or otherwise delivered not less than 13 days, before the date
of the hearing to the street address of each of the properties
specified in Subsection C(1), whether or not the owner resides
there, and to any other address indicated by the assessment roll as
the address of an absentee owner.
(3) The public hearing shall not be held unless the applicant has filed
with the Board the proof of the mailing of notice or, if the notice
was delivered by hand, a written affidavit of service; provided,
however, that the Board of Appeals may excuse the failure to notify
each property owner pursuant to this Subsection C upon proof by
the applicant of diligent efforts to comply with the requirements of
this Subsection C and upon a showing that reasonable grounds
§ 295-142 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-143
257:692
§ 295-144. Hearing; decision.
exist for that failure to comply, including, without limitation,
difficulties in determining lot lines or the names or addresses of the
property owners.
(4) No hearing or action by the Board of Appeals shall be held to be
invalid or illegal because of the failure of any person or any Village
officer, agency or board, including the Board of Appeals, to comply
with this Subsection C.
D. At least 10 days before such hearing, the Board shall mail notices
thereof to the parties, to the regional state park commission having
jurisdiction over any state park or parkway within 500 feet of the
property affected by such appeal and to the County Planning Board as
required by § 239-m of the General Municipal Law.
E. In considering an appeal, the Board of Appeals shall comply with the
provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act141 and its
implementing regulations.
A. At the hearing on the appeal, any party may appear in person or by
agent or attorney.
B. The Board of Appeals shall decide the appeal within 62 days after the
final hearing on the appeal. The time within which the Board of Appeals
must render its decision may be extended by mutual consent of the
applicant and the Board.
C. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement,
decision, interpretation or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be
made in the matter by the administrative official charged with
enforcement of this chapter and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
D. The concurring vote of a majority of the Board of Appeals shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor
of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter or to effect any variation in this chapter.
E. All decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution. Each
decision shall state in detail the conditions and safeguards, if any, which
the Board of Appeals deems to be required and accordingly imposes.
F. The Board of Appeals shall file a copy of each decision with the Village
Clerk within five business days after the decision is made and it shall be
141. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law Article 8.
§ 295-143 TATTOOING § 295-144
257:693
§ 295-145. Rehearings. [Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
A motion for the Zoning Board of Appeals to hold a rehearing to review
any order, decision or determination of the Board of Appeals not previously
reheard may be made by any member of the Board. A unanimous vote of
all members of the Board then present is required for such rehearing to
occur. Such rehearing is subject to the same notice provisions as an original
hearing. Upon such rehearing the Board may reverse, modify or annul its
original order, decision or determination upon the unanimous vote of all
members then present, provided that the Board finds that the rights vested
in persons acting in good faith in reliance upon the reheard order, decision
or determination will not be prejudiced thereby.
§ 295-146. Variances.
a public record; the decision shall have no force or effect until it is thus
filed. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to the applicant.142
A. The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or determination of
the administrative officer charged with enforcement of this chapter,
shall have the power to grant use variances and area variances, as
defined herein.
B. Use variances.
(1) "Use variance" shall mean the authorization by the Board of
Appeals for the use of land for a purpose that is otherwise not
allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations.
(2) No use variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals without a
showing by the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and
restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove
such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall demonstrate to the
Board of Appeals that for each and every permitted use under the
zoning regulations for the particular district where the property is
located:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
142. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G, regarding disapproval of a proposal, which
immediately followed, was repealed 8-21-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018.
§ 295-144 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-146
257:694
(3) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of a use variance, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proved by the applicant, and at
the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
C. Area variances.
(1) "Area variance" shall mean the authorization by the Board of
Appeals for the use of land in a manner that is not allowed by the
dimensional or physical requirements of the applicable zoning
regulations.
(2) In determining whether to grant an area variance, the Board of
Appeals shall take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if
the variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community by
such grant. In making such determination, the Board of Appeals
shall also consider:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance.
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other
than an area variance.
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial.
(d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district.
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the Board of Appeals but
shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the area
variance.
(3) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of an area variance, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
D. Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of
both use variances and area variances, have the authority to impose
such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to
and incidental to the proposed use of the property. Such conditions
shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter, and shall be
imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact such
variance may have on the neighborhood or community.
§ 295-146 TATTOOING § 295-147
257:695
§ 295-147. Expiration of variances; application of provisions
governing nonconformity.
A. Variances granted pursuant to this chapter and which cannot fully be
exercised without a building permit shall automatically lapse and
become null and void if a building permit issued in accordance with the
variance is not obtained within 12 months after it has been granted. If a
building permit is obtained, the variance shall automatically lapse and
become null and void:
(1) To the extent it is not fully exercised within six months after the
completion of construction in accordance with § 295-101C above;
or
(2) Upon the expiration, lapse, revocation or termination of the
building permit.
B. Variances granted before the effective date of this chapter and which
cannot fully be exercised without a building permit shall automatically
lapse and become null and void if a building permit issued in
accordance with the variance is not obtained within 12 months after it
has been granted. If a building permit is obtained, the variance shall
automatically lapse and become null and void:
(1) To the extent it is not fully exercised within six months after the
completion of construction in accordance with § 295-101C above;
or
(2) Upon the expiration, lapse, revocation or termination of the
building permit.
C. Variances granted pursuant to this chapter and which can be fully
exercised without a building permit shall automatically lapse and
become null and void to the extent the variance is not fully exercised
within six months after it has been granted.
D. Variances granted before the effective date of this chapter and which
can be fully exercised without a building permit shall automatically
lapse and become null and void to the extent the variance is not fully
exercised within six months after the effective date of this chapter.
E. Variances shall be subject to the same requirements and restrictions as
lawfully nonconforming lots, structures, buildings and uses, including,
without limitation, the provisions of this chapter relating to the
abandonment of nonconforming lots, structures, buildings and uses.
§ 295-147 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-147
257:696
ARTICLE XV
Violations and Enforcement
§ 295-148. Penalties for offenses.
§ 295-149. Notice of violation.
A. Any person who violates or is accessory to the violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $50 nor
more than $250 to be recovered by the Village with costs and, in
addition, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to both a fine and imprisonment not in excess of the
maximum fine and imprisonment prescribed by the Penal Law for such
disorderly conduct. Each week's continued violation after service by the
Building Inspector of a notice of the violation pursuant to § 295-149
shall constitute a separate additional offense.
B. Any violation of this chapter may also be enjoined pursuant to law.
C. The remedies provided in this section shall be cumulative and shall be
in addition to any other remedies provided by law, including, without
limitation, this chapter.
A. Whenever the Building Inspector, after examination and inspection,
determines that there exists a violation of any provision of this chapter,
or of any rule, regulation or condition adopted or imposed pursuant
thereto, (s)he shall serve a written notice of violation on the person
committing or permitting the violation.
B. The notice shall be served personally or by certified mail (return receipt
requested) or any other method of delivery providing proof of delivery
sent to both the premises and the house or business address of the
person committing or permitting the violation; provided, however, that,
if the Building Inspector after reasonable efforts can neither determine
where that person might be personally served nor determine the home
or business address of that person, then the notice shall be served by
mailing a copy, certified mail (return receipt requested), or any other
method of delivery providing proof of delivery, to the premises and
posting a copy on the premises. [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No.
2-2005]
C. The notice of violation shall state:
(1) The sheet, lot and block number and street address (if any) of the
premises.
(2) The nature and details of the violation, including the section
numbers of the provisions of this chapter that have been violated.
(3) Remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
§ 295-148 TATTOOING § 295-149
257:697
§ 295-150. Extensions.
Upon written application, the Building Inspector may extend for not more
than six months the date of compliance specified in a notice of violation if,
in the Building Inspector's opinion, there is reasonable evidence of intent to
comply and reasonable conditions exist that prevent compliance by the date
specified in the notice of violation.
§ 295-151. Reinspections; certificate of zoning compliance; legal
action.
(4) The date by which compliance must be made.
A. If, on reinspection following the expiration of the date of compliance
specified in the notice of violation, or the date to which it was extended,
the Building Inspector determines that the violation has been remedied
or removed in accordance with the remedial action specified in the
notice of violation and that there is no longer a violation of any
provision of this chapter, then the Building Inspector shall issue a
certificate of zoning compliance.
B. If, on reinspection following the date of compliance specified in the
notice of violation, or the date to which it was extended, the Building
Inspector determines that the remedial action has not been carried out
and that the violation still exists, then the Building Inspector shall
immediately refer the matter to the Village Attorney, who shall institute
appropriate legal action to restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, remedy or
remove the violation and take whatever other legal action is necessary
to compel compliance with this chapter and obtain any other remedies
provided by law.
§ 295-149 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-151
257:698
ARTICLE XVI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 295-152. Fees.
Fees for building permits, site plan approval, special use permits, notices of
appeal to the Board of Appeals and other fees required under this chapter
shall be fixed from time to time by a resolution of the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson.143
§ 295-153. Contents of notices.
In addition to any other requirements imposed by law, including this
chapter, for the giving of any notices, all notices required to be given under
any provision of this chapter shall be given in clear, concise and ordinary
language and shall contain a description of the property at issue by sheet,
lot and block and post office address, and a clear and concise statement of
the purpose of the action or proceeding for which the notice is given.
§ 295-154. Service of notices and documents.
Whenever a notice or other document is personally served pursuant to this
chapter, there shall be filed with the Village Clerk a written statement
setting forth the name of the person who served the notice or document, the
name of the person on whom service was made and the date, time and place
of the service.
§ 295-155. Conduct of public hearings.
Where a public hearing is required or permitted by this chapter, nothing
contained in this chapter shall preclude the holding of additional public
hearings or, to the extent permitted by law, nonpublic hearings.
§ 295-156. Judicial proceedings.
Except as otherwise provided in a judicial decision, judgment or decree,
where this chapter requires any act to be performed within a specified time,
that time shall be tolled during the pendency of any judicial proceeding,
including all appeals, brought to review any order, requirement, decision,
determination or action the validity of which is, under this chapter, a
precondition for that act.
§ 295-157. Amendments.
A. Authority to amend. This chapter, including the schedule and Zoning
Map144 incorporated herein, may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the Board of Trustees,
either on its own motion, on the recommendation of the Planning Board
143. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
144. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 295-152 TATTOOING § 295-157
257:699
or Board of Appeals or on application or petition by a property owner
or owners with respect to the property they own.
B. Contents of application or petition; fee.
(1) Any application or petition by a property owner or owners for an
amendment or other change to this chapter shall be filed with the
Village Clerk in triplicate on official Village forms and shall contain:
(a) The names and addresses of the applicants or petitioners and
the section, lot and block numbers and street address, if any, of
those properties under their ownership with respect to which
the amendment is sought.
(b) A map drawn to a convenient scale showing lot lines, building
locations and the section, lot and block numbers of all
properties with respect to which the amendment is sought.
(c) A complete description of the nature of the amendment
requested, including the section and paragraph of this chapter,
if any, sought to be changed, and of the reasons the request is
made.
(2) The application or petition shall be accompanied by a fee in the
amount set by the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 295-152 of this
chapter.
C. Public hearing; referral; limitation on construction and issuance of
permits.
(1) The Board of Trustees shall fix a reasonable time for a public
hearing, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard on any proposal to amend, supplement,
change, modify or repeal this chapter, whether that proposal is
upon the motion of the Board of Trustees, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Board or Board of Appeals or
pursuant to an application or petition by a property owner or
owners. Due notice of that public hearing shall be given pursuant to
Subsection D below.
(2) Upon fixing the time of the public hearing, the Board of Trustees
shall also refer the proposed amendment or other change to the
Planning Board and the Board of Appeals for advisory reports,
pursuant to Subsection E below.
(3) Whenever the Board of Trustees, by resolution, has authorized and
scheduled a public hearing on a proposed amendment or other
change to this chapter, for a period of 62 days following the date of
that resolution, no building or structure shall be constructed,
reconstructed, altered, renovated, demolished, enlarged, moved or
removed, and no permit shall be issued for the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, renovation, demolition, enlargement,
§ 295-157 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-157
257:700
moving or removing of any building or structure or for the
occupancy of any land, building or structure, that would in any
manner be contrary to or in violation of provisions of the proposed
amendment or other change.
D. Notice of hearing.
(1) Notice of the public hearing shall state:
(a) The time and place of the hearing.
(b) The street address, sheet, lot and block, zoning district and
location of the property with respect to which the amendment
or other change is proposed.
(c) A description of the nature of the proposed amendment or
other change, including the section and paragraph of this
chapter sought to be amended or changed.
(d) Whether the proposal is on motion of the Board of Trustees,
upon recommendation of the Planning Board or Board of
Appeals or upon application or petition of property owners,
and, if the proposal is upon application or petition of property
owners, their names and addresses.
(2) Notice of the public hearing shall be published not less than 10
days before the hearing date at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village.
(3) In addition, where the proposed amendment or other change is
upon application or petition of property owners, those property
owners shall also provide actual notice of the proposed amendment
or change to certain property owners, as follows:
(a) The applicants or petitioners shall either deliver by hand or
send by certified mail (return receipt requested) or any other
method of delivery providing proof of delivery a copy of the
notice of the hearing to all persons who, according to the latest
completed assessment roll of the Village, own property within
a radius of 300 feet of the property lines of the subject
property; provided, however, that where, in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, the amendment or change may affect
property located more than 300 feet from the property lines of
the subject property, the applicants or petitioners shall thus
notify all owners of property within that affected area, as
determined by the Building Inspector, but need not notify any
person owning property more than 500 feet from the property
lines of the subject property. [Amended 2-1-2005 by L.L. No.
2-2005]
(b) The notices shall be delivered by hand not less than 10 days, or
mailed not less than 13 days, before the date of the hearing to
§ 295-157 TATTOOING § 295-157
257:701
the street address of each of the properties specified in
Subsection D(3)(a), whether or not the owner resides there,
to any other address indicated by the assessment roll as the
address of an absentee owner and to any other address known
by the applicants or petitioners to be the actual business or
residence of an absentee owner.
(c) The public hearing shall not be held unless the applicants or
petitioners have filed with the Board of Trustees either the
return receipts from the mailing of notices or, if the notice was
delivered by hand, a written affidavit of service; provided,
however, that the Board of Trustees may excuse the failure to
notify any property owner pursuant to this Subsection D(3)
upon proof by the applicants or petitioners of diligent efforts to
comply with the requirements of this Subsection D(3) and upon
a showing that reasonable grounds exist for that failure to
comply, including, without limitation, difficulties in
determining lot lines or the names or addresses of the property
owners.
(d) No hearing or action by the Board of Trustees shall be held to
be invalid or illegal because of the failure of any person or any
Village officer, agency or board, including the Board of
Trustees, to comply with this Subsection D(3).
(4) A copy of the notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the
Westchester County Planning Board not less than 10 days before
the public hearing. The County Planning Board may appear and be
heard at the hearing and may file a memorandum of its position.
(5) A written notice of any proposed change or amendment affecting
property within 500 feet of a housing project authorized under the
Public Housing Law shall be served personally or by mail upon the
executive director of the housing authority erecting or owning the
project and to the chief executive officer of the municipality
providing financial assistance thereto at least 10 days before the
date of the public hearing.
(6) A written notice of any proposed change or amendment affecting
property within 500 feet of the boundaries of any state park or
parkway or city, Village, town or county shall be given in the case of
a city, Village or town to the Clerk of that city, Village or town, and,
in the case of a county, to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors or
other person performing like duties, and, in the case of any state
park or parkway, to the regional state park commission having
jurisdiction over such state park or parkway at least 10 days before
the date of the public hearing. Such city, Village, town or county
shall have the right to appear and to be heard at the public hearing
with respect to any such proposed change or amendment.
§ 295-157 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-157
257:702
(7) A copy of the notice of the public hearing shall be given to any other
person or entity required by law to receive such notice.
E. Report by Planning Board and Board of Appeals.
(1) Before the closing of the public hearing on any proposed
amendment or other change to this chapter, the Planning Board
and Board of Appeals shall file with the Board of Trustees advisory
reports on that proposed amendment or other change.
(2) In recommending the adoption or rejection of any such proposed
amendment or change, the Planning Board shall state the reasons
for its recommendations, including:
(a) With respect to amendments or changes in the text of this
chapter:
[1] Whether and how the proposed amendment or other
change is consistent, or inconsistent, with the
comprehensive plan of land use of the Village, as it may
exist from time to time.
[2] Whether and how the proposed amendment or other
change is consistent, or inconsistent, with the aims and
principles embodied in this chapter as to the particular
district or districts concerned and set forth in §§ 295-2 and
295-3 above.
[3] Which areas and establishments of the Village will be
directly affected by the amendment or change and in what
way they will be affected.
[4] The indirect implications of the amendment or change in
its effect on other laws and regulations.
(b) With respect to amendments or changes in the Zoning Map:
[1] Whether and how the proposed amendment or other
change is consistent, or inconsistent, with the
comprehensive plan of the Village, as it may exist from
time to time.
[2] Whether the uses permitted by the proposed amendment
or other change would be appropriate in the area
concerned.
[3] Whether adequate public schools or other facilities and
services exist or can be created to serve the needs of any
additional development likely to be constructed as a result
of the amendment or change.
§ 295-157 TATTOOING § 295-157
257:703
(3) In making its report on any proposed amendment, the Board of
Appeals shall state its views as to the desirability and practicability
of the proposal.
(4) The failure of the Planning Board or the Board of Appeals to file an
advisory report as required by this section shall not affect the
power of the Board of Trustees to act on the proposed amendment
or other change.
F. Disapproval by County Planning Board. If the County Planning Board, in
appearing before the Board of Trustees at the public hearing,
disapproves of the proposed amendment or other change, or
recommends changes or modifications thereof, the Village shall not act
contrary to that disapproval or recommendation except by adoption of a
resolution by the Village Board of Trustees.
G. Protests. In case of a written protest against a proposed amendment or
other change presented to the Board of Trustees and signed by the
owners of 20% or more of the area of the land included in the proposed
amendment or other change, or by the owners of 20% or more of the
land immediately adjacent thereto, extending 100 feet therefrom, or by
the owners of 20% or more of the land directly opposite thereto,
extending 100 feet from the street frontage of that opposite land, the
amendment or other change shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of 3/4 of the members of the Board of Trustees.
[Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
H. Conformity to Comprehensive Land Use Plan. In all cases where the
Board of Trustees shall approve an amendment to the Zoning Map,145
the Board shall find that, for reasons fully set forth in its findings, the
amendment is in conformity with the comprehensive plan of land use
for the Village, as it may exist from time to time.
I. Compliance with SEQRA. In considering any amendment or change to
this chapter, the Board of Trustees shall comply with the provisions of
the State Environmental Quality Review Act146 and its implementing
regulations.
J. Minutes; publication.
(1) Every amendment or other change to this chapter (excluding any
map incorporated therein) shall be entered in the minutes of the
Board of Trustees and a copy, summary or abstract thereof
(exclusive of any map incorporated therein) shall be published once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. Such minutes
shall describe and refer to any map adopted in connection with
such amendment or change.
145. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
146. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law Article 8.
§ 295-157 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-157
257:704
§ 295-158. Repealer; effect of repeal.
The local law on zoning of the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson adopted by the
Board of Trustees and effective July 1, 1979, and any and all amendments
thereto, are hereby repealed. That repeal shall not affect or impair any act
done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability,
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred before the repeal takes effect;
but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as
fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected.
§ 295-159. Supersession.
To the extent necessary to comply with applicable state law, if the
enactment of this chapter pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law is
deemed to be a supersession or modification of the Village Law, then
this chapter shall be deemed to supersede any inconsistent provision or
procedure set forth in § 7-706 of the Village Law.
(2) In addition to publication, a copy of the amendment or other
change, together with a summary or abstract of any map
incorporated therein, shall be posted conspicuously at or near the
main entrance to the office of the Village Clerk.
(3) Affidavits of the publication and posting thereof shall be filed with
the Village Clerk.
K. Effective date. The amendment or other change shall take effect upon
filing in the office of the Secretary of State, but shall take effect from
the date of its service as against a person served personally with a copy
thereof, certified by the Village Clerk and showing the date of its
passage and entry in the minutes.
L. Effect on approved subdivisions. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
provision of this chapter, the provisions of any amendment or other
change to this chapter that establish or increase lot areas or lot
dimensions that are greater than or in excess of the lot areas or lot
dimensions of the lots shown and delineated on a subdivision plat that
has been duly approved by the Planning Board, and which subdivision
plat or the first section thereof has been duly filed in the office of the
recording officer of the county, or which provisions establish or
increase side, rear or front yard or setback requirements in excess of
those applicable to building plats under the provision of the zoning law
in force and effect at the time of the filing of the subdivision plat or first
section thereof, shall not, for a period of three years after the filing of
the subdivision plat or first section thereof, be applicable to or in any
way affect any of the lots shown and delineated on the subdivision plat.
[Amended 6-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
§ 295-157 TATTOOING § 295-160
257:705
§ 295-160. Greenway Compact Plan. [Added 11-15-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005]
By Local Law No. 7 of 2005, the Village of Hastings-on-Hudson has adopted
the Compact Plan, as amended from time to time, as a statement of policies,
principles, and guides to supplement other established land use policies
in the Village. In its discretionary actions under this Zoning Code, the
reviewing agency should take into consideration said statement of policies,
principles and guides, as appropriate.
§ 295-160 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § 295-160
257:706
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-1999 9-21-1999 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1-2000 6-6-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
2-2000 10-3-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
3-2000 10-3-2000 Planning Board: alternate
members
Ch. 45, Art. II
4-2000 11-7-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 282
5-2000 12-5-2000 Senior citizen tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
1-2001 2-6-2001 Traffic Violations Bureau
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 63; Ch. 282
2-2001 Moratorium NCM
3-2001 7-17-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
1-2002 Moratorium extension NCM
2-2002 4-16-2002 Snow and ice removal
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 241; Ch. 282
3-2002 Moratorium extension NCM
4-2002 Moratorium extension NCM
5-2002 11-5-2002 Senior citizen tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
1-2003 1-21-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
2-2003 3-18-2003 Moratorium NCM
3-2003 7-15-2003 Tree preservation
amendment
Ch. 273
4-2003 8-28-2003 Moratorium NCM
5-2003 10-21-2003 Moratorium NCM
6-2003 11-4-2003 Stormwater management Repealed by L.L. No.
5-2007
§ 295-160 TATTOOING § DL-1
257:707
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2003 12-2-2003 Taxation: senior citizens
exemption amendment
Ch. 260
8-2003 12-2-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 282
1-2004 Moratorium NCM
2-2004 3-2-2004 Professional fees Ch. 223
3-2004 5-18-2004 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
4-2004 Moratorium NCM
5-2004 6-22-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
6-2004 Moratorium NCM
7-2004 10-5-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
1-2005 2-1-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
2-2005 2-1-2005 Notice by mail
amendment
Chs. 14; 112, Parts 1
and 2; 184, Art. X;
217; 252, Arts. VI and
VII; 295
3-2005 2-1-2005 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 128
4-2005 3-1-2005 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
5-2005 4-19-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
6-2005 5-23-2005 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
7-2005 11-15-2005 Greenway Compact Plan Chs. 25; 295
1-2006 3-21-2006 Tax abatement for rentcontrolled
and rentregulated
property
occupied by senior
citizens or persons with
disabilities
Ch. 260, Art. VII
2-2006 12-5-2006 Senior citizen tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
1-2007 2-20-2007 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
2-2007 7-24-2007 Professional fees
amendment
Ch. 223
3-2007 7-24-2007 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
§ DL-1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
257:708
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2007 9-11-2007 Flood damage prevention Ch. 146
5-2007 12-11-2007 Stormwater management,
erosion, and water
pollution control
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 250; 295
1-2008 3-4-2008 Performance standards
amendment
Ch. 217
2-2008 4-15-2008 Tax exemption for
members of Volunteer
Fire Department and
Ambulance Corps
Ch. 260, Art. VIII
3-2008 5-6-2008 Performance standards
amendment
Ch. 217
4-2008 5-20-2008 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 4
5-2008 5-20-2008 Building construction:
Building Board and
Building Inspector
amendment
Ch. 101, Art. I
6-2008 5-20-2008 Fire prevention and life
safety amendment
Ch. 143
7-2008 6-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
8-2008 5-20-2008 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
9-2008 6-17-2008 Police: residency
requirements repealer
Ch. 48, Art. I (Editor's
Note only)
10-2008 6-17-2008 Zoning Board of Appeals
repealer
Ch. 76 (reference
only)
11-2008 6-17-2008 Publication of Zoning
Laws repealer
Ch. 79 (reference
only)
12-2008 6-17-2008 Animals: Dog Warden
repealer
Ch. 94, Art. I (Editor's
Note only)
13-2008 6-17-2008 Ice cream and
nonalcoholic beverages
repealer
Ch. 170 (reference
only)
14-2008 6-17-2008 Junk dealers repealer Ch. 176 (reference
only)
§ DL-1 TATTOOING § DL-1
257:709
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-2008 6-17-2008 Licenses and permits:
certain trades and
occupations repealer
Ch. 184, Art. II
(Editor's Note only)
16-2008 6-17-2008 Peace and good order
repealer
Ch. 212 (reference
only)
17-2008 6-17-2008 Peddling, vending and
soliciting amendment
Ch. 214
18-2008 6-17-2008 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 241
19-2008 6-17-2008 Taxicabs and taxicab
drivers amendment
Ch. 262
20-2008 6-17-2008 Trailers and trailer camps
repealer
Ch. 267 (reference
only)
21-2008 6-17-2008 Trapping repealer Ch. 270 (reference
only)
22-2008 6-17-2008 Vehicles and traffic:
municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 282, Part 1
23-2008 6-17-2008 Village property
amendment
Ch. 287
24-2008 8-5-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
25-2008 8-5-2008 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
26-2008 9-9-2008 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
27-2008 10-7-2008 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
28-2008 12-16-2008 Steep slopes; zoning
amendment
Chs. 249; 295
29-2008 12-16-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
1-2009 5-19-2009 Parks and recreation:
swimming pool and
related facilities
amendment
Ch. 209, Art. I
2-2009 10-6-2009 Senior citizen tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 260, Art. III
3-2009 10-20-2009 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
4-2009 12-15-2009 Solid waste: littering
amendment
Ch. 244, Art. III
§ DL-1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
257:710
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2010 2-16-2010 Handbills and posters
repealer
Ch. 162 (reference
only)
2-2010 3-16-2010 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
3-2010 3-16-2010 Ethics amendment Ch. 18
4-2010 3-16-2010 Parks and recreation:
Department and
Commission amendment
Ch. 209, Art. II
5-2010 7-6-2010 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
6-2010 9-7-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
7-2010 11-16-2010 Building construction:
architectural review
amendment
Ch. 101, Art. III
8-2010 11-16-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
9-2010 11-16-2010 Signs projecting over
streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 234, Art. I
10-2010 11-16-2010 Building construction:
architectural review
amendment
Ch. 101, Art. III
1-2011 1-18-2011 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
2-2011 1-18-2011 Stormwater management,
erosion and water control
amendment
Ch. 250
3-2011 2-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
4-2011 5-3-2011 Solid waste: collection
and disposal
Ch. 244, Art. II
5-2011 5-17-2011 Building construction:
Building Board and
Building Inspector
amendment
Ch. 101, Art. I
6-2011 5-17-2011 Parks and recreation:
Department and
Commission amendment
Ch. 209, Art. II
7-2011 7-19-2011 Traffic Violations Bureau
amendment
Ch. 63
8-2011 8-9-2011 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
§ DL-1 TATTOOING § DL-1
257:711
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-2011 8-9-2011 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
1-2012 12-20-2011 Steep slopes amendment Ch. 249
2-2012 12-20-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
3-2012 11-6-2012 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
4-2012 11-6-2012 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
5-2012 12-4-2012 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
1-2013 1-8-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
2-2013 3-5-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
3-2013 3-5-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
4-2013 8-6-2013 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L. No.
4-2015
5-2013 8-6-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
6-2013 10-1-2013 Green Building Code See Ch. 160
7-2013 11-19-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
1-2014 2-18-2014 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
2-2014 6-3-2014 Solid waste: retail
checkout bags; expanded
polystyrene containers
Ch. 244, Art. IV; Ch.
244, Art. V
3-2014 11-4-2014 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 86
4-2014 11-4-2014 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
1-2015 1-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
2-2015 6-2-2015 Tax abatement for rentcontrolled
and rentregulated
property
occupied by senior
citizens or persons with
disabilities amendment
Ch. 260, Art. VII
3-2015 6-16-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
excavations amendment
Ch. 252, Art. VII
4-2015 8-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
5-2015 9-1-2015 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
§ DL-1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
257:712
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-2015 10-20-2015 Community Choice
Aggregation (Energy)
Program
Ch. 110
7-2015 12-1-2015 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
8-2015 12-1-2015 General traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
1-2016 1-5-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 295
2-2016 8-23-2016 General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
3-2016 11-1-2016 Assessments, Real
Property Tax
Ch. 7
4-2016 11-15-2016 Municipal Building
Energy Benchmarking
Ch. 190
1-2017 1-3-2017 Taxation: Alternative
Veterans Exemption
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. IV
2-2017 8-22-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
3-2017 11-7-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
4-2017 12-5-2017 General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
1-2018 2-20-2018 General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
2-2018 3-6-2018 General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
3-2018 8-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
4-2018 8-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 295
5-2018 9-4-2018 General Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 282, Part 2
§ DL-1 TATTOOING § DL-1
257:713
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1-2019 1-22-2019 Adult
Entertainment
Amendment;
Animals:
Dogs and
Domestic
Animals
Amendment;
Curfew
Repealer;
Dance Halls
Repealer
Ch. 83; Ch.
94, Art. I; Ch.
116
(reference
only); Ch. 121
(reference
only)
15.1
2-2019 2-5-2019 Traffic
Violations
Bureau
Amendment;
Oil Burners
Amendment;
Snow and Ice
Removal
Amendment;
Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 63; Ch.
204; Ch. 241;
Ch. 295
15.1
3-2019 2-5-2019 General
Provisions:
Penalties;
Definitions
and Word
Usage
Ch. 1, Art. II;
Ch. 1, Art. III
15.1
§ DL-1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
257:714
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
4-2019 3-5-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Encumbrances
and
Encroachments
Amendment;
Recreational
Use
Amendment;
Trees
Repealer;
Sidewalk
Obstructions
and Curbs
Amendment;
Care of
Sidewalks
Amendment;
Excavations
Amendment;
Tree
Preservation
Amendment
Ch. 252, Art.
I; Ch. 252,
Art. II; Ch.
252, Art. III
(reference
only); Ch.
252, Art. IV;
Ch. 252, Art.
V; Ch. 252,
Art. VII; Ch.
273
15.1
5-2019 3-5-2019 Parades and
Gatherings
Ch. 184 15.1
§ DL-1 TATTOOING § DL-1
257:715
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
6-2019 3-5-2019 Local Laws,
Public
Hearings for
Amendment;
Fire
Prevention
and Life
Safety:
Inflammable
Material
Repealer;
Sprinkler
Systems
Amendment;
Fires on
Streets or
Public Places
Amendment:
Taxicabs and
Taxicab
Drivers
Amendment
Ch. 32; Ch.
143, Art. I
(reference
only); Ch.
143, Art. II;
Ch. 262
15.1
7-2019 3-5-2019 Parks and
Recreation:
Swimming
Pool and
Related
Facilities
Amendment;
Department
and
Commission
Amendment;
Vehicles in
Parks
Amendment;
Sales in
Public Parks
and
Playgrounds;
Tennis and
Day Camps
Ch. 209, Art.
I; Ch. 209,
Art. II; Ch.
209, Art. IV;
Ch. 209, Art.
V; Ch. 209,
Art. VI
15.1
§ DL-1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
257:716
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
8-2019 7-2-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic:
General
Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 282, Pt. 2 15.1
9-2019 9-3-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic:
General
Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 282, Pt. 2 15.1
10-2019 10-15-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic:
General
Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 282, Pt. 2 15.1
11-2019 10-15-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic:
General
Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 282, Pt. 2 15.1
12-2019 11-5-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 295 15.1
13-2019 12-3-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic:
General
Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 282, Pt. 2 15.1
14-2019 12-17-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 295 15.1
15-2019 12-17-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic:
General
Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 282, Pt. 2 15.1
1-2020 2-18-2020 Notification
of Defects
Amendment
Ch. 196 15.1
§ DL-1 TATTOOING § DL-1
257:717
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2-2020 3-3-2020 Ethics
Amendment
Ch. 18 15.1
3-2020 5-5-2020 Residency
Requirements
Ch. 50 15.1
4-2020 5-5-2020 Salaries
Amendment
Ch. 54 15.1
5-2020 5-5-2020 Alcoholic
Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 88 15.1
§ DL-1 HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
257:718