Part I, Administrative Legislation
:1

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the local
laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Hamburg, as codified by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 250, together with
an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Hamburg,"
hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Village of Hamburg" to any
other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall
be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number appearing in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been
formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of local
laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this local law are intended as a continuation of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg, and it is the intention
of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed
as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former local laws and ordinances as
are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of
§ 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Village of
Hamburg in force on the date of the adoption of this local law including the "Code of
Ordinances of the Village of Hamburg," adopted April 6, 1970, and not contained in
such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed
from and after the effective date of this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law shall not
affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision of the Village of Hamburg prior to the effective date of this local law or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this local law in
violation of any legislative provision of the Village of Hamburg or any penalty,
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this local law
or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this Code now or
through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article,
chapter or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law, brought pursuant to
any legislative provision of the Village of Hamburg.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred
by the Village of Hamburg.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Hamburg providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing
name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street,
road, highway, park or other public place within the Village of Hamburg or any
portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Hamburg appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing
the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Village of Hamburg or other
instruments or evidence of the village's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance establishing a
specific fee amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the village.
N. All personnel policies, including Local Law No. 1-1954 dealing with
hospitalization insurance.
O. Any local law adopted subsequent to 2-18-1998.
§ 1-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Village
Administrator of the Village of Hamburg and shall remain there for use and examination
by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local law shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village Administrator of the Village of
Hamburg by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village of Hamburg, and such certified
copy shall remain on file in the office of said Village Administrator to be made available
to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
The enactment and publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy
of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Hamburg"
or any new local laws or resolutions, when enacted or adopted in such form as to
indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the
loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing
contained in this local law shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution
contained herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Hamburg required to be filed in the
office of the Village Administrator for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all
local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees subsequent to the enactment
of this local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part
of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Administrator of the Village of
Hamburg upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Administrator, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Village of
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
Hamburg or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will
cause the legislation of the Village of Hamburg to be misrepresented thereby or who
violates any other provision of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term
of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the Code
of the Village of Hamburg, such local law to be entitled "General Provisions, Article I,
Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13,
inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State of the
State of New York.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for
publication as the Code of the Village of Hamburg, no changes in the meaning or
intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have been made, except as
provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and
other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective upon the
effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section number references are to the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear in
the Code.)1
C. Throughout the Code, all occurrences of the term "Superintendent of Buildings" are
changed to "Superintendent of Public Works."
D. Throughout the Code, all occurrences of the term "Village Engineer" are changed
to "Superintendent of Public Works."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were added, amended, adopted or
deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced
with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998." Schedule A, which contains a
complete description of all changes, is on file in the village offices.
§ 1-10 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 1-13
1:6
ARTICLE II
Penalty Assessment
[Adopted 4-19-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
§ 1-14. Penalties assessed against unpaid taxes, sewer rents and invoices.
Penalties are assessed against unpaid taxes and sewer rents as follows: June 1 to July 1
without fee; after July 1 to July 31 a percentage of penalty is added, and an additional
percentage of penalty is added per month thereafter. The aforementioned penalties are
set by the State of New York. After November 1, delinquent taxes are sent to the County
of Erie for collection.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

Chapter 5
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
§ 5-1. Policy.
The Village of Hamburg is committed to ensuring the meaningful participation of
minority-owned and women-owned business enterprises, and minorities and females in
the work force, on projects which consist of the expenditure of public funds as required
and detailed in Article 15A of the New York Executive Law.
§ 1-14 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 5-1
5:1

Chapter 9
ASSESSMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 212.
§ 9-1. Termination of assessing unit.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, the Village of Hamburg shall cease to be
an assessing unit.
§ 9-2. Assessor abolished.
The position of Village Assessor in the Village of Hamburg is abolished.
§ 9-3. Board of Assessment Review abolished.
The Board of Assessment Review as now or heretofore existing is abolished.
§ 9-4. Tax roll.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, real property taxes in the Village of
Hamburg shall be levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll of the
Town of Hamburg with the taxable status date of the Town of Hamburg controlling for
village tax purposes.
§ 9-5. Filing of copies.2
Within five days after the effective date of this chapter the Clerk-Treasurer of the Village
of Hamburg shall file a copy of this chapter with the Town Clerk and the Assessor of the
Town of Hamburg and with the New York State Board of Real Property Services.
§ 9-6. When effective; referendum.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State;
provided, however, that this chapter is subject to a permissive referendum. The Clerk-
Treasurer shall forthwith publish and post a copy of this chapter, with notice, in the
manner required by Article 9 of the Village Law.3
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
3. Editor's Note: No valid petitions were filed.
§ 5-1 ASSESSMENT § 9-6
9:1

Chapter 13
ASSETS, FIXED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Procurement policy — See Ch. 67.
§ 13-1. Findings.
A. Maintaining adequate fixed asset records and fairly reporting fixed assets allows
local governments to meet the requirements under generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP) for fairly reporting fixed assets in their general purpose financial
statements. Second, fixed asset accounting provides management with a valuable
tool for controlling fixed assets and planning replacements.
B. Fixed asset accounting is a valuable management tool because it accomplishes the
following:
(1) Establishes a record of fixed assets. Having a formal record enables the Board
to easily determine what assets the local government has and where the assets
are located.
(2) Fixes responsibility. Fixing responsibility for assets improves the care
employees exercise over assets and diminishes the number of assets lost or
stolen. This aspect of fixed asset accounting in and of itself makes it well
worth the effort it takes to begin and maintain fixed asset accounting. In
addition, it enables the Board to fulfill its stewardship responsibilities in
managing the local governments assets.
(3) Identifies financing source of assets. Fixed asset accounting provides a record
of how each asset was financed which becomes useful in planning future
purchases and how they will be financed.
(4) Provides the Board with useful supplemental information:
(a) Replacement cost. Knowing what an asset cost may help the Board in
determining an approximate replacement cost. This is particularly
important if the Board establishes a reserve for future capital acquisitions.
(b) Insurance coverage. Knowing the value of assets permits the optimum
insurance coverage by eliminating over or under insurance coverage. In
addition, fixed asset records provide valuable information for proof of
loss if a claim for loss is filed.
(c) Maintenance cost. Knowing what assets a local government has is
beneficial in planning a repair and preventive maintenance schedule and
providing for the required expenditure.
§ 9-6 ASSETS, FIXED § 13-1
13:1
§ 13-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FIXED ASSETS — Assets of a long term character, which are intended to be held or
used for more than one year, e.g. land, buildings, improvements on buildings, machinery
and equipment.
§ 13-3. Procedure.
Below is a procedure to follow for the Village of Hamburg's fixed assets:
(d) Useful life. Knowing how long an asset is expected to last helps in
planning for future replacements and expansion programs.
(e) Capital budget. Knowing what assets a local government has is very
useful in forming an overall capital improvement program for acquiring
and replacing fixed assets and determining how to finance such
purchases.
A. Assets are purchased by each department through the normal Village of Hamburg
purchasing procedures as per Chapter 67, Procurement Policy. [Amended
6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
B. After purchase and receipt of the asset, an inventory change report is to be filled out
and signed by the department head. This form consists of the following: name of
department, type of transaction (addition, subtraction, deletion or transfer), property
identification number, description, location code of transaction, vendor, purchase
price, method of disposition and signature. This procedure is for any asset $1,000
or more in cost or for pilferable items that the department head wishes to track for
accountability purposes, such as computer software, hand tools, etc. [Amended
6-15-1998]
C. All inventory change reports are to be handed in to the Clerk-Treasurer's office.
This office acts as the property control manager. A Village of Hamburg sticker will
be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer's office for the reported items. [Amended
6-15-1998]
D. The Property Control Manager (Clerk-Treasurer) accumulates these change reports
and transfers the information onto computerized records. These reports designate
the actual location of each item in the village.
E. The inventory change reports consist of addition, deletion or transfer sheets. These
addition sheets can now be verified to see if all inventory has been recorded for the
year by checking them against the department's expenditure guideline listing.
F. The Property Control Manager then prepares a schedule of general fixed assets by
function and activity and another showing additions and deletions for the year. This
report is then used in our annual financial report.
G. Procedures employed shall comply with all applicable laws and the requirements of
the New York State Department of Audit and Control which are issued pursuant to
Section 36 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
§ 13-1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 13-3
13:2
H. All fixed assets will be physically inventoried on an annual basis. The Clerk-
Treasurer is responsible to ensure the inventory is completed not later than April 30
of each fiscal year. [Added 6-15-1998]
§ 13-3 ASSETS, FIXED § 13-3
13:3

Chapter 17
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 123.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 127.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 233.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 13-3 BUILDING DEPARTMENT § 13-3
17:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 4-6-1970 as Art. II of Ch. 5 of the 1970 Code]
§ 17-1. Established.
§ 17-2. Qualifications of Superintendent of Public Works.6
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be:
§ 17-3. Acting Superintendent.
In the absence of the Superintendent of Public Works, or in the case of the
Superintendent's inability to act for any reason, the Village Board shall have the power to
designate a person to act on behalf of the Superintendent of Public Works and to exercise
all of the powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter.
§ 17-4. Appointment; compensation; qualifications of Building Inspector.
A. There is hereby established in the village a department to be designated as the
Building Department for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
all laws, rules, regulations and orders applicable to buildings and structures and
their appurtenances in the village.
B. The Building Department shall be headed by an official designated as the
Superintendent of Public Works.4
C. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed by the Village Board for a
discretionary term at a compensation to be fixed by the Village Board.5
A. A person who shall have had at least five years experience as a licensed professional
engineer or architect, building inspector, building contractor or supervisor of
building construction; and/or
B. A person who meets the current Civil Service Job Description for the position of
Department of Public Works Superintendent.
A. The Village Board may appoint one or more Building Inspectors as the need may
appear to exercise, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, any or all of the duties
of Superintendent of Public Works. The compensation of such Building Inspectors
shall be fixed by the Village Board.
B. The Building Inspector shall be a person who has had at least three years of
practical experience in the design or construction of buildings or in the design,
construction or installation of plumbing, heating or electrical equipment, or a
suitable person who has had training as an engineer or architect.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 17-1 BUILDING DEPARTMENT § 17-5
17:3
§ 17-5. Other employees.
The Village Board may appoint other employees from time to time to carry out the
functions of the Building Department.
§ 17-6. Restrictions on employees.
No officer or employee of the Building Department shall engage in any activity not
consistent with his or her duties or with the interests of the Building Department, nor
shall any officer or employee, during the term of his or her employment, be engaged
directly or indirectly in any building business, in the furnishing of labor, materials or
appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or the preparation
of plans and specifications thereof within the village, excepting only that this provision
shall not prohibit any employee from such activities in connection with the construction
of the building or structure owned by him or her.
§ 17-7. Powers and duties of Superintendent of Public Works.
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law or regulation, or except as herein
otherwise provided, the Superintendent of Public Works shall administer and
enforce all of the provisions of laws and regulations applicable to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal and demolition of buildings and structures, and the
installation and use of materials and equipment therein and the location, use,
occupancy and maintenance thereof.
B. The Superintendent of Public Works shall receive from the Village Clerk all
applications for the erection, alteration, removal and demolition of buildings or
structures or parts thereof and shall examine the premises for which applications
have been received and shall recommend the issuance or refusal of the permits
applied for and shall examine the premises for which permits have been issued for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with laws and regulations governing building
construction.
C. The Superintendent of Public Works shall issue all appropriate notices or orders to
remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary safeguards during
construction and to ensure compliance during the entire course of construction with
the requirements of such laws, ordinances or regulations.7
D. The Superintendent of Public Works shall make or cause to be made all inspections
which are necessary and may accept written reports of inspection from generally
recognized and authoritative service and inspection bureaus, provided that the same
are certified by a responsible official thereof.
E. Whenever necessary or appropriate to ensure compliance with the provisions of
applicable laws or regulations covering building construction, the Superintendent
of Public Works may require the performance of tests in the field by experienced,
professional persons or by accredited and authoritative testing laboratories or
service bureaus or agencies.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Buildings, Dangerous.
§ 17-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 17-8
17:4
§ 17-8. Departmental records and reports.
§ 17-9. Personal liability.
No official or employee of the Building Department shall, while acting pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as the result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her official duties, provided that such acts are performed in good faith and without
gross negligence.8
§ 17-10. Cooperation of other departments and officers.
The Superintendent of Public Works may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and cooperation of the
Police, Fire and Water Departments and of all other municipal officials exercising any
jurisdiction over the construction, use or occupancy of buildings or the installment of
equipment therein.
A. The Superintendent of Public Works shall keep permanent official records of all
transactions and activities of the Building Department, including all applications
which have been referred to the Department and permits and certificates
recommended or issued, inspection reports and notices and orders issued. All such
records shall be permanent records open to public inspection during business hours.
B. The Superintendent of Public Works shall annually submit to the Village Board a
written report and summary of the business conducted by the Department and such
other reports as the Board of Trustees may by resolution request.
8. Editor's Note: Former § 5-23, Right of entry, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 17-8 BUILDING DEPARTMENT § 17-10
17:5

ARTICLE II
Violations of Zoning Code
[Adopted 9-16-1991]
§ 17-11. Notice; penalties.
The Building Department, upon discovery of a violation of the Chapter 250, Zoning,
shall serve upon the owner of the property which is in violation, written notice requiring
the violation of the code to be cured within 10 days of the date of the notice, or be
summoned to the Village Court. The Building Department shall have authority to grant
reasonable extensions of this ten-day deadline, if the property owner exhibits good-faith
efforts to cure the violation(s), and if the violation(s) do not threaten the health and/or
safety of any person.
§ 17-11 BUILDING DEPARTMENT § 17-11
17:7

Chapter 21
CAPITAL RESERVE FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 71.
§ 21-1. Youth Center Reserve.9
Youth Center Reserve is to accumulate donations and bequeaths from various groups
or individual donors for projects that are related to the Youth Center or to its related
activities.
§ 21-2. Pool Reserve.
Each year the Clerk-Treasurer should transfer all Pool Reserve moneys from the general
fund to the Pool Capital Reserve for the amount received in excess of the anticipated
revenue.10
9. Editor's Note: The sections formerly preceding this section, regarding the Public Works Equipment Reserve and the
Streets Reserve, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
10. Editor's Note: The section regarding the H.V.F.D Equipment Reserve, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 17-11 CAPITAL RESERVE FUNDS § 21-2
21:1

Chapter 23
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 54.
§ 23-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide legal and financial protection for those
individuals serving the Village of Hamburg from losses which may be brought against
them in their individual capacity for actions taken while in performance of their official
duties and responsibilities. By enactment of this chapter, the Board of Trustees intends
to confer the benefits of § 18 of Article 2 of the Public Officers Law of New York State
upon covered persons as defined in § 23-2 of this code. It is the further intent of this
chapter to provide supplemental defense and indemnification for punitive and exemplary
damage as well as compensatory damages. The duty shall not arise where the injury or
damages resulted from the intentional wrongdoing or maliciousness on the part of the
covered person.
§ 23-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDING — A proceeding before a governmental agency
charged with administering and implementing legislation.
CIVIL ACTION — An action brought to enforce, redress or protect private rights,
including suits at equity and at law.
COVERED PERSON — Any person holding a position by election, appointment, or
employment in the service of the Village of Hamburg, whether or not compensated, but
shall not include an independent contractor. The term "covered person" shall include a
former covered person, his estate or judicially appointed personal representative. The
benefits of this chapter shall inure only to "covered persons," as defined herein, and shall
not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — The head of a department of the Village of Hamburg.
JUDICIAL PROCEEDING — Any proceeding in which judicial action is invoked and
taken in a legally constituted court.
TRUSTEE-LIAISON — A member of the Village Board of Trustees appointed by the
Mayor to act as liaison to a particular Village department.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hamburg.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Administrator for the Village of
Hamburg.
§ 21-2 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-2
23:1
VILLAGE ATTORNEY — The Village Attorney for the Village of Hamburg.
§ 23-3. Village to provide defense; exception.
§ 23-4. Judgments and settlements.
A. Upon compliance by the covered person with the provisions of § 23-5 of this
chapter, the Village of Hamburg shall provide the defense of the covered person in
any civil action, administrative or judicial, or proceeding in any state or federal
court arising out of any alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the
complaint to have occurred while the covered person was acting within the scope
of his public employment or duties. This duty to provide for a defense shall not
arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Village
of Hamburg.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section, the covered
person shall be entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney; provided,
however, that the covered person shall be entitled to representation by private
counsel of his choice in any civil, administrative or judicial action or proceeding
whenever the Village Attorney determines, based upon his investigation and review
of the facts and circumstances of the case, that representation by the Village
Attorney would be inappropriate or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction,
upon appropriate motion or by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of
interest exists and that the covered person is entitled to be represented by private
counsel of his choice. The Village Attorney shall notify the covered person in
writing of such determination that the covered person is entitled to be represented
by private counsel of his choice. The Village Attorney may require, as a condition
to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation, that appropriate groups
of such covered persons be represented by the same counsel. If the covered person
or group of covered persons is entitled to representation by private counsel under
the provisions of this section, the Village Attorney shall so certify to the Board of
Trustees. Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the
Village of Hamburg to such private counsel from time to time during the pendency
of the civil action or proceeding, subject to certification that the covered person is
entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of this section by the head
of the department in which such covered person is employed, and upon the review
of the Village Attorney and the Village Administrator, and approval by the Board
of Trustees. Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple covered persons
by a single counsel or the amount of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of
attorneys' fees shall be resolved by the court upon motion or by way of special
proceeding.
C. Where the covered person delivers process and a request for a defense to the Village
Attorney as required by § 23-5 of this chapter, the Village Attorney shall take the
necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel under the terms and
conditions provided in Subsection B of this section, on behalf of the covered person
to avoid entry of a default judgment pending resolution of any question pertaining
to the obligation to provide for a defense.
A. The Village of Hamburg shall indemnify and save harmless its covered persons in
§ 23-2 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 23-4
23:2
§ 23-5. Conditions.
The duty to indemnify or save harmless provided by this chapter shall be conditioned
upon delivery to the Village Attorney, at his office by the covered person of the original
or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five
the amount of any judgment rendered against such covered persons by any state or
federal court or by any administrative agency or in the amount of any settlement of
a claim, including punitive or exemplary damages, that arise out of a negligent or
other act committed while in the proper discharge of his or her duties and within
the scope of his or her employment. The duty to indemnify and save harmless
prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from
intentional or malicious wrongdoing on the part of the covered person.
B. Such proper discharge of duty and scope of employment shall be determined by a
majority vole of a panel consisting of the Village Administrator, the trustee-liaison
to the department in which the covered person is employed and the department
head. In the absence of or unavailability of a trustee-liaison, the Mayor shall sit on
the panel. In the event that the covered person that is the subject of the proper
discharge and scope of employment determination is the department head, or in the
event that the covered person does not belong to a department, the Village Attorney
shall sit as the third member of the panel. In the event that the Village Administrator
and the Village Attorney are the covered persons that are the subject of the proper
discharge and scope of employment determination, the panel shall consist of the
Board of Trustees.
C. Any proposed settlement which may be subject to indemnification must be
presented to the Board of Trustees by the Village Attorney, or by the covered
person or his private counsel, within three business days of the covered person's
receipt of the settlement offer. The Board of Trustees, by a majority of no less than
three votes, may approve any proposed settlement. In addition, the Board of
Trustees, in its discretion, may initiate settlement discussions as to any pending
civil action, administrative proceeding or judicial proceeding, or direct the Village
Attorney or the Village Administrator to initiate such settlement discussions.
Further, after consultation with the Village Attorney, the Board of Trustees may
propose a settlement to the adversarial party. The Village Attorney shall review
such proposed settlement as to form and amount and shall give his or her approval
if, in his or her judgment, the settlement is in the best interest of the Village.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Village to indemnify or
save harmless a covered person with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and
approved by the Village Attorney.
D. Upon entry of a final judgment against the covered person or upon the execution of
a settlement of the claim, the covered person shall cause to be served a copy of such
judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered mail within 30 days
of the date of entry or settlement, upon the Village Administrator, and, if not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such judgment or settlement shall
be certified for payment by the Village Administrator. If the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Hamburg concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement
shall be paid upon the approval of the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees
shall not concur in the certification of a judgment that it had determined to appeal.
§ 23-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-5
23:3
days after he is served with such document and the full cooperation of the covered person
in the defense of such action or proceeding and in defense of any action or proceeding
against the Village based upon the same act or omission and in the prosecution of any
appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the covered person that the Village
of Hamburg provide for his defense pursuant to this chapter.
§ 23-6. Construal of provisions.
§ 23-7. Punitive damages for police officers.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to affect, alter or repeal any
provision of the Workers' Compensation Law.
B. This chapter shall not in any way affect the obligation of any claimant to give notice
to the Village under any provision of law.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit or modify
the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance.
D. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify, abrogate
or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or
covered person of the Village or any right to defense and/or indemnification
provided for any governmental officer or covered person by, in accordance with, or
by reason of, any other provisions of state or federal statutory or common law.
A. The Village of Hamburg shall provide for the defense of any civil action or
proceeding brought against a duly appointed police officer and shall indemnify and
save harmless such police officer from any judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction whenever such action, proceeding or judgment is for punitive or
exemplary damages arising out of a negligent act or other tort such police officer
committed while in the proper discharge of his/her duties and within the scope of
his/her employment. This duty to provide a defense shall not arise where the action
or proceeding against such police officer is brought by or at the behest of the
Village itself.
B. Such proper discharge and scope shall be determined by a majority vote of a panel
consisting of the Police Chief, the Village Administrator, and the Trustee-liaison to
the Police Department. The panel shall make its determination at or before the time
to file or serve an answer in a civil action or proceeding; a determination favorable
to such police officer may thereafter be revoked by the panel only if such police
officer, with respect to any material and relevant facts, acts or omissions, lied in any
investigation of the underlying incident upon which the panel relied in making its
original determination, and the truth causes the panel to revise its original
determination. The panel's determination, original or revised, shall be in writing and
served promptly upon such police officer, and, if a determination is adverse to such
police officer, it shall state facts and reasons therefore. A special proceeding
brought pursuant to Article 78 of the New York Civil Practice Law and Rules shall
be the exclusive method by which such police officer aggrieved by a determination
may seek judicial review of the determination.
§ 23-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 23-7
23:4
§ 23-8. Liability for costs.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg hereby accepts the applicability of
§ 18 of the Public Officers Law for the Village of Hamburg and agrees that the Village
shall be liable for costs incurred under the provisions of § 18 of the Public Officers
Law and confers upon the officers and employees of the Village the benefits of § 18
of such law. Such benefits shall supplement and he available in addition to defense and
indemnification protection conferred by the other provisions of this chapter.
§ 23-9. Effect on pending proceedings.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings pending upon
the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
§ 23-10. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance
is held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or in part, by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such holding of unconstitutionality or invalidity shall in no way affect or
impair any other provision of this chapter or the application of any such provision to any
other person or circumstance.
§ 23-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State.
C. The duties to defend and to indemnify and save harmless for all damages, including
compensatory and punitive or exemplary, shall be conditioned upon delivery by
such police officer to the Village Attorney of any notice, summons, complaint or
any other legal process within three business days after he/she is served with such
document; the full and truthful response by such police officer in any and all Village
investigations in the incident(s) and transaction(s) upon which the action or
proceeding is predicated; and the full cooperation of such police officer in the
defense of any action or proceeding against him/her or against the Village based
upon his/her alleged acts or omissions and in the taking of any appeals.
§ 23-7 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 23-11
23:5

Chapter 24
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 31. Officers and employees — See Ch. 54.
§ 23-11 ELECTIONS § 23-11
24:1

ARTICLE I
Runoff Elections
[Adopted 11-19-2001 by L.L. No. 9-2001]
§ 24-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to comply with Article 15 and § 15-126 of the Election Law
of the State of New York in order to provide for a runoff election in the event that more
eligible persons remaining than the number to be elected receive for the same office or
offices an equal number of votes in any general or special Village election.
§ 24-2. Procedures.
A. In the event that more eligible persons than the number remaining to be elected
receive for the same office or offices of the Village an equal number of votes, the
Board of Trustees shall adopt a resolution stating the date and place and hours of
the special runoff election, the names and addresses of the candidates involved in
the run-off and the office and terms nominated for. Said resolution shall include a
statement that the run-off election is for those Village offices for which a tie vote
was received in the previous general or special election and is limited to only the
number of offices remaining unfilled as a result of the tie vote and includes only
those candidates that received the equal number of votes for the same office. In
addition, such resolution shall direct the Village Clerk to publish same at least 10
days prior to the election date.
B. The date for the special run-off election shall be held on the first Tuesday at least
10 days after the final certification of such tie results.
C. The special run-off election as provided for herein shall be waived and the selection
made by lot as provided for by Article 15, § 15-126 of the Election Laws of the
State of New York, as may be amended from time to time, if each person who shall
have received such equal number of votes shall have filed with the Village Clerk no
later than two days after such final certification of such tie vote, a written notice of
consent that such selection be made by lot.
§ 24-1 ELECTIONS § 24-2
24:3

Chapter 25
ELECTRIC UTILITY
§ 25-1. Statutory authority; when effective.
§ 25-2. Intent.
§ 25-3. Creation of utility.
The Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility shall acquire the necessary plant and
facilities, if any, and either establish necessary functions for or procure contracts for the
maintenance, service and billing of the electrical energy system and utility, and a supply
of electricity, such as are necessary for the creation of the Hamburg municipal electric
utility.
§ 25-4. Plant and facilities; service and maintenance; electrical supply.
The proposed method of constructing, leasing, purchasing, or acquiring, the plant and
A. Pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, and § 360 of the General
Municipal Law, the Incorporated Village of Hamburg, County of Erie and State of
New York, hereby enacts this chapter to create the Village of Hamburg municipal
electric utility.
B. This chapter shall take effect on the filing of the approved local law with the
Secretary of State of New York, which shall be within five days after its approval
by a simple majority of the voters by mandatory referendum at an election to be
held to approve this chapter, pursuant to § 360 of the General Municipal Law.
A. The Incorporated Village of Hamburg is a village duly incorporated under the laws
of the State of New York and the Trustees of the Village of Hamburg are duly
empowered, pursuant to § 360 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New
York, to form a municipal electric utility for the village.
B. It is essential for the well-being, livelihood and safety of the residents and
businesses of the village, and of the other consumers of electric power in the village,
including the village itself, and of their families and guests, for the economic
climate of the village, and for the protection of private and public property within
the village and the value of that property, that the supply and distribution of
electricity to the residents, businesses and other consumers of electric power in the
village, and the village itself, be provided in a reliable manner and at a fair and
reasonable cost.
C. Whereas the Trustees have determined that the most reliable, fair and economical
way for the supply of electricity and electrical service to be provided to the Village
of Hamburg, its residents and businesses and institutions, is by the creation of the
Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility, the Trustees of the Village of
Hamburg hereby enact this chapter for the intent and purpose of establishing a
municipal electric utility pursuant to § 360 of the General Municipal Law, and all
of the powers and duties thereunder.
§ 24-2 ELECTRIC UTILITY § 25-4
25:1
facilities for the municipal electric utility, together with both the maximum and the
estimated costs thereof, the method of furnishing such service and the method of
obtaining electrical supply, shall be as follows:
A. Plant and facilities.
(1) The Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility will initially operate by the
transportation and distribution of electricity through the property of the New
York State Electric and Gas Company (NYSEG) or such other company
owning wires, poles or other assets necessary for the transportation and
distribution of electricity by the Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility
to its customers, and then, after approval by the Board of Trustees, will
acquire, build or construct property necessary for the transportation and
distribution of the electric supply, and the servicing, operation and
maintenance thereof.
(2) The Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility will obtain, by purchase or
condemnation, the electrical distribution system within the boundaries of the
village currently owned by the New York State Electric and Gas Company
(NYSEG), or other electric company operating in the village, and will
construct such additional infrastructure as may be needed to separate itself
from the NYSEG system, if necessary. The Village of Hamburg municipal
electric utility also may construct its own generating facilities to supply
electrical energy to its customers and, if necessary, in its discretion, may
construct new infrastructure instead of acquiring NYSEG property.
(3) The initial cost of the commencement of the operation of the municipal electric
utility will not exceed a maximum of $25,000. In the event that the Board of
Trustees determines to acquire, build or construct the poles, wires and other
assets necessary for the transportation and distribution of the supply of
electricity, including the maintenance, operation and servicing thereof, the
maximum and estimated cost of the items set forth in Subsection A(1) and (2)
should be not more than $6,019,447. It shall be a condition of the operation of
the municipal electric utility, and this chapter, that the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Hamburg, prior to spending a cost of more than a total of $25,000
for the amounts stated in Subsection A(1) and (2), will submit the plan to
another public referendum for approval.
(4) The cost of the acquisition of the plant, facilities, distribution system and any
other costs that are necessary for the implementation of the Village of
Hamburg municipal electric utility shall be paid by the issuance of a bond by
the village for the useful life of the equipment and facilities, and the longest
maturity possible, which is expected to be 30 years.
(5) The entire costs of the acquisition, construction, development, implementation
and operation of the Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility, including
the debt service of any financing that is created in order to pay the costs
thereof, including the long-term bond that is described herein, as well as any
other costs of the Hamburg municipal electric utility, will be paid in the first
instance from the revenues generated by the Village of Hamburg municipal
electric utility and will not have any effect on the general budget or real estate
§ 25-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 25-4
25:2
§ 25-5. Mandatory referendum.
taxes of the village.
B. Service and maintenance of plant, facilities and distribution system.
(1) The Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility will obtain service and
maintenance for the infrastructure of the municipal electric utility, and billing
and management services, by obtaining contracts with suitable and acceptable
maintenance, service and billing companies. The contracts will be supported
wherever possible by a performance bond of an amount acceptable to the
village.
(2) The village will also consider and retain the ability and power to create its own
maintenance and service and billing department, including the equipment,
materials and supplies required for that department, in order to provide service
and maintenance to the Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility if the
village deems it to be in its best interests to do so.
C. Electrical supply. The Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility will obtain its
supply of electricity either by contracting with a utility or supplier, or by generating
its own electricity or a combination thereof.
A. This chapter shall be subject to approval by a mandatory referendum of the
residents of the Incorporated Village of Hamburg, to be conducted at an election or
special election pursuant to and as set forth in § 360 of the General Municipal Law
of the State of New York, the Election Law and Village Law of the State of New
York.11
B. The Village of Hamburg municipal electric utility shall be effective and granted the
full powers entitled to it by law on the date of the approval by a simple majority of
the referendum, except as otherwise provided in this chapter for the approval by a
second referendum, and the filing of the chapter with the Secretary of State of New
York.
11. Editor's Note: This chapter was approved by a majority of the qualified electors at the general election held 3-21-2000.
§ 25-4 ELECTRIC UTILITY § 25-5
25:3

Chapter 27
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION COMMISSION
§ 27-1. Intent.
The preservation and improvement of the quality of the natural and man-made
environment within the Village of Hamburg in the face of population growth,
urbanization and technological change, with their accompanying demands on natural
resources, is found to be of increasing and vital importance to the health, welfare and
economic well-being of present and future inhabitants and requires forthright action
by the governing body of the Village of Hamburg. It is recognized that the biologic
integrity of the natural environment on which humans are dependent for survival and
the natural and functional beauty of our surroundings which condition the quality of our
life experience cannot be protected without the full cooperation and participation of all
the people of the village working in partnership with local and state officials and with
various public and private institutions, agencies and organizations. Establishment of a
Commission for Conservation of the Environment is a necessary step in fostering unified
action on environmental problems.
§ 27-2. Establishment.
The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg hereby creates a commission
which shall be known as the "Village Environmental Conservation Commission" for
conservation of the environment, pursuant to Article 12f, § 239-x, General Municipal
Law, hereinafter called the "Commission."
§ 27-3. Membership.
§ 27-4. Officers, meetings and committees. [Amended 9-2-2003 by L.L. No.
1-2003]
The Village Board of Trustees shall designate a member of the Commission to act as
Chairperson thereof. At the first meeting of the Commission its members shall elect
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Village Board of
Trustees and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Board of Trustees, and the
remainder shall be ex-officio members as provided herein. Persons residing within
the Village of Hamburg who are interested in the improvement and preservation of
environmental quality shall be eligible for appointment as members of the
Commission. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointments, except that a vacancy occurring other than by expiration
of term of office shall be filled only for the remainder of the unexpired term.
[Amended 7-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999; 3-6-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000;
9-2-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
B. The Village Board of Trustees, the Chairperson of the Planning Commission,
Director of Public Works, Recreation Supervisor, Chairperson of the Recreation
Commission, Village Attorney and other officials that may be hereafter designated
by the Village Board of Trustees shall be ex-officio members of the Commission.
§ 25-5 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 27-4
27:1
from among themselves a recording secretary. The Commission shall adopt rules and
procedures for its meetings. It shall keep accurate records of its meetings and activities.
§ 27-5. Powers and duties of Commission. [Amended 9-2-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
The powers and duties of the Commission shall be to:
§ 27-6. Compensation and expenses.12
The members of the Commission, including ex-officio members, shall receive no
compensation for their services as members thereof but may be reimbursed for
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties within the
appropriations made available therefor.
A. Advise the Village Board of Trustees on matters affecting the preservation,
development and use of the natural and man-made features and conditions of the
village insofar as beauty, quality, biologic integrity and other environmental factors
are concerned and, in the case of man's activities and developments, with regard to
any major threats posed to environmental quality, so as to enhance the long-range
value of the environment to the people of the village.
B. Develop and, after receiving general approval by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees, conduct a program of public information in the community which shall be
designed to foster increased understanding of the nature of environmental problems
and issues and support for their solutions.
C. Conduct studies, surveys and inventories of the natural and man-made features
within the Village of Hamburg and such other studies and surveys as may be
necessary to carry out the general purpose of this chapter, with the approval of the
Village Board.
D. Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of private groups, institutions and
individuals with the Village of Hamburg in accord with the purpose of this chapter.
E. Maintain liaison and communications with public and private agencies and
organizations of local, state and national scope whose programs and activities have
impact on the quality of the environment or who can be of assistance to the
Commission.
F. Prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets in accord with the
purposes of this chapter and the budget established by the Village Board of
Trustees.
G. Obtain and maintain in orderly fashion maps, reports, books and other publications
to support the necessary research of the Commission into local environmental
conditions.
H. Carry out such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Village
Board of Trustees.
12. Editor's Note: Former § 27-6, Reports, as amended, was repealed 9-2-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003. This local law also
renumbered former §§ 27-7 and 27-8 as 27-6 and 27-7, respectively.
§ 27-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 27-7
27:2
§ 27-7. Construction.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the Village of Hamburg to
preserve and improve the quality of the natural and man-made environment on behalf of
the present and future inhabitants thereof. This chapter is not intended and shall not be
deemed to impair the powers of any public corporation.
§ 27-7 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION COMMISSION § 27-7
27:3

Chapter 31
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
§ 27-7 ETHICS § 27-7
31:1

ARTICLE I
Code of Ethics
[Adopted 10-19-1970 by L.L. No. 6-1970]
§ 31-1. Authority; purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Hamburg recognizes that there are rules of ethical conduct
for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high degree of moral
conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be maintained in our unit of local
government. It is the purpose of this article to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct
for the officers and employees of the Village of Hamburg. These rules shall serve as a
guide for official conduct of the officers and employees of the Village of Hamburg. The
rules of ethical conduct of this article, as adopted, shall not conflict with but shall be
in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law, or any other
general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest in contracts of municipal
officers and employees.
§ 31-2. Definitions.13
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INTEREST—A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal
officer or employee as the result of a contract with the municipality which such officer or
employee serves. For the purposes of this article, a municipal officer or employee shall
be deemed to have an interest in the contract of:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the Village
of Hamburg, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any administrative board,
commission or other agency thereof. No person shall be deemed to be a municipal officer
or employee solely by reason of being a volunteer fire fighter or civil defense volunteer,
except a Fire Chief or Municipal Fire Chief.
§ 31-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village of Hamburg shall be subject to and abide by
the following standards of conduct:
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of employment with
the municipality which such officer or employee serves.
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is a member
or employee.
B.
C. A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director or employee.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by
such officer or employee.
D.
A. Gifts. An officer or employee shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit any gift or
13. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 31-1 ETHICS § 31-3
31:3
accept or receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the form
of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise or
any other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that
the gift was intended to influence him or her, or could reasonably be expected
to influence him or her, in the performance the official duties of the officer or
employee or was intended as a reward for any official action on his or her part.14
B. Confidential information. An officer or employee shall not disclose confidential
information acquired by him or her in the course of his or her official duties or use
such information to further his or her personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. An officer or employee shall not receive
or enter into any agreement, expressed or implied, for compensation for services to
be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of which he or
she is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency over which he
or she has jurisdiction or to which he or she has the power to appoint any member,
officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. An officer or employee shall
not receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for
services to be rendered in relation to any matter before any agency or his or her
municipality, whereby his or her compensation is to be dependent or contingent
upon any action by such agency with respect to such matter, provided that this
subsection shall not prohibit the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable
value of the services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that an officer or employee knows
thereof, a member of the Board of Trustees and any officer or employee of the
Village of Hamburg, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the discussion or
gives official opinion to the Board of Trustees on any legal legislation before the
Board of Trustees shall publicly disclose on the official record the nature and extent
of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest he or she has in such
legislation.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. An officer or employee shall not invest
or hold any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business, commercial
or other private transaction which creates a conflict with his or her official duties.
G. Private employment. An officer or employee shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate
for or promise to accept private employment or render services for private interests
when such employment or service creates a conflict with or impairs the proper
discharge of his or her official duties.
H. Future employment. An officer or employee shall not, after the termination of
service or employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the Village of Hamburg in relation to any case, proceeding or application in
which the officer or employee personally participated during the period of his or
her service or employment or which was under his or her active consideration.
14. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 31-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 31-4
31:4
§ 31-4. Filing of claims.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a present or former
municipal officer or employee of any claim, account, demand or suit against the Village
of Hamburg, or any agency thereof, on behalf of himself or herself or any member of
his or her family arising out of any personal injury or property damage or for any lawful
benefit authorized or permitted by law.
§ 31-5. Distribution.15
The Mayor of the Village of Hamburg shall cause a copy of this code of ethics to be
distributed to every officer and employee of the Village of Hamburg within 30 days
after the effective date of this article. Each officer and employee elected or appointed
thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of the office or
employment. Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of any officer or employee to
receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with such code or the
enforcement provisions thereof.
§ 31-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any person who shall
knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of this code may be fined,
suspended or removed from office or employment, as the case may be, in the manner
provided by law.
§ 31-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect 10 days after it is filed, as provided in Section 27 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law.
15. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 31-4 ETHICS § 31-7
31:5

ARTICLE II
Board of Ethics
[Adopted 2-3-1975; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 31-8. Established.
There shall be a Board of Ethics to administer the rules and regulations set forth in
Article I of this chapter, the Code of Ethics for the Village of Hamburg. Said Board shall
consist of three members.
§ 31-8 ETHICS § 31-8
31:7

Chapter 36
FLAG, DISPLAY OF
§ 36-1. Designated holidays.16
The Village of Hamburg will display American flags along the designated streets for the
following events and holidays:
Presidents' Day
Memorial Day
Flag Day
Fourth of July
Labor Day
Veterans Day
§ 36-2. Timing of display.
Flags will be put up during the last regular work day prior to the event or holiday and
taken down the first regular work day following the event or holiday.
§ 36-3. Special events.
Flags may also be flown for special events other than those listed and for other such
times as the Board of Trustees approves through resolution.
16. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 31-8 FLAG, DISPLAY OF § 36-3
36:1

Chapter 40
GAS UTILITY
§ 40-1. Statutory authority; enactment; when effective; intent.
§ 40-2. Plant and facilities; maintenance and service; gas supply.
The Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility shall acquire the necessary facilities
and either establish necessary functions for or procure contracts for the maintenance,
management, service and billing of the gas energy system and a supply of gas as
are necessary for the creation and operation of the Hamburg municipal gas utility.
The proposed method of constructing, leasing, purchasing or acquiring the facilities
necessary for the operation of the Hamburg municipal gas utility, if any, together with
A. Enactment. Pursuant to § 10 of the Home Rule Law and § 360 of the General
Municipal Law, the Incorporated Village of Hamburg, County of Erie and State of
New York, hereby enacts this chapter to create the Village of Hamburg municipal
gas utility.
B. When effective. This chapter shall take effect upon the filing of the approved Local
Law with the Secretary of State of New York, which shall be within five days, or
the period required by the Secretary of State, after its approval by a simple majority
of the voters, by mandatory referendum at an election or special election to be held
to approve this chapter, pursuant to § 360 of the General Municipal Law.
C. Intent.
(1) Whereas the Incorporated Village of Hamburg is a village duly incorporated
under the laws of the State of New York; and
(2) Whereas the Trustees of the Village of Hamburg are duly empowered pursuant
to § 360 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York to form a
municipal gas utility for the village; and
(3) Whereas it is essential for the well-being, livelihood and safety of the residents
and businesses of the village, and of the other consumers of gas power in the
village, including the village itself, and of their families and guests, for the
economic climate of the village, and for the protection of private and public
property within the village and the value of that property, that the supply and
distribution of gas to the residents, and other consumers of gas power in the
village, and the village itself, be provided in a reliable manner, and at a fair
and reasonable cost; and
(4) Whereas the Trustees have determined that the most reliable, fair and
economical way for gas and gas supply to be provided to the Village of
Hamburg, its residents, businesses and institutions, is by the creation of the
Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility, the Trustees of the Village of
Hamburg hereby enact this chapter for the intent and purpose of establishing a
municipal gas utility pursuant to § 360 of the General Municipal Law and all
of the powers and duties thereunder.
§ 36-3 GAS UTILITY § 40-2
40:1
both the maximum and the estimated costs thereof, the method of furnishing such service
and the method of obtaining gas supply shall be as follows:
A. Plant and facilities.
(1) The Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility will obtain access to or acquire
the portion of the gas distribution system within the village, if any, that it is
necessary for the village to operate the municipal gas utility, by purchase, lease
or condemnation from that which is currently owned by the National Fuel
Corporation (National), or such other utility that may be servicing the village,
or by obtaining other facilities as necessary. The Hamburg municipal gas
utility will only construct or obtain that equipment and facilities, if any, which
are necessary for the municipal gas utility to provide gas supply to the users of
gas energy in the village, or other users as the municipal gas utility may
provide gas to, and segregate and operate the municipal gas utility and as may
be needed to separate itself from the National system or to meter the gas
supplied to or used by the Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility.
(2) The maximum and estimated cost of the items set forth in Subsection A(1)
hereof is expected to be not more than $25,000.
(3) The cost of the necessary facilities, if any, and distribution and any other costs
that are necessary for the implementation of the Village of Hamburg municipal
gas utility and the entire costs of the implementation and operation of the
Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility will be paid from the revenues
generated by the Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility.
(4) None of the costs of the implementation or operation of the Village of
Hamburg municipal gas utility shall be included in or have any effect on the
village general budget or the assessment of village property taxes.
B. Service and maintenance of plant, facilities and distribution system.
(1) The Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility will obtain service and
maintenance for the equipment and infrastructure of the Hamburg municipal
gas utility, if any, and the other remaining gas distribution and other equipment
that is within the village from national or such other utility that is providing
service in the village, or the existing gas utility for the time that the utility is
mandated to provide those services or it remains in the best interests of the
village to receive the maintenance from that source, and will otherwise
contract out the service and maintenance to other suitable contractors as
necessary or when in the best interests of the village and the municipal gas
utility.
(2) The Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility will obtain billing and
management services by obtaining contracts with suitable and acceptable
maintenance, management, service and billing companies. The contracts will
be supported wherever possible by a performance bond of an amount
acceptable to the village.
(3) The village will also consider and retain the ability and power to create its own
maintenance, management and billing department, including the equipment,
§ 40-2 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 40-2
40:2
§ 40-3. Mandatory referendum.
materials and supplies required for that department, in order to provide billing,
service and maintenance to the Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility if the
village deems it to be in the best interests of the village to do so.
C. Gas supply. The Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility will obtain its supply of
gas by contracting with another utility or supplier to provide the supply of gas to
the municipal gas utility.
A. This chapter shall be subject to approval by a mandatory referendum of the
residents of the Incorporated Village of Hamburg, pursuant to and as set forth in
§ 360 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, the Election Law
and the Village Law of the State of New York, at an election or special election as
may be required.
B. The Village of Hamburg municipal gas utility shall be effective and granted the full
powers entitled to it by law on the date of the approval by a simple majority of the
referendum and the filing of this chapter with the Secretary of State of New York.
§ 40-2 GAS UTILITY § 40-3
40:3

Chapter 43
HANDICAPPED GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 54. Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
§ 43-1. Requirements.
The procedures set forth hereunder shall meet the requirements of Section 51.55(d) of
31 CFR (Federal Revenue Sharing Regulations).
§ 43-2. Internal grievance procedure.
The Village of Hamburg hereby adopts an internal grievance procedure providing for
prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by the
Office of Revenue Sharings (ORS) regulations [31 CFR 51.55(d)(2)] implementing
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1983 as amended (29 U.S.C. 794). Section
504 states, in part, that "no otherwise qualified handicapped individual... shall soley
by reason of his handicap, be excluded from the participation in, be denied of, or be
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial
assistance...."
§ 43-3. Complaints.17
Complaints should be addressed to the Village of Hamburg Clerk-Treasurer, 100 Main
Street, Hamburg, NY, 14075, 649-0200, who has been designated to coordinate Section
504 compliance efforts.
A. A complaint should be filed in writing or verbally, contain the name and address of
the person filing it and briefly describe the alleged violation of regulations.
B. A complaint should be filed within 30 days after the complainant becomes aware of
the alleged violation. (Processing of allegations of discrimination occurring before
this grievance procedure is in place will be considered on a case-by-case basis).
C. An investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow a filing of a complaint. The
investigation will be conducted by the Clerk-Treasurer. These rules contemplate
informal but thorough investigations, affording all interested persons and their
representatives, if any, an opportunity to submit evidence relative to a complaint.
Under 31 CFR 51.55(d)(2), the Village of Hamburg need not process complaints
for admission to post-secondary educational institutions.
D. A written determination as to the validity of the complaint and description of
resolution, if any, shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer and a copy forwarded to
17. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-3 HANDICAPPED GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE § 43-3
43:1
the complainant no later than 30 days after its filing.
E. The Section 504 coordinator shall maintain the files and the records of the Village
of Hamburg relating to the complaints filed.
F. The complainant can request a reconsideration of the case in instances where he or
she is dissatisfied with the resolution. The request for reconsideration should be
made within 30 days to the Village Attorney, who is designated the officer
responsible for handling appeals.
G. The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint filed
hereunder shall not be impaired by the person's pursuit of other remedies such as
the filing of a Section 504 complaint with the Office of Revenue Sharing, United
States Department of the Treasury. Utilization of this grievance procedure is not a
prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies.
H. These rules shall be construed to protect the substantive rights of interested persons,
to met appropriate due process standards and to assure that the Village of Hamburg
complies with Section 504 and the ORS regulations.
§ 43-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 43-3
43:2
Chapter 44
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building department — See Ch. 17.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 182.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 44-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Hamburg Landmarks
Preservation Local Law."
§ 44-2. Purpose.
A. The Village Board of Trustees finds that there exists within the Village of Hamburg
places, sites, structures and buildings of historic or architectural significance,
antiquity, uniqueness of exterior design or construction, which should be
conserved, protected and preserved to maintain the architectural character of
Hamburg Village to contribute to the aesthetic value of the Village and to promote
the general good, welfare, health and safety of the Village and its residents.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general welfare by providing for the
identification, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of buildings,
structures, signs, features, improvements, sites and areas within the Village that
reflect special elements of the Village's historical, architectural, cultural, economic
or aesthetic heritage for the following reasons:
(1) To foster public knowledge, understanding, and appreciation of the beauty and
character of the Village and in the accomplishments of its past;
(2) To ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of
the Village;
(3) To enhance the visual character of the city by encouraging new design and
construction that complements the Village's historic buildings;
(4) To protect and promote the economic benefits of historic preservation to the
Village, its inhabitants and visitors;
(5) To protect property values in the Village;
(6) To promote and encourage continued private ownership and stewardship of
historic structures;
(7) To identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation
of historic landmarks/districts and alternative land uses; and
§ 43-3 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-2
44:1
§ 44-3. Enabling authority.
Pursuant to Article 5, § 96-a; Article 5-G, Article 5-J and Article 5-K, § 119-dd of the
General Municipal Law; Article 14 of the Parks, Recreation and Historical Preservation
Law; and § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law; it is hereby declared as a matter
of public policy that the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and
historic districts are necessary to promote the cultural, economic and general welfare of
the public.
§ 44-4. Historic Preservation Commission.
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Village of Hamburg Historic
Preservation Commission.
(8) To conserve valuable material and energy resources by ongoing use and
maintenance of the existing built environment.
A. Membership. The Commission shall consist of seven members.
B. Appointments. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Village
Mayor subject to approval of the Village Board of Trustees. No person appointed
to the Commission can also serve as a member of the Village governing board
establishing the Commission.
C. Term of office. The terms for all members of the Commission shall be staggered
and fixed so that the term of one or two member(s) shall expire at the end of the
Village term calendar year (April 3) in which all such commission members were
initially appointed. The terms of the remaining members shall be so fixed that one
or two term(s) shall expire at the end of Village term calendar year (April 3)
thereafter. At the expiration of the term of each member first appointed, his or her
successor shall be appointed for a term which shall be four years.
D. Qualifications. To the extent possible, Commission members shall be required to
have the following expertise:
(1) At least one shall be a historian;
(2) At least one shall be an architect;
(3) At least one shall be a state-licensed real estate professional;
(4) At least one shall have demonstrated significant interest in and commitment to
the field of preservation planning as evidenced either by involvement in a local
or regional historic preservation group, employment or volunteer activity in
the field of preservation planning, or other serious interest in the field; and,
(5) All members shall have a known interest in historic preservation and planning
within the Village of Hamburg.
(6) In the event that the Village Board of Trustees determines that any of the
positions described in Subsection D(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) cannot be filled by
persons so qualified, the Village Board of Trustees may fill any such position
by appointing persons qualified under Subsection D(4) or (5).
§ 44-2 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-4
44:2
§ 44-5. Organization.
E. Vacancies. Vacancies occurring in the Commission other than by expiration of term
of office shall be filled by appointment of the Village Mayor. Any such
appointment shall be for the unexpired portion of the term of the replaced member,
and the appointment must be made in accordance with the criteria established above
for original appointments.
F. Reappointment. Members may serve for no more than a maximum of two full four
year terms before stepping down from the Commission. A previous appointee may
be reappointed after a two year hiatus from the Commission. Each member shall
serve until the appointment of a successor, or until they serve two consecutive four
year terms. The term limits imposed by this subsection may be waived or modified
by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the
Commission when, in the judgment of the Village Board of Trustees, it is in the
best interest to do so.
G. Compensation. Members shall serve without compensation.
H. Training and attendance requirements:
(1) Each member of the Commission shall complete, at a minimum, four hours of
training each year designed to enable such members to more effectively carry
out their duties. Training received by a member in excess of four hours in any
one year may be carried over by the member into succeeding years in order to
meet this requirement. Such training shall be approved by the Village Board
of Trustees and may include, but not be limited to, training provided by a
municipality, regional or county planning office or commission, county
planning federation, state agency, statewide municipal association, college or
other similar entity. Training may be provided in a variety of formats,
including but not limited to, electronic media, video, distance learning and
traditional classroom training.
(2) To be eligible for reappointment to the Commission, a member shall have
completed the training approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
(3) The training may be waived or modified by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees when, in the judgment of the Village Board of Trustees, it is in the
best interest to do so.
(4) No decision of a commission shall be voided or declared invalid because of a
failure to comply with this subsection.
A. Chairperson; designation and duties.
(1) The Village Board of Trustees may designate the Chairperson of the
Commission. In the absence of the Village Board of Trustees' designation, the
chairperson of the Commission shall be designated by vote of an affirmative
majority of the members of the Commission.
(2) The Chairperson shall have the right to vote in all matters before the
Commission.
§ 44-4 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-5
44:3
§ 44-6. Records and annual report.
§ 44-7. Promulgation of regulations; meetings.
(3) The Chairperson shall appoint a Vice Chairperson. The Vice Chairperson shall
perform the responsibilities of the Chairperson when the Chairperson is
absent.
(4) All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairperson
and at such other times as the Commission may determine by affirmative vote.
Such Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
B. Secretary. The Village Mayor shall appoint a secretary to serve as Secretary to the
Commission. At the time of service, the Secretary shall not also serve as member
of the Commission. The Secretary shall keep a record of all resolutions
proceedings, and actions of the Commission, as well as attendance of Commission
members.
(1) A member of the Commission shall take meeting minutes except in the event
of a public hearing.
(2) The Village shall provide a secretary for all public hearings.
C. Quorum. A simple majority of the Commission members shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. An affirmative majority vote of the full Commission
is required to approve any resolution, motion or other matter before the
Commission.
A. Records. The Commission shall be subject to the provisions of the Public Officers
Law, including Article 7 related to the Open Meetings Law. The Commission
records shall be readily available to the public. The vote or failure to vote of each
Commission member shall be recorded. If any Commission member abstains from
voting based on a conflict of interest or otherwise, the member must also state his
or her reason(s) or ground(s) for doing so on the record.
B. Annual reports. The Commission shall submit an annual report of its activities to
the Mayor and each member of the Village Board of Trustees and make such
recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees as the Commission deems
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
A. Regulations. The Commission may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees
regulations relating to any subject matter over which the Commission has
jurisdiction under this local law. Any such recommendation may be adopted by
local law of the Village Board of Trustees.
B. By-laws; meetings. The Commission may propose by-laws that are consistent with
the regulations adopted by the Village Board of Trustees. Such by-laws shall
provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings; and may provide for the
calling of special meetings by the Chairperson or by written request of at least two
members of the Commission. Regular meetings shall be held at least once a month.
All regular or special meetins of the Commission shall be consistent with the notice
§ 44-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-7
44:4
§ 44-8. Committees.
The Commission may, in its by-laws, establish permanent or ad hoc committees
consisting of no less than three current members of the commission for assignments
assigned to it by the full Commission.
§ 44-9. Powers and duties of the Historic Preservation Commission.
provisions of the New york Open Meetings law and shall be open to the public. All
proposed by-laws shall be approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
A. General and advisory powers. The Commission shall, from time to time:
(1) Review any local laws or regulations, including existing landmarks or historic
preservation laws or regulations in the Village, and recommend to the Village
governing board any changes and amendments thereto;
(2) Recommend to the Village Board of Trustees additional regulations to be
adopted by local law that may be necessary for the Commission to conduct its
business, consistent with the scope and intent of this chapter;
(3) Recommend to the Village Board of Trustees specific criteria for regulations
to be adopted by local law that identify and catalogue significant historic
landmarks, and from time to time advise it on suggested changes thereto;
(4) Designate landmarks and historic districts under this landmarks preservation
chapter and from time to time changes thereto;
(5) Maintain an inventory of locally designated historic resources or districts
within the Village and publicize the inventory;
(6) Recommend to the Village Board of Trustees additional criteria to be adopted
in local law to be used when evaluating applications for a certificate of
appropriateness;
(7) Recommend to the Village Board of Trustees proposals for the acquisition of
preservation easements or other interests in real property;
(8) Conduct investigations, prepare maps, reports and recommendations in
connection with its advisory authority relating to the planning, development
and administration of the Village landmarks preservation policies, regulations
and local law as needed, provided the total expenditures of said commission
shall not exceed the appropriation provided by the Village Board of Trustees
together with any public or private grant funding received by the Village for
the commission to undertake its landmarks preservation powers and duties.
(9) Report on matters referred to it by the Village Board of Trustees. The Village
Board of Trustees may by resolution provide for the referral to the commission
for a report on any matter or class of matters that impact the municipality's
landmarks preservation local law, policies, regulations or administrative
processes before final action is taken thereon by the Village Board of Trustees.
The Village Board of Trustees may further stipulate that final action thereon
shall not be taken until the commission has submitted its report thereon, or has
§ 44-7 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-9
44:5
§ 44-10. Cooperation of Village departments.
All Village departments shall, upon request of the commission, assist and furnish
available permits, plans, reports, maps and statistical and other information in that
department's possession which the commission may require for its work.
§ 44-11. Criteria and designation of landmarks or historic districts.
The Commission shall designate landmarks or historic districts within the Village under
this chapter.
had a reasonable time, to be fixed by the Village Board of Trustees in said
resolution, to submit the report.
B. Administrative reviews. In accordance with the regulations adopted by the Village
Board of Trustees for landmarks and historic preservation purposes, the
Commission shall:
(1) Evaluate an application for a certificate of appropriateness; approve, approve
with modifications, or deny any proposal for exterior changes to a designated
individual landmark or property within a designated historic district resulting
from any such application;
(2) Evaluate an application for a certificate of economic hardship; approve,
approve with modifications, or deny any such application;
(3) Evaluate an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition,
removal or relocation; approve, approve with modifications, or deny any such
application;
(4) Evaluate, without public hearing, an application for ordinary maintenance and
repair of historic resources, properties or landmarks; approve, approve with
modifications, or deny any such applications;
(5) Perform other functions that the Village Board of Trustees may designate by
local law.
C. A commission may designate a historic district under this historic preservation
chapter and that historic district is not to be construed as a zoning district under the
Village law. Nothing contained in this historic preservation chapter shall be
construed as authorizing the Commission to adopt a law or regulation that regulates
or limits the height and bulk of buildings, regulates and determines the area of
yards, courts and other open spaces, regulates density of population or regulates or
restricts the locations of trades, residences or industries or creates zoning districts
for any such purpose.
A. Individual landmark. The Commission may designate an individual property as an
individual landmark if it:
(1) Exemplifies or possesses special character, or historic or aesthetic interest of
value as part of the political, economic, or social history of the Village;
(2) Is identified with persons or events significant in local, state, or national
§ 44-9 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-11
44:6
§ 44-12. Notice and hearing requirements for proposed designation.
The Commission shall designate individual landmarks or historic districts in the
following manner:
history;
(3) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction or design style, or is a valuable example of the use of indigenous
materials or craftsmanship; or is representative of the work of a designer,
architect or builder;
(4) Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the community by
virtue of its unique location or singular physical characteristic, represents an
established and familiar visual feature of the community; or
(5) Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory or
history.
B. Historic district. The Commission may designate a group of properties within the
Village as an historic district if a majority of properties therein:
(1) Contains properties which meet one or more of the criteria for designation as
a landmark and which may have within its boundaries other properties or
structures that, while not of such historic and/or architectural significance to
be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual
characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the historic
district; and
(2) Constitute a unique section of the Village by reason of possessing those
qualities that would satisfy such criteria.
C. Scenic landmark. The Commission may designate a landscape feature or group of
features. Recommendations for designation must be accompanied by such historical
and architectural information as is required by the commission to make an informed
recommendation concerning the application, together with any fee set by the
Village Board of Trustees.
D. The boundaries of each landmark, scenic landmark or historic district shall be
specified in detail with reference to the tax map identification number and shall be
filed, in writing, in the Village Clerk's office and there made available for review
by the public.
E. Ordinarily, properties that have achieved significance within the past 50 years are
not considered eligible for designation under this landmarks preservation chapter or
local law adopted by the Village Board of Trustees. However, such properties will
qualify if they are:
(1) Integral parts of historic districts that meet the criteria for designation; or
(2) If they are properties of exceptional importance.
A. Initiation of proposed designation. Designation of an individual historic landmark
§ 44-11 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-12
44:7
or historic district may be proposed by the Commission, by the owner of the
property, or by any resident of the Village. Within five days of the receipt of
a proposal of designation, or of the time the Commission makes a proposal of
designation, notice shall be personally served upon the property owner or mailed by
registered mail, FedEx, UPS or any other similar delivery system, to the owner of
the property to be designated notifying the owner of the proposed designation.
B. Public hearing; general notice.
(1) Within a reasonable time after receipt of a full application or other matter
referred to it, the Commission shall schedule a public hearing on all proposed
resource, individual, landmark or historic district designations. Public notice
of any such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Village at least 15 days prior to the public hearing date.
Notification of the public hearing shall be mailed directly to the property
owner in the manner set forth in Subsection A above.
(2) The Commission shall require submission of written comments on the
application prior to designation of any landmark, scenic landmark or historic
district.
(3) The Commission, property owners, and any interested parties may present
testimony or documentary evidence at the hearing which will become part of a
record regarding the historic, architectural, or cultural importance of the
proposed resource, individual, landmark or historic district. The Commission
shall maintain a written record of all evidence and/or testimony provided at the
hearing regardless of whether such evidence or testimony supports or opposes
the proposed designation.
C. Notice of public hearing; multiple properties proposed for designation.
(1) Ten properties or less: Notice of public hearing for a proposed designation
involving no more than 10 properties shall be sent as required by § 44-12(A)
above to the owners of properties located within the area of the proposed
historic district at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Such
notice shall include a description of the properties proposed for designation
and state the time and place where any public hearing to consider such
designation will be held by the Commission.
(2) More than 10 properties: Where the proposed designation of an historic district
includes more than 10 properties and the commission deems individual notice
infeasible, notice may, with the prior approval of the Village Board of
Trustees, instead be published at least once in newspaper of general circulation
in the Village at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. The notice
shall specify the time and place of the public hearing, a brief description of the
proposed designation, and the location where the proposal may be reviewed
prior the hearing.
(3) The notice provisions are in addition to the general notice requirements under
Subsection B.
D. Work moratorium. Once the Commission has issued notice of a proposed
§ 44-12 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-12
44:8
§ 44-13. Certificate of appropriateness for alteration, demolition, or new
construction affecting individual landmarks or historic districts.
designation it may recommend to the municipal governing board that a moratorium
be put in place, prohibiting any work relating to the individual landmark or district
proposed for designation as long as the proposed designation is under active
consideration by the Commission and until the Commission has made its decision
on designation.
E. Commission record. The Commission shall compile a public record of all of the
evidence and testimony submitted during the proceeding for its designation of a
resource, landmark or historic district. In addition to testimony or documentary
evidence received at any public hearing, the record may also contain reports, public
comments, expert testimony, or other evidence offered outside of the hearing, but
submitted for the Commission's consideration by the date of the hearing. The
Commission may, at its discretion, accept further evidence submitted after the
public hearing, and may set deadlines regarding the submission thereof. At a
minimum, the record of the designation shall contain the application, commission
and/or staff reports, any comments made on the application at the public hearing,
and the Commission's decision to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the
application requesting designation.
F. Commission decision. Within 62 days after the close of the public hearing, the
Commission shall by resolution undertake a designation in whole or in part, or shall
disapprove in entirety, setting forth in writing the reasons for the decision. Within
seven days, notice of the Commission's recommendation shall be sent to the
applicants and owners of a designated property, or in the case of an approved
historic district, notice shall be sent to the applicants and owners of all properties
within the approved district, as well as to the governing board of the municipality.
G. The Commission may agree with the applicant in writing to extend the time period
within which a designation will be made.
H. The Commission shall forward notice of each property designated as an individual
landmark and the boundaries of each designated historic district to the building
department, planning department, Village Clerk and County Clerk for recordation.
I. Failure to send notice. The Commission shall exercise due diligence in serving
notice upon a property owner whose property is proposed for designation. The
Commission shall maintain any affidavits of service and/or mailing related thereto.
Failure to send any notice by mail to any property owners where the address of such
owner is not a matter of property tax records shall not invalidate any proceedings in
connection with the proposed designation.
J. Amendment or rescission. The Commission may amend or rescind any designation
of an individual landmark or historic district in the same manner and procedure as
followed for designation.
A. The Village of Hamburg commission is responsible for the approval or disapproval
of proposals for exterior changes to a historic property designated under this
chapter. No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
§ 44-12 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-13
44:9
§ 44-14. Criteria for issuing a certificate of appropriateness.
reconstruction, demolition, new construction, or move of a designated historic
landmark or property within a designated historic district without first obtaining
a certificate of appropriateness that authorizes such work from the Village of
Hamburg commission. The certificate of appropriateness required by this chapter
shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit or other approval that
may be required by any other local law or regulation of the Village of Hamburg.
B. All changes to Village-owned property affecting an individual landmark or within
a historic district shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Building Department and/or Code Enforcement shall receive and file all
applications issued for any individual landmark, or landmarks or historic district to
which this chapter applies. The Building Department and/or Code Enforcement
shall transmit a copy of any such application to the commission.
D. The Commission may require that the application for certificate of appropriateness
be supplemented by such additional information or materials as may be necessary
for a complete review by the Commission. The Commission may impose such
reasonable conditions or restrictions as it deems necessary or appropriate on a caseby-
case basis to promote or achieve the purpose of this chapter.
A. Certificate of appropriateness; general criteria. The Commission shall approve the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness only if it determines that the proposed
work will not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historical, or
architectural significance and value of the individual landmark or if the proposed
work is within a historic district, proposed work will not have a substantial adverse
effect on the aesthetic, historical, or architectural significance of the property itself,
the district or neighboring properties in such district.
B. In making this determination, the Commission's decision to approve, approve with
modification(s) or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness for an
individual landmark or scenic landmark will be guided by the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and by the following principles:
(1) The Commission's decision to approve, approve with modification(s) or deny
an application for a certificate of appropriateness for an improvement to
property located within a historic district shall be based on the following
principles:
(a) Properties which contribute to the character of the historic district shall
be retained, with their historic features altered as little as possible;
(b) Any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with the
surrounding historic district; and
(c) New construction shall be compatible with the historic district in which it
is located.
C. In applying the principle of compatibility set forth in Subsection B of this section,
the Commission shall consider the following factors:
§ 44-13 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-14
44:10
§ 44-15. Certificate of appropriateness application procedure.
(1) The general design and character of the proposed alteration or new
construction relative to existing features of the property or improvement;
(2) The scale and visual compatibility of the proposed alteration or new
construction in relation to the property itself, surrounding properties, and the
neighborhood;
(3) Texture and materials, and their relation to similar features of the property and
other properties in the neighborhood;
(4) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including proportion of the
property's facade, proportion and arrangement of windows and other openings
within the facade, roof shape, and the rhythm of spacing of properties on
streets, including setback; and
(5) The importance of historic physical and visual features to the significance of
the property.
D. In approving an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission
shall find that the building or structure for which the permit was requested, if
erected or altered in accordance with the submitted plan or with stated
modifications, would be consistent with the spirit and intent of this local law, would
not be visually offensive or inappropriate by reason of poor quality of exterior
design, monotonous similarity or visual discord in relation to the sites or
surroundings, would not mar the appearance of the area, would not impair the use,
enjoyment and desirability or reduce the values of properties in the area, would not
be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood, would not prevent an
appropriate development and utilization of the site or of adjacent lands and would
not adversely affect the functioning economic stability, prosperity, health, safety
and general welfare of the community.
E. Where the Commission grants a certificate of appropriateness under circumstances
where the permitted activity is likely to uncover or affect archaeological resources,
the Commission shall require reasonable efforts to protect and preserve such
resources. Where such protection and preservation is not feasible, the Commission
shall nonetheless impose appropriate and reasonable conditions to insure that the
archaeological resource is made accessible for a reasonable period to qualified
persons.
F. In considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission
shall not review changes to exterior paint colors.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of appropriateness,
the property owner shall file an application for a building permit with the Village
Code Enforcement and an application for such certificate with the Commission.
B. The application for certificate of appropriateness shall contain:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of applicant;
(2) Building permit application number as assigned by the Building Department/
§ 44-14 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-15
44:11
§ 44-16. Certificate of appropriateness public notice requirements.
Code Enforcement;
(3) Location and photographs of property;
(4) Elevation drawings of proposed changes, if available;
(5) Perspective drawings, including relationship to adjacent properties, if
available;
(6) Samples of building materials to be used, including their proposed color;
(7) Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the
type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors, a description of
materials to be used, method of illumination, and a plan showing the sign's
location on the property; and any other information which the Commission
may deem necessary in order to visualize the proposed work.
C. Upon receipt of all the information required herein, the Commission shall deem the
application complete and shall place the application on the agenda of the next
meeting of the Commission.
D. Upon submission of a complete application, the Commission shall have the
authority to, without public hearing and notice:
(1) Determine whether the proposed work constitutes ordinary maintenance and
repair for which a certificate of appropriateness is not required;
(2) Approve work which is considered replacement-in-kind;
(3) Approve work that is of any other type that has been previously determined by
the Commission to be appropriate for delegation to staff.
E. The Commission is required to report to the Village Board of Trustees on a monthly
basis on all activities for which applications were submitted and decisions were
made without any public hearing and notice.
A. Upon application for a certificate of appropriateness, a public notice of the proposal
shall be posted by the owner or owner's representative on the property for a
minimum of 10 days. This notice must remain in place until a decision to approve
or deny the certificate of appropriateness has been made. The notice shall specify
the proposed work, the time and place of the public hearing, and to whom and by
when any public comments are to be communicated. The notice must be placed at
or near the property line in the front yard so that it will be plainly visible from the
street, and, in cases where a property has frontage on more than one street, an
additional sign must be placed at or near the property line on any additional street
frontage so that the sign will be plainly visible from the street on which it has such
additional frontage.
(1) The notice sign shall be provided by the Village of Hamburg;
(2) The notice sign shall be paid for and installed by the applicant.
§ 44-15 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-16
44:12
§ 44-17. Recommendation on a temporary moratorium on land use approvals.
B. The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to rendering a decision on any
application for a certificate of appropriateness. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village at least 15 calendar
days prior to the public hearing date. The notice shall specify the time and place of
the public hearing, a brief description of the proposal, and the location where the
proposal may be reviewed prior to the hearing. The property owner and any
interested party may present testimony or documentary evidence regarding the
proposal at the hearing, which will become a part of the record. The record may
also contain staff reports, public comments, and other evidence offered outside of
the hearing, but presented by the hearing date.
C. Within 62 days after the close of the public hearing, the Commission shall approve,
approve with conditions or modifications, request additional information, or deny
the certificate of appropriateness.
D. In the event, however, that the Commission shall make a finding of fact that the
circumstances of a particular application require further time for additional study
and information than can be obtained within the aforesaid 62-day period after close
of the public hearing, then the Commission shall have a period of up to one
additional 62-day period from the date of any such finding within which to act upon
such an applications.
E. All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent to the
applicant by mail, and a copy filed with the Code Enforcement and Village Clerk
for public inspection, within ten days of the date of the decision. The Commission's
decision shall state the reasons for denying or modifying any application.
A. Once the Commission has received a complete application requesting a certificate
of appropriateness it may request the Village Board of Trustees to adopt a
moratorium prohibiting the issuance of any building permits or demolition permits,
relating to any property or resources that is the subject of the application, as long as
the application is under active consideration by the Commission and until the
commission has made its decision.
B. The Commission's request for a temporary moratorium shall include the reasons the
Commission deems the imposition of such a moratorium is in the best interest of
the public or to preserve the historic landmark or district. Copies of the
Commission's request for imposition of a temporary moratorium shall be sent to the
applicant by registered mail return receipt requested or hand delivered to the
applicant's representative of record.
C. An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness may petition the Village Board of
Trustees for the lifting of any moratorium to allow certain work to proceed pending
the Commission's determination to approve, approve with modification(s) or to
deny the application, if such work would not affect the historic features under
consideration. The applicant shall send a copy of the petition with all supporting
documents to the Commission. Before the Village Board of Trustees renders a
decision on the applicant's petition, it shall hold a hearing if requested by the
Commission or member of the public.
§ 44-16 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-17
44:13
§ 44-18. Expiration of approval; extension of approval.
Certificates of appropriateness shall be valid for 24 months, after which time the owner
shall apply for a new certificate if he/she still wishes to undertake work on the property.
At least two months prior to expiration of the twenty-four month-period the owner
may apply for an extension in writing and explain the reasons for the extension. The
Commission may grant up to two six-month extensions. A written application for
an extension of a certificate of appropriateness approval shall not be considered an
application for a new certificate of appropriateness.
§ 44-19. Alteration hardship process and criteria.
D. The certificate of appropriateness required by this chapter shall be in addition to
and not in lieu of any building permit or other approval that may be required by any
other local law or regulation of the Village of Hamburg.
A. An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed alteration of a
landmark property has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of economic
hardship. In order to prove the existence of economic hardship related to a proposed
alteration, the applicant shall establish that the denial of a certificate of
appropriateness will prevent the property owner from earning a reasonable return
on investment, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable
return possible.
B. As promptly as is practicable after making a preliminary determination of hardship
as provided in this chapter, the Commission, with the aid of such experts as it deems
necessary, shall, in consultation with the applicant, endeavor to develop a plan
whereby the improvement may be preserved and perpetuated in such manner as to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter, and also rendered capable of earning a
reasonable return.
C. Consultation; plan development. The applicant shall consult in good faith with the
Commission, local preservation groups, and other interested parties in a diligent
effort to seek an alternative that will result in appropriate preservation of the
property. The consulting parties may include interested purchasers, as well as
preservation and other interested organizations, public agencies, developers, real
estate agents and individuals who may be instrumental in developing an
economically feasible solution.
D. Economic hardship; criteria. Following the denial of a certificate of
appropriateness, the applicant may request a certificate of economic hardship. In all
cases other than a proposed demolition, removal or relocation, the applicant shall
prove the existence of economic hardship by demonstrating to the Commission that:
the applicant cannot realize a reasonable return if compliance with the
Commission's decision is required, provided, however, that the lack of reasonable
return is proven by the applicant to be substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence; that the alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or neighborhood;
that the requested relief, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood; and that the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
§ 44-17 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-19
44:14
E. The Commission, in the granting of a certificate of economic hardship, shall grant
the minimum terms deemed necessary and adequate to address the unnecessary
hardship proven by the applicant, and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
F. Public hearing.
(1) The Commission may hold a public hearing on the hardship application at
which an opportunity will be provided for the applicant and public to present
their views on the hardship application.
(2) If no public hearing is held, the Commission must render a decision on the
hardship application within 62 days following its receipt of a complete
application.
(a) A complete application includes the conclusion of all activities under
Subsection C initiated to consult with necessary parties to determine
whether the property may be preserved or rehabilitated in a manner that
alleviates the hardship that would otherwise result while substantially
accomplishing the goals of this local law.
(b) A complete application also includes receipt by the Commission of all
submissions necessary to meet the applicant's burden of proof.
(3) Following the submission of a complete application, the Commission may
schedule a public hearing within a reasonable time and determine within 62
days following to the close of any public hearing held on the application
whether the applicant has met his or her burden of proof.
G. Commission decision.
(1) If the Commission finds that the applicant's burden of proof has not been met,
the Commission shall deny the application for a certificate of economic
hardship.
(2) If the Commission finds that the applicant's burden of proof has been met, the
Commission shall issue a preliminary determination of landmarks or economic
hardship within 62 days of the close of any public hearing held on the
application or within 62 days after the Commission has received a complete
application.
(3) Within 62 calendar days following the Commission's preliminary
determination of economic hardship the Commission must make a final
determination.
(4) A decision of the Commission on the hardship application shall be in writing
and shall state the reasons for granting or denying it. A copy shall be sent to
the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the Village clerk's office
for public inspection.
H. No building permit or approvals required by the Village of Hamburg for work
included in the hardship application shall be issued unless the Commission grants
the hardship application. If the hardship application is granted, the Commission
§ 44-19 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-19
44:15
§ 44-20. Demolition, removal, or relocation of landmark buildings.
shall approve only such work as is necessary to alleviate the hardship.
A. Demolition of an individual landmark or of a structure located in and contributing
to the significance of a historic district shall be allowed only in case of economic
hardship, unless, an express written finding has been made by Code enforcement
pursuant to Chapter 127 of the Village Code that the structure presents an imminent
threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Any person desiring to demolish a designated historic building shall first file an
application for a historic building demolition permit with the Code Enforcement
and an application for such certificate with the commission. An applicant must
submit the following items to the extent they are applicable to the property:
(1) Current level of economic return;
(2) Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, party from whom purchased,
and relationship between the owner of record, the applicant, and person from
whom property was purchased;
(3) Annual gross and net income from the property for the previous three years;
itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous three years, and
depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if
any, during the same period;
(4) Remaining balance on the mortgage or other financing secured by the property
and annual debt-service, if any, during the prior three years;
(5) Real estate taxes for the previous four years and assessed value of the property
according to the two most recent assessed valuations;
(6) All appraisals obtained within the last two years by the owner or applicant in
connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership of the property;
(7) Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship,
for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or
other;
(8) Any state or federal income tax returns relating to the property for the last two
years;
(9) Any listing of property for sale or rent, price asked, and offers received, if any,
within the previous two years, including testimony and relevant documents
regarding: any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the property,
reasonableness of price or rent sought by the applicant, or any advertisements
placed for the sale or rent of the property;
(10) Feasibility of alternative uses for the property that could earn a reasonable
economic return;
(11) Report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation
as to the structural soundness of any buildings on the property and their
§ 44-19 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-20
44:16
§ 44-21. Demolition, removal or relocation hardship criteria.
suitability for rehabilitation;
(12) Cost estimates for the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or
removal, and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to
comply with the requirements for a certificate of appropriateness;
(13) Estimated market value of the property: in its current condition; after
completion of the proposed alteration or demolition; and after renovation of
the existing property for continued use;
(14) Expert testimony or opinion on the feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the
existing structure by an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser,
and/or other real estate professional experienced in historic properties and
rehabilitation;
(15) Any evidence of self-created hardship through deliberate neglect or inadequate
maintenance of the property; and
(16) Economic incentives and/or funding available to the applicant through federal,
state, city, or private programs.
C. Demolition of any such building may be approved only in connection with approval
of a replacement project.
D. The Commission shall hold a public hearing and shall take one of the following
actions:
(1) Approve the demolition permit in conformance with the provisions of § 44-21
of this chapter;
(2) Approve the demolition hardship permit subject to a waiting period of up to
one hundred twenty days to consider relocation/documentation;
(3) Deny the permit.
E. During the continuance period, the Historic Preservation Commission may
investigate relocation of the building (on site) or modification of the building for
future uses in a way which preserves the architectural and historical integrity of the
building.
A. Certificate of appropriateness for demolition, removal or relocation. An applicant
whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed demolition, removal or
relocation of a landmark, resource or property has been denied may apply for relief
on the ground of economic hardship. In order to prove the existence of economic
hardship sufficient to justify demolition, removal, or relocation, the applicant shall
establish that the denial of a certificate of appropriateness will prevent the property
owner from earning a reasonable return on investment, regardless of whether that
return represents the most profitable return possible.
B. Certificate of appropriateness for demolition. The applicant for a certificate of
appropriateness for demolition must establish to the commission's satisfaction an
§ 44-20 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-21
44:17
§ 44-22. Affirmative maintenance and repair requirement.
imminent plan of reuse or redevelopment of the affected property. The applicant for
an income producing property shall establish that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether
that return represents the most profitable return possible; and,
(2) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current
owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; and,
(3) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving
it have failed.
C. In deciding upon such application for removal, relocation or demolition, the
Commission may consider whether the owner has created his own hardship through
waste and neglect, thereby permitting the property to fall into a serious state of
disrepair.
D. Before approving the removal, relocation or demolition of an individual landmark
or structure within a historic district, the Commission may suspend the application
for up to 180 days to allow the applicant to consult in good faith with the
Commission, local preservation groups, and the public in a diligent effort to seek a
less intrusive alternative to demolition.
A. Ordinary maintenance; repair.
(1) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance
and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a historic landmark or
property within a historic district that does not involve a change in design,
building materials or outward appearance.
(2) The Commission may evaluate and decide, without public hearing, whether or
not proposed work constitutes ordinary maintenance and repair or requires a
certificate of appropriateness.
B. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as an individual
landmark or included with an historic district shall permit the property to fall into a
serious state of disrepair. Maintenance shall be required, consistent with the
Property Maintenance Code of New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and all provisions of the Village of Hamburg Code.
C. Every owner or person in charge of an improvement on a landmark site or in an
historic district shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such
improvement and all interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may
cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of such improvement to deteriorate,
decay or become damaged or otherwise to fall into a serious state of disrepair.
Examples of types of prohibited disrepair include, but are not limited to:
(1) Deteriorated or crumbling exterior plasters, mortar or facades;
(2) Deteriorated or inadequate foundation;
§ 44-21 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-22
44:18
§ 44-23. Enforcement and violations; penalties.
(3) Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports or any structural floor
members of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety;
(4) Deteriorated walls or other vertical structural supports that split, lean, list or
buckle due to defective material or deterioration;
(5) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal
members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration
or are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads;
(6) Ineffective or inadequate waterproofing of exterior walls, exterior chimneys,
roofs, foundations or floors, including windows or doors, which may cause or
tend to cause deterioration, decay or damage;
(7) Defective or insufficient weather protection for roofs, foundation or exterior
wall covering, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or
other protective covering, which may cause or tend to cause deterioration,
decay or damage;
(8) Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or
deterioration or are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with
safety;
(9) Any fault or defect in the building or structure which renders it not properly
watertight or otherwise compromises the life and character of the building or
structure.
D. Every owner or person in charge of a scenic landmark shall keep in good repair all
portions thereof.
A. All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this
chapter shall conform to the requirements expressly stated in the certificate or
reasonably implied therefrom. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer
to periodically inspect any such work to assure compliance with the certificate and
all applicable law. In the event any requirement included in the certificate of
appropriateness has not been met, or upon notification of that fact by the Historic
Preservation Commission, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a stop-work
order and all work shall immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken on
the project as long as a stop-work order is in effect.
B. Any owner or person in charge of a property who demolishes, alters, constructs, or
permits a designated property to fall into a serious state of disrepair in violation of
this chapter in the absence of a certificate of appropriateness, a finding of economic
hardship, or other approval by the Commission, may be required by the Code
Enforcement Officer to restore the property and its site to its appearance prior to the
violation.
C. If, in the judgment of the Commission, a violation of this chapter exists that will
result in a detrimental effect upon the life and character of a designated historic
resource, landmark, property or on the character of a historic district as a whole, the
§ 44-22 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-23
44:19
§ 44-24. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Commission relating to certificate of
economic hardship or a certificate of appropriateness may, within 15 days of the
decision, file a written appeal to the Village Board of Trustees for review of the decision.
Appellate review shall be based on the same record that was before the Commission and
using the same criteria in this chapter.
Commission shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer. If, upon investigation,
the Code Enforcement Officer finds noncompliance with the requirements of the
Property Maintenance Code of the New York State Fire Prevention and Building
Code, the Property Maintenance law of the Village of Hamburg or any other
applicable law or regulation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall order such
remedies as are necessary and consistent with this chapter and shall provide written
notice thereof to the Secretary of the Commission.
D. Penalties. A violation of this chapter is deemed an offense punishable by a fine,
imprisonment or both as follows:
(1) First offense. A first conviction for violation of this chapter may result in a
fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or both;
(2) Second offense. A second conviction for violation of this chapter, if the
occurrence that leads to conviction began within a period of five years from
the date of first conviction, may result in a fine not less than $350 nor more
than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both;
(3) Third offense. A conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which
were committed within a period of five years from when the occurrence
leading to the first conviction began, shall include a fine of not less than $700
nor more than $1000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months,
or both.
(4) Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
(5) Each day's continued violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
additional offense.
(6) In addition to any penalties imposed under this chapter, continued violations
of this chapter shall be punishable in any other manner provided under other
local regulations, and state and federal law.
E. The Commission shall notify the Village Board of Trustees of an enforcement
matter arising under this chapter and shall refer it to the Village attorney. Action to
enforce this chapter shall be brought by the Code Enforcement Officer. Civil
remedies authorized under § 44-23 of this chapter shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
§ 44-23 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-25
44:20
§ 44-25. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meaning:
ACQUISITION — The act or process of acquiring fee title or other interest in real
property, including acquisition of development rights or remainder interest.
ADDITION—Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural
features of a building or structure by adding to, joining with or increasing the size or
capacity of the building or structure.
ALTERATION — Any act or process, other than demolition or ordinary maintenance,
that changes the exterior appearance of significant historical or architectural features,
or the historic context of a designated landmark, including, but not limited to, exterior
changes, additions, new construction, erection, reconstruction, or removal of the
building or structure, or grading.
APPROPRIATE — Especially suitable or compatible.
ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE—The quality of a building or structure based on
its date of erection, style and scarcity of same, quality of design, present condition and
appearance or other characteristics that embody the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period or method of construction.
BUILDING — Any construction created to shelter any form of human, such as a house,
garage or barn, and which is permanently affixed to the land. Building may also refer to
a historically related complex, such as a house and a barn.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The person, or his or her designee, authorized to grant
permits for construction, alteration, and demolition pursuant to the codes adopted by the
Village.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — An official form issued by the Village
Commission stating that the proposed work on an designated historic landmark is
compatible with the historic character of the property and thus in accordance with
the provisions of this chapterand therefore: the proposed work may be completed as
specified in the certificate; and the Village's departments may issue any permits needed
to do the work specified in the certificate.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP — An official form issued by the
Commission when the denial of a certificate of appropriateness has deprived, or will
deprive, the owner of the property of all reasonable use of, or economic return on, the
property.
CHANGE — Any alteration, demolition, removal or construction involving any
property subject to the provisions of this chapter.
CHARACTER — Defined by form, proportion, structure, plan, style or material.
General character refers to ideas of design and construction such as basic plan or form.
Specific character refers to precise ways of combining particular kinds of materials.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person, or his or her designee, authorized
and certified to enforce the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code. The
person, or his or her designee, who is also authorized by the Village Board of Trustees
to enforce this chapter, except where another official is expressly authorized.
§ 44-25 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-25
44:21
COMMISSION — The historic preservation commission established pursuant to § 44-4
of this chapter.
COMPATIBLE — In harmony with location, context, setting, and historic character.
CONSTRUCTION — The act of constructing an addition to an existing structure or the
erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
DEMOLISH — Any act or process that removes or destroys in whole or in part a
building, structure, or resource.
DEMOLITION PERMIT—A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer allowing
the applicant to demolish a building or structure, after having received a certificate of
demolition approval from the Commission.
EVALUTATION — The process by which the significance and integrity of a building,
structure, object, or site is judged by an individual who meets the professional
qualification standards published by the National Park Service in the Federal Register
(Code of Federal Regulation, 36 CFR Part 61), as determined by the State Historic
Preservation Office, using the designation criteria outlined in § 44-11 of this chapter.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FATURES — The architectural style, design, general
arrangement and components of all of the outer surfaces of any building or structure.
FEATURE — Elements embodying the historical significance or architectural style,
design, general arrangement and components of all of the exterior surfaces of any
landmark or historic resource, including, but not limited to, the type of building
materials, and type and style of windows, doors, or other elements related to such
landmark or historic resource.
HISTORIC CONTEXT—A unit created for planning purposes that groups information
about historic properties based on a shared theme, specific time period and geographical
area.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — LOCAL — An area designated as a historic district by
this historic preservation chapter, and which contains within definable geographic
boundaries a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings,
structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.
HISTORIC FABRIC — Original or old building materials (masonry, wood, metals,
marble) or construction.
HISTORIC INTEGRITY — The retention of sufficient aspects of location, design,
setting, workmanship, materials, feeling or association for a property to convey its
historic significance.
HISTORIC LANDMARK — A building, district, site, structure or object significant in
American history, architecture, engineering, archeology or culture at the national, state,
or local level.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation
Commission appointed by the Village Board of Trustees for the Village of Hamburg.
HISTORIC PROPERTY — A district, site, building, structure, or object significant in
American history, architecture, engineering, archeology, or culture at the national, state,
or local level.
§ 44-25 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-25
44:22
HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any evaluated building, structure, object, or site that
potentially meets the designation criteria outlined in § 44-11.
HISTORIC RESOURCES SURVEY — The process of systematically identifying,
researching, photographing, and documenting historic resources within a defined
geographic area, and the resulting list of evaluated properties that may be consulted
for future designation. For the purpose of this chapter, all surveys shall be conducted
in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for
Identification and Evaluation, as may be amended.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE — The quality of a place, site, building, district or
structure based upon its identification with historic persons or events in the Village of
Hamburg.
INTEGRITY — The authenticity of a property's historic identity, evidenced by the
survival of physical characteristics that existed during the property's historic or
prehistoric period.
INTERIOR LANDMARK — Interior landmarks are noted for the portions of their
interior that are open to the public.
INVENTORY — A list of historic properties determined to meet specified criteria of
significance.
LANDMARK — Any building, structure or site that has been designated as a landmark
by the Commission, pursuant to procedures described in this chapter that is worthy
of preservation, restoration or rehabilitation because of its historic or architectural
significance.
LANDMARK ALTERATION PERMIT — A permit approving an alteration to or
demolition of a landmark, or demolition of a historic resource listed in the heritage
resource inventory pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
LISTING — The formal entry or registration of a property.
MAINTAIN — To keep in an existing state of preservation or repair.
MINOR WORK — Any change, modification, restoration, rehabilitation, or renovation
of the features of an historic resource that does not materially change the historic
characteristics of the property.
MOVE — Any relocation of a building or structure on its site or to another site.
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — The established criteria for evaluating the
eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES — The official inventory of the
nation's historic properties, districts, sites, districts, structures, objects and landmarks
which are significant in American history, architecture, archaeology, and culture,
maintained by the Secretary of the Interior under the authority of the Historic Sites Act
of 1935 and the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq., 36
C.F.R. Sections 60, 63, as may be amended).
NONCONTRIBUTING — A feature, addition or building, structure, object or site
which does not add to the sense of historical authenticity or evolution of an historic
resource or landmark or where the location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
history, and/or association of the feature, addition or building, structure, object or site
§ 44-25 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-25
44:23
has been so altered or deteriorated that the overall integrity of that historic resource or
landmark has been irretrievably lost.
OBJECT — Constructions that are primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small
in scale and simply constructed. Although it may be moveable by nature or design, an
object is associated with a specific setting or environment. Examples include boundary
markers, mileposts, fountains, monuments, and sculpture. This term may include
landscape features.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Any work or repair that is done to prevent
deterioration or damage to the structural integrity or any exterior feature of a landmark
or historic resource that does not involve a change in design, material or exterior
appearance. Such work includes, but is not limited to, painting, roof repair, foundation
or chimney work, or landscape maintenance.
OWNER — Those individuals, partnerships, corporations, or public agencies holding
fee simple title to property, as shown on the records of the Village.
PERIOD OF SIGNIFICANCE — The length of time when a property was associated
with important events, activities, or persons, or attained characteristics which qualify it
for landmark status. Period of significance usually begins with a date when significant
activities or events began giving the property its historic significance; this is often a date
of construction.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of applying measures necessary to sustain
the existing form, integrity, and materials of an historic property. Work, including
preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the property, generally focuses upon the
ongoing maintenance and repair of historic materials and features rather than extensive
replacement and new construction. New exterior additions are not within the scope of
this treatment; however, the limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical,
and plumbing systems and other code-required work to make properties functional is
appropriate within a preservation project.
PROPERTY TYPE — A grouping of individual properties based on a set of shared
physical or associative characteristics.
RECONSTRUCTION—The act or process of depicting, by means of new construction,
the form, features, and detailing of a nonsurviving site, landscape, building, structure, or
object for the purpose of replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its
historic location.
REHABILITATION — The act or process of making possible a compatible use for a
property through repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those portions or
features of the property which convey its historical, architectural and cultural values.
REPAIR — Acts of ordinary maintenance that do not include a change in the design,
material, form, or outer appearance of a resource, such as repainting. This includes
methods of stabilizing and preventing further decay, and may incorporate replacementin-
kind or refurbishment of materials on a building or structure.
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately depicting the form features, and
character of a property as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the
removal of features from other periods in its history and reconstruction of missing
features from the restoration period. The limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical,
electrical, and plumbing systems and other code-required work to make properties
§ 44-25 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 44-25
44:24
functional is appropriate within a restoration project.
RETAIN — The act of keeping an element, detail or structure and continuing the same
level of repair to aid in the preservation of elements, sites, and structures.
REVERSIBLE — An addition which is made without damage to the project's original
condition.
SCENIC LANDMARK — Scenic landmarks encompass structures that are not
buildings, such as bridges, piers, parks, cemeteries, sidewalks, clocks, and trees.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARD FOR THE TREATMENT OF
HISTORIC PROPERTIES — Principles developed by the National Park Service (36
C.F.R. 68.3, as may be amended) to help protect historic properties by promoting
consistent preservation practices and providing guidance to historic building owners
and building managers, preservation consultants, architects, contractors, and project
reviewers on how to approach the treatment of historic properties. The Secretary of the
Interior Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties may also be referred to in this
chapter as "Secretary of the Interior's Standards."
SIGNIFICANT — Having particularly important associations with the contexts of
architecture, history and culture.
SITE — The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or
activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the
location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of
any existing buildings, structures or other objects. Examples of a site are a battlefield,
designed landscape, trail, or camp site.
STABILIZATION — The act or process of applying measures designed to reestablish
a weather resistant enclosure and the structural stability of an unsafe or deteriorated
property while maintaining the essential form as it exists at present.
STRUCTURE — Any assemblage of materials forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
STYLE — A type of architecture distinguished by special characteristics of structure or
ornament and often related in time; also a general quality of distinctive character.
UNDERTAKING—Any project or other action involving the expansion, modification,
development or disposition of the physical plant or any site or building.
§ 44-25 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 44-25
44:25

Chapter 45
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 45-1. Objectives.
The objectives of the investment policy of the Village of Hamburg are to minimize risk,
to ensure that investments mature when the cash is required to finance operations and to
ensure a competitive rate of return.
§ 45-2. Guidelines.
§ 45-3. Moneys obtained in official capacity.
All other local government officials receiving money in their official capacity must
deposit such funds in negotiable order of withdrawal accounts.
§ 45-4. Conditions.
All investments made pursuant to this investment policy shall comply with the following
conditions:
A. In accordance with this policy, the chief fiscal officer is hereby authorized to invest
all funds, including proceeds of obligations and reserve funds in:
(1) Certificates of deposit issued by a bank or trust company authorized to do
business in New York State.
(2) Time deposit accounts in a bank or trust company authorized to do business in
New York State.
(3) Obligations of New York State.
(4) Obligations of the United States Government.
B. All funds except reserve funds may be invested in:
(1) Obligations of agencies of the federal government, if principal and interest is
guaranteed by the United States.
(2) With the approval of the State Comptroller, revenue anticipation notes or tax
anticipation notes or other local governments.
C. Only reserve funds may be invested in obligations of the Village of Hamburg.
A. Collateral.
(1) Certificates of deposit shall be fully secured by insurance of the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation or by obligations of New York State or
obligations of the United States which are guaranteed by the United States or
obligations of New York State local governments. Collateral shall be delivered
to the local government or a custodial bank with which the local government
has entered into a custodial agreement. The market value of collateral shall at
§ 44-25 INVESTMENT POLICY § 45-4
45:1
§ 45-5. Purchase and sale of securities.
§ 45-6. Annual audit.
At the time independent auditors conduct the annual audit of the accounts and financial
affairs of the Village of Hamburg, the independent auditors shall audit the investments
of the Village of Hamburg for compliance with the provisions of these investment
guidelines.
all times equal or exceed the principal amount of the certificate of deposit.
(2) Collateral shall not be required with respect to the direct purchase of
obligations of New York State, obligations of the United States and
obligations of federal agencies, the principal and interest of which are
guaranteed by the United States Government.
B. Designation of custodial bank. Any bank chartered by the State of New York is
designated to act as custodial bank of the Village of Hamburg investments.
However, securities may not be purchased through a repurchase agreement with the
custodial bank.
C. Financial strength of institutions.
(1) All trading partners must be credit worthy. Their financial statements must be
reviewed at least annually by the chief fiscal officer to determine satisfactory
financial strength, or the chief fiscal officer may use credit rating agencies to
determine credit worthiness of trading partners.
(2) The village will seek the most favorable rate of return possible. This should
not restrict the total amount that can be deposited in any one institution.
[Amended 4-6-1992]
(3) Allowable investment vehicles are to be made with banks or trust companies.
[Amended 4-6-1992]
(4) Their annual reports must be reviewed by the chief fiscal officer to determine
satisfactory financial strength.
(5) When purchasing eligible securities, the seller shall be required to deliver the
securities to our custodial bank.
A. The chief fiscal officer or the deputy chief fiscal officer shall authorize the purchase
and sale of all securities and execute contracts for certificates of deposit on behalf
of the Village of Hamburg. Oral directions concerning the purchase or sale of
securities shall be confirmed in writing. The Village of Hamburg shall pay for
purchased securities upon the delivery or book-entry thereof.
B. The Village of Hamburg will encourage the purchase and sale of securities and
certificates of deposit through a competitive or negotiated process involving
telephone solicitation of at least two bids for each transaction.
§ 45-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 45-7
45:2
§ 45-7. Review of policy.
At least annually, and if practicable, at the April meeting of the governing board, the
members shall review and amend, if necessary, these investment guidelines.
§ 45-8. Prior investments.
The provisions of these investment guidelines and any amendments hereto shall take
effect prospectively and shall not invalidate the prior selection of any custodial bank or
prior investment.
§ 45-7 INVESTMENT POLICY § 45-8
45:3

Chapter 50
NEWSPAPER, OFFICIAL
§ 50-1. Annual designation.
§ 50-2. No paper designated.
If no official paper has been designated, the designation of a particular newspaper to
publish a specific notice, resolution, local law or other matter requiring publication shall
be deemed a designation of such paper as the official paper of the Village of Hamburg
for the publication of such notice, resolution, local law or other matter requiring
publication.
A. The Board of Trustees shall from time to time, but no less often than annually,
designate a newspaper or newspapers as the official paper or papers of the Village
of Hamburg.
B. If only one paper is continuously published in the Village of Hamburg, such paper
shall be designated the official paper.
C. If no newspaper is regularly or continuously published in the Village of Hamburg,
any other newspaper published in the County of Erie and regularly circulated in the
Village of Hamburg may be designated the official paper.
§ 45-8 NEWSPAPER, OFFICIAL § 50-2
50:1

Chapter 54
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
Police Department — See Ch. 63.
Salaries — See Ch. 83.
§ 50-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 50-2
54:1

ARTICLE I
Clerk
[Adopted 4-4-1977]
§ 54-1. Collection of taxes and charges.
The Clerk-Treasurer, as of June 1, 1977, shall be charged with the collection of village
taxes and all other charges made by the Village of Hamburg.
§ 54-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 54-1
54:3

ARTICLE II
Village Constable
[Adopted 10-15-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
§ 54-2. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the village the office of Village Constable.
§ 54-3. Powers and duties.
The Village Constable shall have the following powers and authority:
A. The Village Constable shall be subject to the general authority and direction of the
Board of Trustees under the immediate supervision of the Chief of Police.
B. The Village Constable shall attend sessions of the Village Justice Court. The
Village Constable shall assist the Village Justice and the Court Clerk in the
functioning of the Court and in maintaining order in the courtroom. The Village
Constable shall carry out and enforce in the courtroom all orders and directives of
the Village Justice.
C. The Village Constable must, at all times, be the holder of a valid pistol permit duly
issued to him or her pursuant to the laws of the State of New York.
D. The Village Constable shall act as court crier when required.
E. The office of Village Constable is a part-time office. The hours and times of work
shall be as required by the schedule of court sessions of the Village Justice Court.
F. The Village Constable must have graduated from a course of training prescribed by
the Municipal Police Training Council or must have completed such other training
as the Board may deem appropriate.
§ 54-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 54-3
54:5

ARTICLE III
Residency Requirements
[Adopted 4-15-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
§ 54-4. Purpose.
The Board of Trustees recognizes that emergency work situations and emergencies
arise which require employees of the Village of Hamburg to be near their place of
employment and to assure the continuation of public services to protect health, safety
and general welfare of the people. The Board of Trustees considers that residency
by village employees and officers within the community will assure continuation of
essential public services. The Board of Trustees determines that the public need is
sufficient to require that employees hired after the effective date of this article be
residents of the Village of Hamburg.
§ 54-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
RESIDENCY — The actual principal domicile of an individual, where he/she normally
sleeps and maintains usual personal and household effects.
§ 54-6. Residency for new employees.
§ 54-7. Posting.
A copy of this article shall be provided to all employees upon initial appointment.
However, the failure to do so shall not affect the applicability of this article to any
employee appointed after its effective date. A copy of this article shall also be posted on
all notice boards normally used for employee communication.
§ 54-8. Violations; notice; hearing.
A. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Board of Trustees hereby establishes a
residency requirement for all employees of the village. Every person commencing
employment with the Village of Hamburg shall become a resident of the Village of
Hamburg within six months of the date of initial service for the village. No
individual shall cease to be a resident of the village during the term of such
service.18
B. The Clerk-Treasurer, Superintendent of Public Works, Chief of Police, Recreation
Supervisor and Village Attorney in office or appointed and acting on the effective
date of this article must be and must continue to be residents of the Village of
Hamburg as long as such persons hold such offices or positions.
A. Should it be alleged that an employee is not in compliance with § 54-6 of this
article, the Mayor upon becoming aware of the allegation shall provide the
employee written notice of his or her alleged violation and shall allow the employee
seven calendar days in which to respond. Where there is a failure to respond or
18. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 54-4 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 54-8
54:7
§ 54-9. Waiver of requirements. [Amended 9-21-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
In the event that the Board of Trustees determines that it is in the best interest of the
Village to do so, the provisions of § 54-6 may be waived with respect to an employee,
employees or prospective employee in accordance with the following standards:
where a response is not, in the judgment of the Mayor, sufficient to satisfy the
requirements of this article, the Mayor shall designate an officer or board to set a
hearing date to hear the charge of nonresidency and to make a record of the hearing.
An employee establishing residency to the satisfaction of the Mayor prior to the
hearing date shall result in a cancellation of the hearing authorized by this section.
B. The employee shall be sent notice of the hearing date at least 15 days prior to the
hearing. The hearing record and the determination of the hearing officer or board
conducting the hearing as to whether the employee is a nonresident in violation of
this article shall be referred to the Mayor for his or her review and decision. Should
the Mayor decide that the employee is a nonresident in violation of this article, the
employee shall be deemed to have voluntarily resigned from employment. Upon
reestablishing residency, an individual having so resigned may apply for
reinstatement to his or her former position and shall be reinstated if the position has
not been filled or is still vacant.19
A. Lack of applicants. The requirement of residency may be waived in those instances
where the Board of Trustees has difficulty hiring person because of the residency
requirement.
B. Necessity for nonresidency. The requirement of residency may be waived or
modified, upon any conditions the Board of Trustees may impose, in those
instances where it is determined that requiring the residency is not in the best
interests of the Village. In making this determination, the Board of Trustees may
consider the requirements of the job title, the housing market within the Village at
the time, the financial capabilities of the employee/prospective employee, the
housing needs of the employee/prospective employee and any other information the
Board of Trustees deems relevant. Such a waiver or modification, and any
conditions imposed thereon, shall be by resolution of the Board of Trustees and
shall not in any way affect the application of § 54-6 of this article with respect to
any other title, titles, employee or prospective employee.
19. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 54-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 54-9
54:8
ARTICLE IV
Trip and Expense Reports
[Adopted 8-19-1991]
§ 54-10. Documentation required.
It is the policy of the Village Board to require a trip report from any employees, staff
members and commission members authorized to attend schools, conferences, etc., at
village expense. Such report shall be submitted in writing prior to reimbursement for
personal expense. Trip reports and related expense vouchers shall be submitted to the
department head and/or the Village Board within 30 days from the last authorized
conference date.
§ 54-11. Expenses. [Amended 4-6-1992]
Expenses shall include the following and require receipts:
§ 54-12. Trip advances.
Upon Village Board resolution prior to conference dates, a trip advance may be made by
the Clerk-Treasurer in an amount determined by the Village Board.
§ 54-13. Eligible expenses.
Only expenses incurred during the dates of the conferences as specified by Board
resolution shall be reimbursable.
A. Mileage as set forth by Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations.20
B. Tolls.
C. Meals at no more than $35 per day.
D. Hotel/motel lodging and receipt required.
E. Reasonable gratuities.
F. Cab fare.
G. Train, plane, bus fare; receipt required.
H. No state or local taxes are allowed; file an exempt certificate.
I. Registration fees; receipt required.
20. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 54-10 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 54-13
54:9

ARTICLE V
Administrator
[Adopted 12-16-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 54-14. Establishment.
In order to provide the most economical and efficient overall direction, coordination
and control of the day-to-day activities and operations of the Village of Hamburg, to
minimize the administrative details now handled by the Board of Trustees, to provide
centralized direction and control of village employees and to formalize the staff and
advisory functions necessary to the foregoing, the office of Village Administrator is
hereby established for said village.
§ 54-15. Appointment.
Appointment to this position shall be made by the Board of Trustees, based upon the
recommendation of the Mayor, at the annual meeting of the Board of Trustees. The term
of office shall be for a period ending at the next annual meeting, with the appointee
serving at the pleasure of the Board of Trustees. For the first appointment, and whenever
there shall be a vacancy, an appointment shall be made by the Board for Trustees, based
upon the recommendation of the Mayor, with such appointment to end at the next annual
meeting and with the appointee to serve at the pleasure of the Board of Trustees.
§ 54-16. Executive assistant.
The Village Administrator shall act as the executive assistant of the Mayor and the Board
of Trustees in connection with the conduct of the affairs of the village, subject to and in
accordance with the rules and regulations as may be promulgated from time to time by
the Village Board of Trustees, which shall prescribe the authority, functions, duties and
responsibilities of the Village Administrator in addition to those set forth herein.
§ 54-17. Supervision.
The Village Administrator shall report to and be under the supervision of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 54-18. Powers and duties.
Subject to the approval, direction and control of the Board of Trustees and in accordance
with such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Board of Trustees as
provided in § 54-6 of this article, the Village Administrator shall:
A. Oversee that the rules, regulations, ordinances, local laws and codes of the village
are administered efficiently and fairly.
B. Oversee and coordinate the activities of all village departments in accordance with
the policies of the Board of Trustees.
C. See that all inquiries by residents of the village, or other interested persons, are
referred to the appropriate village official or department head for investigation or
response.
§ 54-14 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 54-18
54:11
§ 54-19. Budget officer.
In addition to the power and duties set forth, the Village Administrator shall serve as
budget officer if and when he or she is so designated by the Mayor.
§ 54-20. Position to be held by full-time employee.
The position of the Village Administrator may be filled by a person holding other
positions in the village employ, but this position shall be held only by a full-time
employee.
§ 54-21. Interpretations of powers and duties.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed as abolishing, transferring or
curtailing any powers and duties of the Board of Trustees, or of the Mayor, Treasurer,
Clerk or Attorney, as prescribed by the Village Law or other applicable laws of the state.
D. Attend meetings of the Board of Trustees and supervise the preparation of agenda
and minutes of such meetings.
E. From time to time, make recommendations to the Board of Trustees as to measures
or programs which he or she believes will improve the efficiency or economy of
village government.
F. Oversee that the Board of Trustees is kept fully advised of the financial condition
of the village.
G. Conduct a continuing study of all functions and activities of the village for the
purpose of devising ways and means of obtaining greater efficiency and economy.
§ 54-18 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 54-21
54:12
Chapter 59
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 54-21 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 54-21
59:1

Chapter 61
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 23.
Ethics — See Ch. 31.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 54.
§ 54-21 PLANNING COMMISSION § 54-21
61:1

ARTICLE I
Alternate Planning Commission Members
[Adopted 12-5-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005]
§ 61-1. Short title; applicability.
§ 61-2. Declaration of policy.
It is sometimes difficult to maintain a quorum on the Planning Commission, because
members are ill or on extended vacation or find they have a conflict of interest situation
on a specific matter before such Commission. In such instances, official business cannot
be conducted, which may delay or impede adherence to required timelines. The use of
alternate members in such instances is hereby authorized pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
§ 61-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALTERNATE MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Mayor and approved by
the Board of Trustees to serve on the Planning Commission when a regular member is
unable to participate on an application or matter before the respective Board, as provided
herein.
MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of
Trustees to serve on the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of the law or
resolution which first established such Planning Commission.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Village of Hamburg
as established by the Village Board of Trustees by resolution pursuant to the provisions
of Article 12-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 61-4. Appointment; term; powers and duties; applicability of state and local
laws.
A. Short title: "Alternate Planning Commission Members Act."
B. This article shall apply to the appointment, terms, functions and powers of alternate
members appointed to serve on the Planning Commission in the Village of
Hamburg.
A. The Village Board of Trustees hereby enacts this article to provide a process for
appointing alternate members of the Planning Commission. These individuals
would serve when members are absent or unable to participate on an application or
matter before the respective Commission.
B. Two alternate members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the
Village Mayor and approved by the Board of Trustees, for a term of three years.
C. The Chairperson of the Planning Commission may designate an alternate to
substitute for a member when such member is unable to participate on an
application or matter before the Commission. When so designated, the alternate
member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of such member of the
§ 61-1 PLANNING COMMISSION § 61-4
61:3
§ 61-5. Supersession of Village Law.
This article is hereby adopted pursuant to the provisions of § 10 of the New York
State Municipal Home Rule Law and § 10 of the New York State Statute of Local
Governments. It is the intent of the Board of Trustees, pursuant to § 10 of the New York
State Municipal Home Rule Law, to supersede the provisions of § 7-718 of the Village
Law relating to the appointment of members to the Village Planning Commission.
§ 61-6. Severability.
If any provisions of this article are held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the section shall remain
in effect.
Commission. Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of each Planning
Commission meeting at which the substitution is made.
D. All provisions of state law relating to Planning Commission member eligibility,
vacancy in office, removal, compatibility of office and service on other boards, as
well as any provisions of a local law relating to training, continuing education,
compensation and attendance, shall also apply to alternate members.
§ 61-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 61-6
61:4
Chapter 63
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 61-6 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 61-6
63:1

Chapter 67
PROCUREMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fixed assets — See Ch. 13. Capital reserve funds — See Ch. 21.
§ 61-6 PROCUREMENT POLICY § 61-6
67:1

ARTICLE I
Best Value Contracts
[Adopted 1-6-2020 by L.L. No. 1-202021]
§ 67-1. Purpose.
New York General Municipal Law § 103, Subdivision 1, allows the Village to authorize,
by local law, the award of certain purchase contracts (including contracts for services)
subject to competitive bidding under General Municipal Law § 103 on the basis of "best
value" as defined in § 163 of the New York State Finance Law. The best value option
may be used, but is not required to be used, if it is more cost-efficient over time to award
the good or service to other than the lowest responsible bidder or offerer if factors such
as lower cost of maintenance, durability, higher quality and longer product life can be
documented.
§ 67-2. Award based on low bid or best value.
Purchase contracts that have been procured pursuant to competitive bidding under
General Municipal Law § 103 by either lowest responsible bidder or best value may be
awarded so long as the award process complies with the terms of this article and General
Municipal Law § 103.
§ 67-3. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, the following terms shall mean:
BEST VALUE — The basis for awarding contracts for services to the offerer which
optimizes quality, cost and efficiency among responsive and responsible offerers. Such
basis shall reflect, wherever possible, objective and quantifiable analysis. Such basis
may also identify a quantitative factor for offerers that are small businesses or certified
minority- or women-owned business enterprises, as defined in Subdivisions 1, 7, 15, and
20 of § 310 of the Executive Law, to be used in evaluation of offers for awarding of
contracts for services.
§ 67-4. Requirements.
A. A best value solicitation shall contain a specific notification that the solicitation will
be analyzed and awarded in accordance with this best value. Such solicitations shall
prescribe the minimum specifications or requirements that must be met in order to
be considered responsive and shall describe and disclose the general manner in
which the evaluation and selection shall be conducted.
B. When the basis for award is based upon a best value offer, the Village
Administrator and/or designee shall document the evaluation criteria and the
process used to make such determination.
C. The standards and procedures for awarding a purchase contract on the basis of best
value shall be set forth in the Village Purchasing Policy as enacted and amended by
the Board of Trustees.
21. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Ch. 67, Procurement Policy, comprised of former Art. I, Purchasing
Procedure, adopted 6-1-1990, as amended, and former Art. II, Bid Specifications, adopted 4-5-1993.
§ 67-1 PROCUREMENT POLICY § 67-5
67:3
§ 67-5. Standards for best value.
Goods and services procured and awarded on the basis of best value are those that the
Village determines will be of the highest quality while being the most cost-efficient
as offered by responsive and responsible bidders and offerors. The determination of
quality and cost efficiency shall be based on objectively quantified and clearly described
and documented criteria, which may include, but shall not be limited to, any or all
of the following: product or service features, quality, durability, reliability, product
performance criteria, quality of craftsmanship, cost and extent of maintenance, useful
lifespan, availability of replacement parts, availability of maintenance contractors,
warranties, proximity to the end user if distance or response time is a significant factor,
references, past performance, organization and staffing, and financial capabilities.
§ 67-6. Documentation.
A contract may be awarded on either a best value or lowest responsible bidder standard.
All information gathered in the course of the bidding procedures of this article shall
be filed with the documentation supporting the subsequent purchase or public works
contract. Where a contract is awarded on the basis of best value rather than lowest
responsible bidder, the basis for determining best value shall be thoroughly and
accurately determined.
§ 67-7. Severability.
If any provision of this article or the application thereof by any person or circumstance is
held invalid, the remainder of this article and the application of such provisions to other
persons and circumstances shall not be rendered invalid thereby.
§ 67-8. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.
§ 67-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 67-8
67:4
Chapter 75
RECORDS
§ 67-8 RECORDS § 67-8
75:1

ARTICLE I
Records Retention
[Adopted 4-17-1989]
§ 75-1. Adoption of standards.
The records retention and disposition schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to Article 57-A
of the Arts & Cultural Affairs Law and containing legal minimum retention periods for
municipal government records, is hereby adopted for use by all municipal officers in
disposing of municipal government records listed therein.
§ 75-2. Criteria for disposal.
In accordance with Article 57-A, only those records will be disposed of that:
A. Are described in records retention and disposition schedule MU-1 after they have
met the minimum retention period prescribed therein.
B. Do not have sufficient administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit
retention beyond established time periods.
§ 75-1 RECORDS § 75-2
75:3

ARTICLE II
Public Access
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 75-3. Purpose and scope.
§ 75-4. Records access officer.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decision-making and the
documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to our society. Access to
such information should not be thwarted by shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy
or confidentiality.
B. These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by which records
may be obtained.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records required by the
Freedom of Information Law (§ 84 et seq. of the Public Officers Law), as well as
records otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflict among laws governing public access to records shall be construed in
favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg is responsible for ensuring
compliance with the regulations herein and designates the Village Clerk and, in his
or her absence, the Deputy Village Clerk as records access officer, who shall be
responsible for ensuring appropriate agency response to public requests for access
to records. The designation of a records access officer shall not be construed to
prohibit officials who have in the past been authorized to make records or
information available to the public from continuing to do so.
B. The records access officer shall ensure that personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection.
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in writing, the
reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay established fees, if
any, in accordance with § 75-12; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
§ 75-3 RECORDS § 75-4
75:5
§ 75-5. Custody and control of records.
§ 75-6. Recovery of records.
The legal department may take steps to recover local government records which have
been alienated from proper custody and may, when necessary, institute actions of
replevin. For the purposes of this section, "replevin" shall mean the recovery by a person
of goods claimed to be his or hers, on his or her promise to test the matter in court and
give the goods up again if defeated.
§ 75-7. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the office of the Village
Clerk, 100 Main Street, Hamburg, New York.
§ 75-8. Hours for inspection.
Requests for public access to record shall be accepted and records produced from 2:00
p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days that the Village Clerk's office is regularly open for business.
§ 75-9. Requests for access.
(a) The Village of Hamburg is not the custodian for such records; or
(b) The records of which the Village of Hamburg is a custodian cannot be
found after diligent search.
A. Active records. The originating department has full custody (legal and physical)
over records still in active use.
B. Inactive records. The originating department is the legal custodian of its records and
shall retain the power to retrieve and use records deposited in inactive storage in the
Records Center. The records access officer will have physical custody of inactive
records and will determine the method and design of storage.
C. Archival records. Records transferred to or acquired by the archives shall be under
the full custody (legal and physical) of the archives, as directed by the records
access officer, rather than the department which created or held them immediately
prior to being transferred to the archives.
(1) Records shall be transferred to the archives upon the recommendation of the
records access officer, with the approval of the head of the department which
had custody of the records and the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
(2) Records may be removed (temporarily or permanently) from the archives at
the request of the records access officer or the head of the department which
had custody of the records immediately prior to the transfer of those records to
the archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
A. A written request may be required, but oral requests may be accepted.
B. A response shall be given regarding any request reasonably describing the record
§ 75-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 75-9
75:6
§ 75-10. Subject matter list.
§ 75-11. Denial of access; appeals.
or records sought within five business days of receipt of the request.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought. Wherever
possible, a person requesting records should supply information regarding dates,
file designations or other information that may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the records access officer does not provide or deny access to the records sought
within five business days of receipt of a request, he or she shall furnish a written
acknowledgment of receipt of the request and a statement of the approximate date
when the request will be granted or denied. If access to records is neither granted
nor denied within 10 business days after the date of acknowledgment of receipt of
a request, the request may be construed as a denial of access that may be appealed.
A. The records access officer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current list by
subject matter of all records in his or her possession, whether or not records are
available pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public Officers Law.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit identification of the
category of the record sought.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice per year. The most recent
update shall appear on the first page of the subject matter list.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing, stating the reason therefor and
advising the requester of the right to appeal to the individual or body established to
hear appeals.
B. If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in § 75-9D of this
article, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of access.
C. The Village Attorney shall hear appeals for denial of access to records under the
Freedom of Information Law. Such appeals shall be made within 30 days of a
denial.
D. The time for deciding an appeal by the individual or body designated to hear
appeals shall commence upon receipt of a written appeal identifying:
(1) The date of the appeal.
(2) The date and location of the request for records.
(3) The records to which the requester was denied access.
(4) Whether the denial of access was in writing or due to failure to provide records
promptly as required by § 75-9D.
(5) The name and return address of the requester.
E. The individual or body designated to hear appeals shall transmit to the Committee
on Open Government copies of all appeals upon receipt of appeals. Such copies
§ 75-9 RECORDS § 75-11
75:7
§ 75-12. Fees.
§ 75-13. Public notice.
A notice containing the title or name and business address of the records access officer
and appeals body and the location where records can be seen or copied shall be posted in
a conspicuous location wherever records are kept and/or published in a local newspaper
of general circulation.
shall be addressed to the Committee on Open Government, Department of State,
162 Washington Avenue, Albany, New York 12231.
F. The Village Attorney shall inform the appellant and the Committee on Open
Government of its determination, in writing, within 10 business days of receipt of
an appeal. The determination shall be transmitted to the Committee on Open
Government in the same manner as set forth in Subsection E of this section.
A. There shall be no fee charged for:
(1) Inspection of records.
(2) Search for records.
(3) Any certification pursuant to this article.
B. The fee for photocopies not exceeding 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches is $0.25 per page.
C. The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsections A and B of this section
shall not exceed the actual reproduction cost (which is the average unit cost for
copying a record, excluding fixed costs of the village, such as operator salaries).
§ 75-11 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 75-13
75:8
Chapter 79
RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 79-1. Purpose.
Section 243 of Article 13 of the General Municipal Law, as enacted by Section 1 of
Chapter 215 of the Laws of 1917, entitled "An Act to Amend the General Municipal
Law, in Relation to Playgrounds and Neighborhood Recreation Centers in Cities and
Villages," as last amended by Chapter 878 of the Laws of 1953, is hereby amended to
read and provide as follows.
§ 79-2. Establishment; powers and responsibilities.
The Recreation Commission of the Village of Hamburg is hereby established. Such
Commission shall possess all the powers and be subject to all the responsibilities of local
authorities under Article 13 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 79-3. Membership; term.22
Such Commission shall consist of seven persons, who are residents of the Village
of Hamburg, to be appointed by the Board of Trustees or the Village of Hamburg
to serve for terms of three years or until their successors are appointed. Members of
such Commission shall serve without pay. Vacancies in such Commission occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled
in the same manner as original appointments.
22. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 75-13 RECREATION COMMISSION § 79-3
79:1

Chapter 83
SALARIES
§ 79-3 SALARIES § 79-3
83:1

Chapter 89
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
§ 79-3 SMOKING § 79-3
89:1

ARTICLE I
Employee Policy
[Adopted 2-16-1993]
§ 89-1. Prohibited areas.
§ 89-2. Violations.
§ 89-3. Copies of regulations.
Copies of these rules will be posted and distributed to all employees and to all
prospective employees upon request.
§ 89-4. Enforcement.24
The Recreation Supervisor shall be designated an agent to assist in the enforcement of
this policy by notifying employees who are in violation.
§ 89-5. Amendment of policy.
This policy may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Hamburg. All amendments shall be in conformance with New York State
Law, and employees will be notified accordingly.
A. Smoking is prohibited in all areas of all village facilities, including motor vehicles.23
B. Personnel who feel that they must smoke may do so only outside of the building
and then only during authorized breaks.
A. Violations should be brought to the attention of the appropriate supervisory
personnel. Employees may also file a formal complaint with Erie County
Commissioner of Health.
B. Employees violating this policy may be subject to penalties provided by law.
23. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
24. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 89-1 SMOKING § 89-5
89:3

Part II, General Legislation
§ 89-5 SMOKING § 89-5
89:5

Chapter 102
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
§ 102-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the Village of Hamburg by reducing the number of avoidable
alarms of fire, intrusion, holdup or other emergencies which contribute to ineffective
utilization of police and fire emergency agencies, require emergency responses which
are susceptible to high accident rates, interfere with genuine emergencies (responses)
and produce unnecessary alarm noise to the surrounding community,
§ 102-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or an assembly of equipment which is designated to
detect smoke, abnormal rise in temperature, fire, medical emergency or an entry into or
exit from a building, structure or facility and by reason thereof emits an audible response
intended to alert persons outside of the premises and/or transmit a signal or message to
an emergency agency, either directly or through a private answering point.
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device that automatically dials and relays a prerecorded
message to an emergency agency.
EMERGENCY AGENCY — The Police Department or Fire Department, central fire
dispatch or other emergency dispatch center.
§ 102-3. Compliance required; exemptions.
§ 102-4. Automatic cutoff system required.
A. The owners and lessees of premises having alarm systems shall comply with all
provisions of this chapter on or before June 1, 2005.
B. Schools, both public and private schools located in the Village of Hamburg, shall
be exempt from compliance with this chapter.
C. Also exempt from this chapter will he village buildings, i.e., buildings owned or
operated by the Village of Hamburg, and fire stations within the Village of
Hamburg.
A. No person shall install or maintain an external audible alarm device which does not
contain an operational automatic cutoff system which turns off the external audible
§ 89-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 102-4
102:1
§ 102-5. Connection to 911 and emergency agencies restricted.
§ 102-6. Avoidable alarms.
alarm after a period not to exceed 10 minutes.
B. An automatic dialer connected directly to an emergency agency shall automatically
disconnect and/or terminate its message after the message has been transmitted a
maximum of two times. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the total
transmission time of all messages shall not exceed five minutes.
A. No alarm system shall have an automatic dialer feature or other type of alarm alter
which connects automatically to the enhanced 911 emergency telephone system.
B. There shall be no automatic alarm system with direct communication of any type to
an emergency agency without prior written authorization from the emergency
agency where the alarms terminate.
A. General provisions.
(1) The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction,
improper installation or the negligence of the owner, user, custodian or lessee
of an alarm system, or of his employees, requiring an emergency response
when, in fact, an emergency does not exist constitutes an avoidable alarm. An
avoidable alarm also includes intentional activation of an alarm system when
the activator knows an emergency situation does not exist.
(2) An avoidable alarm does not include alarms activated by violent conditions of
nature or similar cases beyond the control of the user, owner or operator of the
alarm system. The activation of an alarm system under any circumstances in
which the activator reasonably believes that an emergency situation exists
shall not be deemed to be an avoidable alarm.
B. Charges. An owner or lessee of real property to which an emergency agency
responds as a result of an avoidable alarm shall pay a fee for each such response in
each calendar year as follows:
(1) Police Department response:
(a) First through third avoidable alarm response: no charge.
(b) Fourth and fifth avoidable alarm responses: $50 for each.
(c) Sixth and over avoidable alarm responses: $100 for each.
(2) Fire Department response:
(a) First through third avoidable alarm response: no charge.
(b) Fourth and fifth avoidable alarm responses: $50 for each.
(c) Sixth and over avoidable alarm responses: $100 for each.
C. Notice of excessive use. The owner or lessee of real property which received an
§ 102-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 102-6
102:2
§ 102-7. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police shall enforce this chapter for alarm systems which detect medical
emergencies and entry or exit from a building, structure or facility. The Chief of the
Fire Department shall enforce this chapter for alarm systems which detect smoke, fire or
abnormal rise in temperature.
§ 102-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, business, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other entity that does
not pay the fee as established in this chapter or that violates any other provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation
occurs, continues or is permitted.
emergency response by reason of an avoidable alarm shall be notified, in writing,
by means of first-class mail, of all avoidable alarms, up to three police alarms and/
or one fire alarm in a calendar year. The letter shall inform the owner or lessee of
the times and types of emergency responses provided to the address location and
shall contain a copy of this Alarm Code.
D. Administrative review. The Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department
shall establish a policy and procedures whereby an owner of real property or lessee
thereof on which an alarm system has been installed and who has been notified of
an avoidable alarm may present evidence as to why any such alarm should not be
classified as an avoidable alarm. The Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire
Department shall designate members of their Departments, not to exceed five in
total, to receive such evidence and make recommendations and findings of fact
concerning such classification. The Chief of Police and Chief of the Fire
Department shall make the final determination concerning a classification, which
determination shall be reviewed only pursuant to procedures under Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules. To challenge the classification of an alarm as an
avoidable alarm, the real property owner or lessee thereof shall, in writing, notify
the Chief of Police and/or the Chief of the Fire Department within 20 days after
receipt of notice of the avoidable alarm. The failure to give timely notice shall be
deemed a waiver of the right to review the determination.
E. Payment of charges. The Chief of Police, upon the fourth avoidable alarm and all
subsequent avoidable alarms in that calendar year, and the Chief of the Fire
Department, upon the second avoidable alarm and all subsequent avoidable alarms
in that calendar year, shall notify the owner or lessee in writing, by first-class mail,
of the charge pursuant to § 126-6B of this chapter, along with the times and dates
of emergency responses at this location, and copy of this Alarm Code. Avoidable
alarm charges shall be paid to the Village Clerk of the Village of Hamburg at 100
Main Street, Hamburg, New York 14075.
F. Failure to remit fee. A real property owner or lessee of property who fails to pay the
avoidable alarm charge within 30 days from the date of the notice of the amount
due shall be served with a summons and shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter.
§ 102-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 102-9
102:3
§ 102-9. Fines.
Moneys received for fines for response to alarms by the Village of Hamburg Police shall
go into the General Part Village Fund. Moneys received for fines due to Fire Department
response shall be applied to the Fire Department. Moneys received for fines for response
to alarms by the Village of Hamburg Police and Fire Departments shall be divided
equally between the Village of Hamburg Police and the Fire Departments, in the event
that they both respond simultaneously.
§ 102-10. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other sections, clauses or provisions
or the application thereof which can be sustained or given effect without the invalid
section, clause or provision or application, and to this end the various sections, clauses
or provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 102-11. When effective.
The chapter shall become effective immediately after proper filing, including with the
Secretary of State.
§ 102-9 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 102-11
102:4
Chapter 105
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 167.
§ 105-1. Definitions.25
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following:
OPEN CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or container containing liquor, beer, wine or
other alcoholic beverage, as the same is defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law
of the State of New York.
§ 105-2. Consumption or possession; exception.
A. Drinking from the container.
B. Possession with movement of the container to the mouth.
C. Possession with alcohol on the breath of the possessor.
Any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on any public lands
without permission.
D.
A. No person shall consume any intoxicating beverage or have in his or her possession
with intent to consume any open bottle or container, containing liquor, beer, wine
or other alcoholic beverage on or in any street or private road, bridge, alley, park,
garden, parking lot, athletic field, playground, sidewalk, driveway or in any
moving, standing or parked vehicle within the Village of Hamburg. An open bottle
or open container in any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that the same is in
possession with intent to consume by all the occupants thereof and in violation
hereof.26
B. This section shall not be construed to prohibit such consumption in a park during
the actual conduct of a carnival, lawn fete or similar activity by a veterans'
organization, volunteer fire department, charitable organization or similar such
organization, provided that the same is being conducted with the express consent of
the Board of Trustees by resolution duly adopted.27
25. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
26. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
27. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in the Appendix of this Code.
§ 102-11 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 105-3
105:1
§ 105-3. Penalties for offenses.28
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by a
term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
28. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 105-3
105:2
Chapter 109
ANIMALS
§ 105-3 ANIMALS § 105-3
109:1

ARTICLE I
Animals and Fowl
§ 109-1. Animals at large. [Amended 4-20-1970]
No horses, cattle, sheep, swine or poultry shall be allowed to run at large in the village.
§ 109-2. Keeping certain animals and fowl. [Amended 4-20-1970; 7-21-1975 by
L.L. No. 12-1975; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998; 10-15-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
§ 109-3. Condition of pens and premises. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998;
10-15-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
A. Permit required. No person shall hereafter keep or house horses, cattle, sheep,
swine, poultry or any animals other than household pets within the limits of the
Village without a permit from the Board of Trustees. Upon receipt of a completed
application for a permit, the Village Board of Trustees shall consider said
application at a regularly scheduled Board meeting. Prior to said meeting, the
Village Board shall issue notice of such meeting to all property owners within 100
feet of the property for which the application is made. Said notice shall indicate the
general content of the permit application, the date of the Board meeting when the
application will be considered, and must notify the recipient that they may appear
in person and/or submit a written response to express an opinion on the application.
Said notice must be issued not fewer than 15 days and no longer than 30 days prior
to the Board meeting.
B. Such permit may be granted for a period of one year unless it shall be determined
from complaints that the keeping of the animals listed on the permit is objectionable
or offensive by reason of noise, smell or other cause. Hamburg Village Agricultural
Committee shall field and attempt to mitigate all complaints. Unresolved
complaints shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Department. Such permit
shall be revocable at any time by the Board of Trustees.
C. Fowl/poultry.
(1) All poultry shall be kept outdoors in a secure, sturdy, weatherproof coop and
enclosed run.
(2) Each fowl shall have a minimum of three square feet of floor space in the coop
and shall have at least four square feet of space in addition for a run.
(3) Up to six female domestic fowl per residence are allowed within Village
limits. Roosters are not permitted.
D. Multiple housing unit residents or single-family tenants must obtain a landlord and/
or property owner’s signature of approval on the permit application.
E. No butchering or breeding of animals or fowl shall be permitted.29
29. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in the Appendix of this Code. Former § 3-3, dealing with public
pounds or animal hospitals, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998. See now
§ 109-8.
§ 109-1 ANIMALS § 109-3
109:3
A. It shall be unlawful for any person keeping or harboring animals, pigeons or fowl
to fail to keep the premises where such animals or fowl are kept free from offensive
odors to the extent that such odors are disturbing to any person residing within
reasonable proximity of said premises. It shall be unlawful to allow the premises
where animals or fowl are kept to become unclean and a threat to public health by
failing to diligently and systematically remove all animal waste from the premises
and properly managing and storing the food supply for the animal or fowl.
B. All coops and runs shall be at least six feet from back and side property lines. No
coops shall be allowed in front yards.
C. All coops and runs shall be kept a minimum of 10 feet from a residence.
D. All coops and runs shall be kept at least 15 feet from any bordering residence.
Exception to decrease minimum clearance may be granted upon written permission
from affected bordering resident.
E. All coops and runs are required to be inspected by Hamburg Village Agricultural
Committee prior to initial permit issuance.
F. All permit applications must be reviewed by the Code Enforcement Department for
compliance with the Building Code.
§ 109-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 109-3
109:4
ARTICLE II
Dogs
§ 109-4. Purpose.30
The purpose of this article is to preserve the public peace and good order in the Village of
Hamburg and to contribute to the public welfare and the preservation and protection of
the property and the person of the inhabitants of said village by deciding and enforcing
certain regulations and restrictions on activities of dogs within the village.
§ 109-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Person authorized by the Village Board to enforce
the provisions of this article. An animal control officer shall have all the powers of a
constable or the peace officer in the execution of the provisions of this article, including
the service of a summons and the service of an appearance ticket, pursuant to Section
124 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.[Amended 3-1-1976
by L.L. No. 4-1976; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
AT LARGE — Elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or on the premises of
another person without the knowledge, consent and approval of said other person.
DOG — Both male and female dogs, both licensed and unlicensed.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designated for occupancy by one or more
residents which may be lawfully used for cooking, living and sleeping purposes.[Added
10-19-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
OWNER—Any person, firm, association or corporation owning, harboring, keeping or
having the custody or control of any dog.
RESIDENT — Any person or entity occupying, utilizing or sharing a residential
dwelling unit in the Village of Hamburg.[Added 10-19-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
§ 109-6. Control of dogs.
A. Leash required. No person owning, harboring or having the care, custody or charge
of any dog, whether male or female, or whether licensed or not, shall allow or
permit such dog at any time to run at large within the Village of Hamburg unless
such dog shall be effectively restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding eight feet
in length and by a competent person.
B. Noisy dogs. No owner of a dog or of a duly approved kennel within the Village of
Hamburg shall suffer or permit any dog or dogs to create any unreasonably loud or
disturbing noise of such an intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life,
health or welfare of any individual, and the violation hereof is prohibited and
deemed to be a public nuisance and such dog or dogs shall be so housed and
confined in a place so constructed as to prevent such disturbing and unnecessary
30. Editor's Note: Former § 3-16, dealing with the applicability of other sections to this article, which immediately
preceded this section, was deleted 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
§ 109-4 ANIMALS § 109-6
109:5
§ 109-7. Housing three or more dogs. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998;
amended 10-19-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
§ 109-8. Public pounds or animal hospitals. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Section 109-7 shall have no application to a public pound established by the village
nor to an animal hospital for the treatment, care, observation or temporary boarding of
dogs or cats if such hospital shall be operated by a person licensed to practice veterinary
noise as may result from the habitual or continual barking of such dog or dogs.
The provisions of this section shall be liberally construed to prevent excessive,
unreasonable, disturbing and unnecessary noise, due consideration being given
to the circumstances, time of day, particular location of each violation and the
demands of the public health, safety and welfare.
C. No person owning, harboring or having the care, custody or charge of any dog,
whether male or female, or whether licensed or not, shall allow or permit such dog
at any time to enter into or be or remain in any public park in the Village of
Hamburg, whether or not such dog shall be restrained by a chain or leash.
[Amended 8-16-1976 by L.L. No. 19-1976]
D. Disposal of feces. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog
shall cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any
nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of said property. The restriction in this section
shall not apply to that portion of the street lying between the curblines, which shall
be used to curb such dog under the following conditions: [Added 7-17-1995 by
L.L. No. 2-1995]
(1) The person who allows the dog to defecate shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
(2) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be disposed
of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog curbed by
flushing same down a sanitary sewer system or by use of a chemical container
causing disintegration or by placement in a clear plastic bag at the curb for
collection by the municipal sanitation collectors. In the event that a chemical
container is used, ultimate disposal must be made in accordance with
Department of Environmental Conservation regulations concerning solid
waste disposal. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
A. No dwelling unit shall keep, house or harbor three or more dogs over six months
old within the limits of the Village without a permit from the Board of Trustees.
B. Such permit may be granted for a period of one year unless it shall appear from the
complaints of neighbors or otherwise that the keeping of the animals in question is
objectionable or offensive by reason of noise, smell or other cause. Such a permit
shall be revocable at any time by the Board of Trustees.31
31. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in the Appendix of this Code.
§ 109-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 109-8
109:6
medicine under the provisions of the New York State Education Law.
§ 109-9. Seizure and impounding. [Amended 9-24-1973 by L.L. No. 2-1973]
Any dog running at large within the Village of Hamburg contrary to the provisions of
§ 109-6A of this article; or which is a dangerous dog, defined and deemed to be any
dog which chases, jumps at or onto, snaps at or bites, or has bitten any person; or which
chases vehicles of any kind in the streets or public place; or which is an unconfined
unspayed female dog in time of heat; or which runs with a pack of dogs; or which is
a noisy dog, as defined in § 109-6B, shall be subject to seizure and impounding by the
Animal Control Officer, any police officer or by any other person or agency designated
by the village or authorized by law to seize and impound such dog, and any such animal
control officer, police officer, other person or agency so seizing such dog hereunder
shall be empowered to exercise such degree of force as shall be necessary to effect such
seizure.
§ 109-10. Notice to owner; redemption of impounded dog. [Amended 9-24-1973 by
L.L. No. 2-1973]
After such seizure and impounding, a resident owner of such dog, if ascertainable from
such dog's license tag, shall be notified thereof personally or by affixing a written notice
to such owner's last known place of residence. Such dog so seized and impounded shall
be held for a period of five days, during which period such dog shall be properly fed and
cared for at the expense of the village. During the said five day period the owner of such
dog may recover the same during normal business hours by:
§ 109-11. Disposition of impounded dog.
If any dog is not redeemed as provided in this article, the Animal Control Officer, any
police officer or any other person or agency designated by the Village Board for the
purpose of seizing such dog may order the destruction of such animal, provided that if
said dog is not claimed or redeemed by its lawful owner or his or her duly authorized
agent, then the keeper may deliver said dog to a responsible or proper person upon
payment of the impounding fee and five days' keep and producing a license for said dog.
§ 109-12. Records kept by dog keeper.
The keeper of the dog pound shall keep a record and description of each animal
impounded, the date of receipt of such animal, the date and manner of its disposal and,
if redeemed, the name and address of the person by whom redeemed.
A. Producing a license for such dog and by paying the sum of $15 for the seizure and
impounding of such dog; or by paying the sum of $20 for a second recovery of such
dog within a period of 30 days from the date of the first impounding; or by paying
the sum of $25 for a third recovery of such dog within a period of 60 days from the
date of the first impounding. [Amended 2-3-1975 by L.L. No. 2-1975]
B. Paying for the actual cost of harboring such dog, per day or part thereof, after
seizure and impounding, that such dog is held in custody.
§ 109-8 ANIMALS § 109-13
109:7
§ 109-13. Interference with authorities.
No person shall hinder, resist or oppose the Animal Control Officer, any police officer,
agent or employee or representative of the village in the performance of his or her duties
under this article.
§ 109-14. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-17-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995;
6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Unless otherwise provided by Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, any person
who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this article shall be liable to pay a fine not
exceeding $250 or be sentenced to imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or
both, upon conviction before any Village Justice.
§ 109-15. Enforcement. [Added 7-17-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department.
§ 109-16. Trial procedure. [Amended 3-1-1976 by L.L. No. 4-1976]
A. The owner of a dog who is issued an appearance ticket pursuant to § 109-5 herein
may answer the same by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, within
five days of the violations as hereunder provided in lieu of a personal appearance
on the return date at the time and court specified in said appearance ticket.
B. If the person charged with the violation admits to the violation as charged in the
appearance ticket, the person may complete the appropriate form on such
appearance ticket and forward such form and appearance ticket to the office
specified on such appearance ticket. Such appearance ticket shall set forth the
schedule of penalties and fines for violations of this article, and a certified check or
money order in the amount of the penalty for the violation charged shall be
submitted with such answer.
C. If the person charged with the violation denies part or all of the violation as charged
in the appearance ticket, he or she may complete the appearance ticket likewise
prescribed for that purpose and forward such appearance ticket, together with a
certified check or money order in the amount of $15 to the office of the court
specified on such appearance ticket. Upon receipt, such answer shall be entered in
the docket and a new return date established by said court officer. Such person shall
be notified by return mail of the date and place of such return date and or trial, and
the security shall be returned upon appearance thereat. If a person shall fail to
appear at a return date when such is provided for pursuant to this section, the
security posted to secure such appearance shall be forfeited and a summons or a
warrant of arrest may be issued pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Law. The
person charged with a violation hereunder, should he or she request a trial as
provided herein, shall pay for the care of the dog while impounded.
D. In the event that there is a violation of this article based upon an information and
not an appearance ticket, and the owner of the dog denies the violation, the owner
shall post bail of $25, pay for the care of the dog while impounded and demand, in
writing, a trial. The Animal Control Officer or other law enforcement officer shall
§ 109-13 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 109-16
109:8
immediately proceed to file an information with the Village Justice so that the
matter will appear on the docket of the Village Justice as soon as possible. The rules
of procedure and proof applicable in criminal actions shall apply.
§ 109-16 ANIMALS § 109-16
109:9

Chapter 114
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 150.
§ 114-1. Authorization for conduct of games.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of Article 14-H of
the General Municipal Law, upon retaining the required license, to conduct bingo games
in the Village of Hamburg, subject to the provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the
General Municipal Law, Article 19-B of the Executive Law and the rules and regulations
of the State Racing and Wagering Board.
§ 114-2. Administration and enforcement.
§ 114-3. Restrictions.
The restrictions imposed by § 479 of the General Municipal Law shall apply to bingo
games in the village, in addition to any further restrictions imposed by this chapter.
§ 114-4. Sunday games authorized.
As authorized by General Municipal Law § 485, bingo games may be held on any day
of the week provided for in the license issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 114-5. Frequency of games.
In addition to the provisions of General Municipal Law § 487, no bingo games shall be
held, operated or conducted under any license issued pursuant to this chapter oftener than
on six days in any one calendar month.
A. Licenses. The Village Clerk shall accept application for and issue licenses for the
conduct of bingo games in accordance with Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law.
B. Supervision of games. The Village Clerk, with the aid and cooperation of the Police
Department, shall have and exercise control and supervision over all bingo games
held, operated or conducted under any license issued pursuant to this chapter.
C. Inspection of premises. The Village Clerk, or any officer designated by the Village
Clerk, shall have the right of entry at all times into any premises where any bingo
game is being held, operated or conducted, or where it is intended that any such
bingo game is being held, operated or conducted or any equipment being used or
intended to be used in the conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting
the same.
§ 109-16 BINGO § 114-6
114:1
§ 114-6. Award of prizes; restriction.
§ 114-7. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law,
Article 19-B of the Executive Law and the rules and regulations of the State Racing and
Wagering Board shall be prosecuted as misdemeanors, punishable by a maximum fine
of $1,000 or one year's imprisonment, or both.
A. All winners shall be determined and all prizes shall be awarded in any game played
on any occasion within the same calendar day as that upon which the game was
played.
B. No alcoholic beverage shall be offered or given as a prize in any such game.
§ 114-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 114-7
114:2
Chapter 123
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Department — See Ch. 17.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 127.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 132.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 141.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 182.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 114-7 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 114-7
123:1

ARTICLE I
Standards
§ 123-1. Controlling provisions.
Pursuant to Article 18 of the Executive Law, the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code will be the controlling provisions in regard to building
construction in the Village of Hamburg. A copy of the Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code is on file and available for review in the office of the Superintendent of
Public Works.
§ 123-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 123-1
123:3

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 123-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
Administration and Enforcement Law."
§ 123-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code established by Article 18 of the Executive
Law as added by Chapter 707 of the Laws of 1981 of the State of New York, as the same
may be applicable to the Village of Hamburg, New York.
§ 123-4. Prevalence of more restrictive standards.
Where the provisions of this chapter conflict with or impose a different requirement
from any other provisions of the Village of Hamburg Code or any rule or regulation
adopted thereunder, the provision which establishes the higher standard or requirement
shall govern.
§ 123-5. Designation of enforcement officials.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal to administer and
enforce the Uniform Code and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 123-6. Powers and duties of enforcement officials.
A. The Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal shall administer and enforce all of
the provisions of the Uniform Code and regulations applicable to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal and demolition of buildings and structures and the
installation and use of materials and equipment therein and the location, use,
occupancy and maintenance thereof.
B. The Village Clerk shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection,
alteration, removal and demolition of buildings or structures or parts thereof. Prior
to the issuance of such permit, the Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal shall
examine the premises for which such applications have been received for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the Uniform Code and other laws, ordinances
and regulations governing building construction.
C. The Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal shall issue all appropriate notices
or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary safeguards
during construction and to ensure compliance during the entire course of
construction with the requirements of the Uniform Code and other applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations. They or either of them shall make all inspections which
are necessary or proper for the carrying out of their duties.
D. Whenever the same may be necessary or appropriate to assure compliance with the
provisions of applicable laws, ordinances or regulations covering building
construction, the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal may require the
§ 123-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 123-6
123:5
§ 123-7. Records and reports.
§ 123-8. Examination of permit applications.
The Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal shall examine, or cause to be examined,
performance of tests in the field by experienced professional persons or by a
credited and authoritative testing laboratory or service bureau or agency.
E. Inspections. In the furtherance of the duties of the Building Inspector and/or the
Fire Marshal, as provided for in this chapter, said Building Inspector and/or Fire
Marshal shall institute and perform the following inspections, in addition to those
otherwise required in this chapter:
(1) Construction inspections where a building permit has been issued, at such
times during the course of construction as will permit the observation of the
foundation, structural elements, electrical systems, plumbing systems, heating,
ventilation and air-conditioning systems, fire-protection and detection systems
and exit features.
(2) Inspections where a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of compliance is
required, prior to its issuance.
(3) Fire safety inspections of areas of public assembly defined in Part 606 of Title
9 of the official compilation of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations at
least once a year.
(4) Fire safety inspections of all multiple dwellings and all nonresidential
occupancies at intervals consistent with local conditions, (See Title 19 of the
New York Codes, Rules and Regulations, Administration and Enforcement of
the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, Part 444):
(a) Areas of public assembly, at least once every 12 months.
(b) Gas stations, at least once every six months.
(c) Petroleum bulk storage, at least once every six months.
(d) All buildings open to the public, at least once every 36 months.
(e) All common areas to multiple dwellings (not one or two-family
dwellings), at least every 24 months.
(f) Any building, use or occupancy, at owner request, during an emergency
or for a bona fide complaint.
A. The Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal shall keep permanent official records
of all transactions and activities conducted by them, including all applications
received, inspection reports and notices of orders issued.
B. The Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal shall, as directed, submit to the Village
Board of Trustees, a written report and summary of all business conducted by them,
including orders and notices promulgated, inspections and tests made and appeals
or litigation pending.
§ 123-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 123-8
123:6
all applications for building permits and the plans, specifications and documents filed
therewith. They or either of them shall approve or disapprove the application within a
reasonable time and in all events within 20 business days. The permit shall include a
right of entry in accordance with § 123-10.
§ 123-9. Revocation of building permits.
The Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal may revoke a building permit theretofore
issued and approved in the following instances.
§ 123-10. Right of entry.
Any Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal, upon the showing of proper credentials
and in the discharge of his or her duties, may enter upon any building structure at any
reasonable hour, and no person shall interfere with or prevent such entry.
§ 123-11. Inspections; records.
§ 123-12. Certificates of occupancy.
A. Where the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal finds that there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans or
specifications on which the building permit was based.
B. Where the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal finds that the building permit
was issued in error and should not have been issued, in accordance with the
applicable law.
C. Where the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal finds that the work performed
under the permit is not being prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the
application, plans or specifications.
D. Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails or refuses to
comply with a stop order issued by the Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal
and/or the Village Clerk or other responsible official of the Village of Hamburg.
A. Before a certificate of occupancy is issued in the Village of Hamburg, the Building
Inspector and/or Fire Marshal shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings,
structures and sites for which an application has been filed for a building permit to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or change the use or occupancy,
and the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal may conduct such inspections as
deemed appropriate, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for
which a building permit has been issued.
B. There shall be maintained by the Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal a record
of all such examinations and inspections, together with a record of findings of
violations of the Uniform Code and other applicable laws.
A. Issuance. When, after final inspection, it is found that the proposed work has been
completed in accordance with the Uniform Code and other applicable building
laws, ordinances and regulations and also in accordance with the application, plans
and specifications filed in connection with the issuance of the building permit, the
§ 123-8 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 123-12
123:7
§ 123-13. Penalties for offenses.
§ 123-14. Additional remedies.
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to prevent
unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to prevent illegal acts, conduct or
business in or about any premises and those remedies shall be in addition to the penalties
prescribed in § 382 of the Executive Law.
§ 123-15. Inspection of solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys and flues.
Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal shall approve the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, which certificate shall be issued by the Village Clerk. If
it is found that the proposed work has not been properly completed, the Building
Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal shall refuse to approve the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy and shall order the work completed in conformity with
the building permit and in conformity with the Uniform Code and other applicable
building regulations.
B. Tests for compliance with standards. Whenever there are reasonable grounds to
believe that any material, construction, equipment or assembly does not conform to
the requirements of the Uniform Code or the applicable building laws, ordinances
or regulations, the Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal may require the same
to be subjected to tests in order to furnish proof of such compliance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, alter, repair,
move, remove, demolish, equip, use or occupy or maintain any building or structure
or portion thereof in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or to fail in
any manner to comply with the notice, directive or order of the Building Inspector
and/or Fire Marshal or to construct, alter or use and occupy any building or
structure or part thereof in a manner not permitted by an approved building permit
or certificate of occupancy.
B. For each offense against any of the provisions of the Uniform Code or of this
chapter or any regulations made pursuant thereto or failure to comply with a written
notice or order of any Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal within the time fixed
for compliance therewith, the owner, occupant, builder, architect, contractor or their
agents or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in the commission of
any such offense or who shall fail to comply with a written order or notice of any
Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal shall be subject to the terms and provisions
of § 382 of the Executive Law.
A. Prior to the installation of any solid-fuel-burning heating appliance, chimney or flue
in any dwelling used as a residence, the owner thereof or his or her agent shall first
secure a building permit from the Village Clerk.
B. The Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal shall cause an inspection to be made of
the solid-fuel-burning heating appliance, chimney or flue at a time when such
inspection will best determine conformity of such installation with the Uniform
Code; provided, however, that the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal may
§ 123-12 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 123-15
123:8
waive such inspection for good cause shown.
C. Upon approval of such installation, the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal shall
issue a certificate evidencing compliance with the appropriate provisions of the
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
D. No owner of any dwelling used as a residence shall operate or cause to be operated
any solid-fuel-burning heating appliance until such installation, including chimney
and flue, has been approved and a certificate indicating such approval obtained
from the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal.
E. The issuance of such certificate of compliance shall not be deemed to give rise to
any claim or cause of action for damages against the Village of Hamburg or the
Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal for damages resulting from the operation or
use of such solid-fuel-burning heating appliance, chimney or flue.
F. The fees for such inspection shall be paid by the owner of such property or his or
her agent in a sum which shall be determined from time to time by the Board of
Trustees.
G. Any violation of this § 123-15 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.
H. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this § 123-15, in the event of an
emergency, where a delay occasioned by the requirement of securing a building
permit could reasonably be expected to cause irreparable damage to the property or
serious personal injury to the occupants or other person, the owner or his or her
agent may commence such installation without first obtaining such building permit,
provided that application therefor is filed within three business days after such work
is commenced.
§ 123-15 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION § 123-15
123:9

Chapter 126
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic preservation — See Ch. 44.
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 127.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 129.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 182.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICATION FOR DEMOLITION — The application for a permit to demolish a
building or structure.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly below grade and which has
more than half of its height, measured from floor level to ceiling, above the average
established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
BUILDING—A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, as a structure
wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls or within exterior or party walls and
having a roof, affording shelter to persons, animals or property. The word "building"
shall be construed, when used herein, as though followed by the words "or part or parts
thereof."
CELLAR — That portion of a building that is partly or entirely below grade, which has
more than half its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below the average established
curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER—The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of
Hamburg.
CONTRACTOR — That person, firm or corporation employed by the owner of the
property, empowered by written consent of the owner to perform the specific duty of
demolition as may be specified in authorizing permits.
DEMOLITION or DEMOLISH—The alteration of an existing building or structure, the
purpose of such alteration being the discontinuance of the existing building or structure
or a portion thereof. Demolition shall not include the repairing, remodeling or extending
of an existing building or structure where such is incidental to the improvement of that
building or structure, and the primary intent is shown to be that of repairing, remodeling
or extending the existing building or structure.
DEMOLITION PERMIT — The permit for demolition of an existing building or
structure.
LOCATION — The actual confines of the demolition. The location, as described in the
application for permit and as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer therein, shall
be the only area approved for the demolition.
§ 123-15 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 126-1
126:1
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Village of Hamburg.
OWNER and PROPERTY OWNER — The person who has the legal title to land,
together with ownership of the building or structure location thereon, whose name
appears on the most recent tax assessment rolls of the Village of Hamburg.
PUBLIC WAY — A street, alley, sidewalk or other thoroughfare or easement
permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles. The term "public way" shall
be construed, when used herein, as though followed by the words "or part thereof."
SALVAGE — Component parts of a building or structure being demolished, removed
or to be removed from said building or structure for reuse or resale.
SALVAGE CONTRACTOR — A person, firm or corporation identified in the
application for demolition, authorized by the owner, in writing, to remove items of
salvage from premises, which may or may not be the same person, firm or corporation
designated by the owner as the demolition contractor.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials, other than a building, to form a
construction that is safe and stable, and includes, among other things, stadiums,
platforms, radio towers, sheds and storage bins.
§ 126-2. Permit requirements; fees.
A. No person shall demolish an existing building or structure having a gross floor area
or base area of 500 square feet or more within the Village of Hamburg without first
obtaining a demolition permit, signed by the Code Enforcement Officer and the
Mayor, allowing such demolition. Such permit shall be applied for and issued to the
owner of the property. Except in emergency situations (see Chapter 127), no
demolition permit shall be issued in less than eight business days from the date the
application is received by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. No demolition permit will be issued for demolition of an historically designated
landmark or a structure identified as eligible for inclusion on the National Register
of Historic Places or any structure, property or landmark located within an Historic
District, without the applicant first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness, as
required by Chapter 44 of this Code.
C. Form; contents.
(1) Written application for a demolition permit shall be on the forms provided by
the Village of Hamburg Code Enforcement Officer's office.
(2) Said application shall require the name, address and telephone number of the
owner; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all contractors
(general, special or salvage) authorized by the owner to perform work;
insurance coverage information, including the name of each insurance
company, policy number and date of expiration of policy; a written description
of the building or structure to be removed; starting and completion dates; a
written list of materials to be salvaged; provisions for disposal of refuse; and a
statement to security and/or barricades to safeguard premises from
unauthorized entry during the demolition work, as well as the protection of the
general public.
§ 126-1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 126-2
126:2
§ 126-3. Certificate of insurance.
§ 126-4. Procedures.
(3) Each application shall be accompanied by preliminary plans for the
replacement structure and/or any intended improvement of the property.
D. A filing fee shall accompany all demolition permit applications. Said filing fee shall
be paid to the Village Clerk and is nonrefundable in the event that the permit
applied for is denied. The fee for a demolition permit shall be established by the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg.32
E. Within 24 hours of the receipt of an application for a demolition permit, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall deliver a copy of the application to the Village Clerk, the
Mayor, and the chairperson of the Historic Preservation Committee.
A. As part of the application for a demolition permit, a certificate of insurance for
liability shall be delivered to the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of
Hamburg, as agent for the Village of Hamburg. The minimum limits of said liability
for the demolition of buildings and structures, whether in a homeowner's insurance
policy or separate liability policy, shall be a combined single limit of $500,000 or
equivalent.
B. All insurance certificates shall include the Village of Hamburg as an additional
named insured.
C. Insurance certificates or agreements in a form approved by the Village Attorney,
holding the Village of Hamburg, its officers and employees from liability resulting
from work allowed by a demolition permit, shall be delivered to the Code
Enforcement Officer as agent for the Village of Hamburg.
A. Upon the request of the Code Enforcement Officer, the person making the
application for a permit to demolish a building or structure shall submit to the Code
Enforcement Officer a written report from a licensed exterminator regarding
extermination of the building or structure prior to the issuance of a demolition
permit. A written report from a licensed professional shall be submitted for asbestos
removal/abatement and lead removal/investigation. An approved mitigation/
abatement/removal plan is required prior to issuance of a demolition permit. A
written report from a licensed professional shall be submitted for asbestos removal/
abatement and lead removal/mitigation. An approved mitigation/abatement/
removal plan is required prior to issuance of a demolition permit.
B. Prior to demolition, the contractor will erect a system of barricades around the
construction site and have the electric, gas and telephone services removed by the
respective utility companies. Water service and sewer laterals to the building or
structure being demolished shall be disconnected and removed back to the edge of
the property line and capped, unless there is an approved site plan by the Planning
Board stating that the existing utility line will be reused. All utilities, water and
sewer disconnection shall be inspected and approved by the Code Enforcement
32. Editor's Note: See Ch. A255, Fees.
§ 126-2 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 126-4
126:3
Officer prior to demolition.
C. The contractor shall obtain appropriate approval for the water use on the site from
the Code Enforcement Officer for dust control and have sufficient lengths of oneand-
one-half-inch and/or two-and-one-half-inch hose for this purpose. The
contractor shall provide a flagman for traffic control when necessary, and should a
street have to be closed, he shall obtain written permission from the Superintendent
of Public Works, the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief.
D. In the case of the demolition of an existing building which has a common or party
wall with one or more adjoining buildings, the owner of the building to be
demolished shall be responsible for and bear all costs in relation to the safeguarding
of said adjacent wall.
E. Where beams, girders and joists are removed from party walls, the resulting pockets
in said walls shall be cleaned out and filled with solid masonry. Necessary repairs
shall be made to put the party wall in a safe and weathertight condition. This work
shall be done by the contractor at the expense of the property owner having said
demolition performed.
F. Where such demolition work is to be made and no immediate new construction is
intended at the site, the adjacent wall, whether of the party type or otherwise, shall
be left in an acceptable condition so far as appearance is concerned. In addition to
the repair of all joists, pockets and similar openings, the owner of the demolished
building will be required to remove all old plaster, wallpaper and other decorative
material, in addition to any loose wood, trim or other unrequired material, subject
to the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
G. During the demolition work, debris must be systematically removed from the site
and not allowed to pile up or cause any obstruction.
H. When a building to be demolished contains a cellar or basement, the contractor shall
remove all debris and organic material from the cellar or basement and then break
up and/or perforate the cellar floor. The bearing or foundation wall shall be
removed to a depth of at least 24 inches below the present grade or at least 24 inches
below any future grade to be established. The material resulting from the cellar or
foundation wall demolition may remain in the excavation, provided that the
material is crushed and compacted.
I. Where there is no cellar or basement, the bearing or foundation wall shall be
removed to a depth of at least 24 inches below any future grade to be established.
J. The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the demolition of any building or
structure in the Village regularly and shall be empowered to halt any such
demolition that, in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer, is not being
performed in a safe and sanitary manner.
K. Demolition of any building or structure shall be carried on during daylight hours
only on normal Village workdays.
L. Salvage materials that are a structural part of the building or structure shall not be
removed, except as part of the actual demolition of said building or structure.
§ 126-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 126-4
126:4
§ 126-5. Time limit on permit validity.
A demolition permit shall be valid for a period of 30 days. One additional extension of 10
working days may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer in the event that unusual
circumstances prevent completion of the work. No work shall continue after the time
limits stated above, except upon application and issuance of a renewal permit, subject to
the term and conditions of this chapter and any additional terms or conditions as may be
required by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Mayor.
§ 126-6. Restoration of site; procedure upon owner neglecting to restore.
§ 126-7. Notification of completion.
Immediately after said demolition, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the Village
Clerk and the property owner, in writing, that said demolition for which a permit was
issued has been completed.
§ 126-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation, punishable as follows: by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days or by a fine not exceeding $250, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The
continuation of an offense against the provisions of this chapter shall constitute, for each
day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
Removal of salvage shall be by the owner or salvage contractor only.
M. In-ground storage tanks on the demolition site shall be removed from the
demolition site.
N. No explosives may be used in connection with demolitions of buildings or
structures in the Village of Hamburg unless a special permit is first obtained from
the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg, issued after a public
hearing has been held by such Village Board of Trustees on the application for such
permit.
A. All cellars and basements of demolished buildings or structures shall be filled in
and made safe by filling such basement or cellar with noncombustible materials and
causing the surface of the location to be on a level with the surrounding premises.
No materials will be permitted as fill which may corrode, rot, decay or collapse. All
barricades, guardrails and temporary structures erected during demolition shall be
removed prior to completion approval by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. In the event that the owner refuses or neglects to fill in and make safe such cellar or
basement, or refuses or neglects to dismantle and remove any barricades, guardrails
or temporary structures erected during demolition, the Village of Hamburg may do
the necessary work involved, either with Village employees or outside contractors,
and the cost of making the location safe shall be assessed against such property and
shall be a lien thereon.
§ 126-4 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 126-9
126:5
§ 126-9. Severability.
The invalidity of any part, clause, section or provisions of this chapter shall not
invalidate any other part, clause, section or provision hereof.
§ 126-10. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately.
§ 126-9 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 126-10
126:6
Chapter 127
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 141.
Maintenance of unoccupied buildings — See Ch. 182.
§ 127-1. Identification of dangerous buildings.
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed
an unsafe and/or dangerous building:
§ 127-2. Inspection; determination; notice.
A. Those whose exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle
to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside
of the middle third of its base.
B. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which
the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe
for the purpose used.
C. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become
dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants
or the people of the Village.
D. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or
which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are
unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work
injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein.
E. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the
health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live
therein.
F. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having
insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication.
G. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure
members of the public or property.
H. Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the
health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the Village.
I. Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of Chapter 123, Building
Construction and Fire Prevention, or any other provisions of the Code of the Village
of Hamburg or the State of New York.
§ 126-10 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 127-2
127:1
§ 127-3. Service of notice.
§ 127-4. Contents of notice.
The notice shall contain the following:
A. When it shall appear to the Code Enforcement Officer that a building or structure is
in an unsafe condition or constitutes a danger to the public or to the inhabitants,
occupants or users thereof, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make, or cause
some other qualified official to make, a formal inspection of such building or
structure and shall report, in writing, to the Board of Trustees the findings and
recommendations with respect to the repair or demolition of said building or
structure.
B. Upon receipt of such report, the Board of Trustees shall consider same and then
determine by resolution if the report so warrants, in its opinion, that said building
or structure is unsafe and/or dangerous and order its demolition or its repair, and
further order that a notice shall be given to the persons or corporations or their agent
owning or occupying said building or structure in the manner hereafter provided.
A. The notice shall be directed to and served upon the owner or the owner's executors,
legal representatives, agents, lessees or any person having a vested or contingent
interest in the premises, as shown by the most recently completed assessment roll
of the Village of Hamburg, in either of the following manners:
(1) By personal service of a copy thereof upon one of the persons specified above;
or
(2) By mailing to such owner by registered mail, or a similar delivery service, a
copy of such notice directed to the owner at the last known address of the
person to be served and by securely affixing a copy of such notice upon the
building or structure at or near the principal entrance thereto.
A. A description of the premises sufficient to identify same and the particular building
or structure covered by the report.
B. A statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is found to be
unsafe or dangerous.
C. An order requiring the building to be made safe and secure or to be demolished.
D. An order requiring that the necessary repairs or improvements to make the building
or structure safe and secure, or the demolition of the building or structure, shall
commence within 20 days of the service of the notice and shall be completed within
60 days thereafter unless, for good cause shown, the Board of Trustees shall specify
a period of time other than 60 days for such completion.
E. A date, time and place for a hearing before the Board of Trustees in relation to such
dangerous or unsafe building or structure, which hearing shall be scheduled not less
than five business days from the date of the service of the notice.
F. A notification that, in the event of the neglect or refusal to comply with said order
to secure or demolish and remove the building or structure within the time specified
§ 127-2 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 127-4
127:2
§ 127-5. Failure to comply with notice.
In the event of the refusal or failure of the person(s) or entity(ies) so notified to comply
with said order of the Village Board after the hearing, if any, the Village Board shall
provide for the securing or the demolition and removal of such building or structure
either by Village employees or by contract. Except in emergency cases, as certified by
the Village Board, any contract for the securing or demolition and removal of a building
or structure shall be awarded through competitive bidding if required by state law.
§ 127-6. Notice to County Clerk.
A copy of said notice shall be filed in the office of the Erie County Clerk and indexed in
the same manner as a notice of pendency.
§ 127-7. Assessment of costs.
for such compliance, the Board of Trustees is authorized to provide for securing
of the building or structure or its demolition and removal and to assess against the
property all costs and expenses incurred by the Village of Hamburg in connection
with procedures to repair and make secure, or to demolish and remove, including
the cost of actually demolishing and actually removing said building or structure,
and any other costs or expenses incurred by the Village of Hamburg in connection
with any proceedings conducted under the authority of this chapter. This may be
accomplished by:
(1) The institution of a special proceeding to collect the costs; or
(2) Assessing said costs against the land and/or improvements being taxed on the
particular tax parcel on which the building or structure is located.
G. That, in addition to any other remedies, the owner could be liable for a fine of $250
for each week that the owner remains in violation of this chapter.
A. All costs incurred by the Village in enforcing this chapter shall be recoverable from
the owner of the premises. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Actual attorney fees and disbursements for services rendered with or without
the commencement of litigation;
(2) Actual engineering fees and disbursements, including the costs of the Village
Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) Actual costs of securing, demolishing, removing or repairing the building or
structure deemed dangerous or unsafe;
(4) Costs of serving and/or publishing notices; and
(5) Costs of tax and/or title searches.
B. The costs incurred in enforcing this chapter as levied shall be added to the next
assessment roll for Village taxes against the tax parcel(s) which include the unsafe
or dangerous building or structure involved and shall be collected and enforced in
§ 127-4 BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS § 127-7
127:3
§ 127-8. Emergencies.
If the Superintendent of Public Works and the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine
that the structure is in such condition that there is an actual immediate danger of its
falling or collapsing so as to endanger life and property, the Code Enforcement Officer
may forthwith cause the necessary work to be done, including demolition, to render
said building or structure temporarily safe, whether or not the procedure prescribed in
this chapter has been instituted or not. Under such circumstances, the Superintendent of
Public Works or Code Enforcement Officer may require all occupants or tenants of the
structure or building to vacate same forthwith, and, when necessary for the public safety,
the Superintendent of Public Works or Building Inspector may temporarily close and
barricade sidewalks, streets, adjoining buildings or structures and prohibit the same from
being used until the dangerous condition has been removed. The costs of such action
shall be recovered as provided in this chapter.
§ 127-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons who shall violate any provisions of this chapter or commit
unauthorized removal of notices or interference with officials shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 15 days, or both. Each week the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
the same manner as other taxes for the parcel(s).
C. In addition to any other remedies herein, the Village may commence a special
proceeding under Article 4 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules in a court of
competent jurisdiction to collect the costs incurred by the Village in enforcing this
chapter. Should the Village recover and be paid said costs through such a
proceeding (and after costs have been added to the assessment rolls), the assessment
roll and tax records shall be adjusted accordingly to properly credit amounts so paid
and recovered.
§ 127-7 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 127-9
127:4
Chapter 129
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 129-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING — The principal building or buildings on each lot, and shall not be deemed
to include any minor building.
§ 129-2. Determination of buildings to be numbered.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to decide which building or buildings on
any particular lot shall be numbered.
§ 129-3. Display required.
It shall be the duty of every owner of a building in the Village of Hamburg to cause to
be displayed thereon the street number of said building and at all times to maintain such
number in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 129-4. Size and display of numbers.
§ 129-5. Display of other numbers prohibited.
Each separate building or dwelling shall be assigned a separate distinguishing number
by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg in conformity with a uniform
numbering system encompassing the entire village. The display of any house number
A. The figure or figures comprising the number to be displayed on a building shall be
at least three inches in height and shall be placed on the front of said building in a
prominent and conspicuous place and in such manner as to be plainly legible from
the center of the street at all times between sunrise and sunset. The color of said
figures shall be reflective in nature and in sharp contrast to the color of their
background; provided, however, that, so far as the purpose or intent of this chapter
is concerned, the front of a building shall be construed as that side of the building
which faces the street on which the number or numbers of such building or premises
have been allotted and that the number or numbers shall be displayed on such side
of such building or premises.
B. The numbers shall be so placed so that they will not be obstructed by trees,
shrubbery, porches or other extensions of the building.
C. Wherever practicable, said number shall be placed near some light or source of
illumination so that it may be readily seen at night.
D. Where the building upon which the number is to be displayed is more than 75 feet
from the edge of the right-of-way, whether improved or not, of the street or road
serving the building, the number shall, in addition to the other requirements of this
chapter, be displayed on a sign readily visible from the road or street and in no event
further back than 25 feet from said road or street right-of-way.
§ 127-9 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 129-5
129:1
other than the number assigned by the village is expressly prohibited.
§ 129-6. Procedure on noncompliance.
§ 129-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15
days, or both.
A. Noncompliance deemed a violation. Any person, corporation, partnership or other
entity owning a building within the Village of Hamburg refusing or neglecting, for
60 days after notice from the Building Inspector, to place the proper designated
number on said building shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
B. Service of notice. The notice provided for in Subsection A may be given by
personal service or by mailing a copy thereof to the last known address of the
owner.
C. Numbering of building by village. In the event of the neglect or refusal of any
owner, after notice to cause said building to be properly numbered, the
Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Hamburg, upon being advised by
the Building Inspector, may cause said building to be properly numbered.
D. Report; assessment of costs. The Superintendent of Public Works shall report the
cost of numbering said building to the Board of Trustees, and such Board shall
order the Assessor to assess the cost of the same upon such premises, and the
Assessor shall include the same in the next assessment role.
§ 129-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 129-7
129:2
Chapter 132
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
§ 132-1. Burning prohibited; exception.
§ 132-2. Penalties for offenses.33
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by a
term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
A. No person shall burn within the village any rubbish or any other material of any
kind or nature which shall give rise to unwholesome, offensive or deleterious odors,
gas or smoke.
B. It is not intended that the provisions of this section forbid the igniting or burning of
cooking fires in standard outside barbecues, fireplaces or grills, provided that such
fires are properly supervised.
33. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 129-7 BURNING, OUTDOOR § 132-2
132:1

Chapter 141
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
§ 132-2 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 132-2
141:1

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 4-6-1970 as Ch. 6 of the 1970 Code]
§ 141-1. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 141-2. Electrical inspectors.34
The Chief Inspector and each of the duly appointed inspectors of the New York Board
of Fire Underwriters or other authorized agency are hereby authorized and designated
as representatives of the village to make inspections and reinspections of all electrical
installations heretofore and hereafter described and to approve or disapprove the same.
In no event, however, will the cost or expense of such inspections and reinspections be a
charge against the village.
§ 141-3. Duties of inspector.
§ 141-4. Violations; penalties for offenses.36
A. Report violations. It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to report in writing
to the Building Inspector all violations or deviations from or omissions of the
electrical provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and of all local laws, ordinances and the Building Code as referred to in this
chapter insofar as any of the same apply to electrical wiring.35
B. Inspections; reinspections. The inspector shall make inspections and reinspections
of electrical installations in and on properties in the village upon the written request
of an authorized official of the village or as herein provided. The inspector is
authorized to make inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring, installations,
devices, appliances and equipment in or on properties within the village where the
inspector deems it necessary for the protection of life and property. In the event of
an emergency, it is the duty of the inspector to make electrical inspections upon the
oral request of an official or officer of the village.
C. Written reports. It shall be the duty of the inspector to furnish written reports to the
Building Inspector of the village and owners and/or lessees of property where
defective electrical installations and equipment are found upon inspection.
D. Certificate of compliance. The electrical inspector shall authorize the issuing of a
certificate of compliance only when electrical installations and equipment are in
conformity with this chapter. The electrical inspector shall direct that a copy of the
certificate of compliance be sent to the village to the attention of the Building
Inspector.
A. Installations, alterations. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
34. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
35. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
36. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 141-1 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 141-4
141:3
install, or cause to be installed, or to alter electrical wiring for light, heat or power
in or on properties of the village until an application for inspection has been filed
with the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other authorized agency.
B. Connections. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to connect or cause
to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties for light, heat or power to any
source of electrical energy supply prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate or
a certificate of compliance by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other
authorized agency.
C. Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
maximum fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or
both.
§ 141-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 141-4
141:4
ARTICLE II
Standards
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 141-5. Controlling provisions.
In addition to the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, the National Electric Code will be the controlling provisions for
electrical standards in the Village of Hamburg. Copies of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code and the National Electric Code are on file and
available for review in the office of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 141-5 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 141-5
141:5

Chapter 146
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 146-1. Findings; purpose; objectives.
A. The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg finds that the potential
and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents
of the Village of Hamburg and that such damages may include: destruction or loss
of private and public housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and
privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize the
threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set
forth, this chapter is adopted.
B. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas, by provisions designed to:
(1) Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water
or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood
heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such
uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase
erosion or flood damages;
(5) Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
(6) Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
C. Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are:
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges, located in areas of
special flood hazard;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
§ 141-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-1
146:1
§ 146-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this
chapter its most reasonable application.
100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same meaning as "base flood."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure used solely for parking (two-car detached
garages or smaller) or limited storage, representing a minimal investment of not more
than 10% of the value of the primary structure, and which may not be used for human
habitation.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), with a 1% or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average annual depth of one feet to three feet, where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area
may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30.
It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or "100-year floodplain." For
purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in
meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18 inches or
more in height, which is used to service the underside of the lowest elevated floor.
The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete
or other material, must be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The
enclosed crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization of
hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
blight areas;
(7) To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special
flood hazard; and
(8) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 146-1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 146-2
146:2
paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency that
administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as part of a
riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates a regulatory
floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and determination of
the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the
areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are
provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C,
X, or D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in
Zone V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water; and
(1)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building
during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
(2)
A.
In the case of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
B.
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area
is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
C.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
A.
§ 146-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-2
146:3
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacturing, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE—The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance
with its provisions. This person is often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement
source.
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore
of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused
by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in flooding as defined in Subsection A(1) above.
B.
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained
by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
(1)
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
D.
§ 146-2 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 146-2
146:4
Officer, or employee of an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement
or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of
this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term does not
include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical
Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION—Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the
community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND—That at least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height as
determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study
or by other agencies as provided in § 146-4C(2) of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new construction
and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement is within 180 days after the date of issuance. The "actual start of
construction" means the first placement of permanent construction of a building
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings,
installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 146-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-2
146:5
include land preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory buildings
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building.
For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed
50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market
value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. The term
includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits
construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with the community's floodplain management regulations.
§ 146-3. General provisions.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure."
B.
A. Land to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special
flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Village of Hamburg.
B. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
(1) The areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(a) Flood Insurance Rate Maps: 36029C0476H, 36029C0477H,
36029C0478H, 36029C0479H, whose effective date is June 7, 2019, and
any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas
under our community's jurisdiction.
(b) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study, Erie
County, New York (All Jurisdictions)," dated June 7, 2019.
(2) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this
§ 146-2 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 146-3
146:6
§ 146-4. Development permits.
chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at: Town of
Hamburg, Town Hall, Building/Code Enforcement Department, 6100 South
Park Avenue, Hamburg, New York 14075.
C. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
(1) This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program
through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for
the purpose of flood damage prevention.
(2) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher
standards, shall govern.
D. Severability. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not
invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
E. Penalties for noncompliance. No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall
hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall
be excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this chapter by
failure to comply with any of its requirements, including infractions of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall
constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250
or imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall
be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village
of Hamburg from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy
an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements of this
chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an
approved variance under § 146-6 will be declared noncompliant, and notification
will be sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
F. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific
and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the Village of Hamburg, any officer or employee thereof, or
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. Designation of local administrator. The Town of Hamburg Supervising Code
Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed local administrator to administer and
§ 146-3 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-4
146:7
implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development permits in
accordance with its provisions.
B. The floodplain development permit.
(1) A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction and
other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard in this
community for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased flood
hazards and ensuring that new development is constructed in a manner that
minimizes its exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any
development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 146-3B, without a valid floodplain
development permit. Application for a permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the local administrator and may include, but not be limited to:
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, and showing: the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures; fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing.
(2) Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $50 and $0.02 per square foot. In
addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the Town of
Hamburg for any additional costs necessary for review, inspection and
approval of this project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no
more than $500 to cover these additional costs.
(3) Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following
information, as appropriate. Additional information may be required on the
permit application form.
(a) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation,
certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
(b) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built floodproofed
elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
(c) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 146-5B(3), Utilities.
(d) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria
in § 146-5D, Nonresidential structures.
(e) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
§ 146-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 146-4
146:8
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that
the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater conveyance
than the original stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps,
computations or other material required by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the documents enumerated in
§ 146-3B, when notified by the local administrator and must pay any fees
or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must
also provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or
relocated stream segment will be maintained.
(f) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether the proposed development
to be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
(g) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five acres.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. Duties of the local
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the following
permit application review before issuing a floodplain development permit:
(a) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 146-4B(3), Application for a permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(b) Review subdivision and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks, to determine whether proposed building sites
will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is
located in an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall meet the applicable standards of § 146-5,
General standards, and, in particular, § 146-5A(1), Subdivision
proposals.
(c) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special flood
hazard may result in physical damage to any other property (e.g., stream
bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local administrator may
require the applicant to submit additional technical analyses and data
necessary to complete the determination. If the proposed development
may result in physical damage to any other property or fails to meet the
requirements of § 146-5, General standards, no permit shall be issued.
The applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(d) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by state or
federal law.
§ 146-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-4
146:9
(2) Use of other flood data.
(a) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated areas
of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation data (these areas
are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a floodway, the
local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, including data developed pursuant to § 146-4B(1)(g), as criteria
for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other
proposed development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(b) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local administrator
may use flood information from any other authoritative source, such as
historical data, to establish flood elevations within the areas of special
flood hazard, for the purposes of this chapter.
(c) When an area of special flood hazard, base flood elevation, and/or
floodway data are available from a federal state or other authoritative
source, but differ from the data in the documents enumerated in
§ 146-3B, the local administrator may reasonably utilize the other flood
information to enforce more-restrictive development standards.
(3) Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(a) Provide notification to adjacent municipalities that may be affected and
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation prior to
permitting any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to the Regional Administrator, Region II,
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(b) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(4) Construction stage.
(a) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion of
floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure, the local
administrator shall obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation to
mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same. For manufactured homes, the permit holder shall
submit the certificate of elevation upon placement of the structure on the
site. A certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless
it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(b) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator
§ 146-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 146-4
146:10
shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to
issue a stop-work order for the project unless immediately corrected.
(5) Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the
period of construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions
and enable said inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development permit and/
or any variance provisions.
(6) Stop-work orders.
(a) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the
violator to the penalties described in § 146-3E of this chapter.
(b) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant with the
provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the development
permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in § 146-3E of this chapter.
(7) Certificate of compliance.
(a) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents enumerated
in § 146-3B, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter
created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or
enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate of compliance has been
issued by the local administrator stating that the building or land
conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(b) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local administrator
upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood
hazard.
(c) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections conducted
as prescribed in § 146-4C(5), Inspections, and/or any certified elevations,
hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or encroachment
analyses which may have been required as a condition of the approved
permit.
(8) Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain, and make
available for inspection, copies of the following:
(a) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(b) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures required
pursuant to §§ 146-4C(4)(a) and (b), and whether or not the structures
contain a basement;
(c) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 146-4C(4)(a), and
§ 146-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-4
146:11
§ 146-5. General standards.
whether the structures contain a basement;
(d) Variances issued pursuant to § 146-6, Variance procedure; and
(e) Notices required under § 146-4C(3), Alteration of watercourses.
A. General standards. The following standards apply to new development, including
new and substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 146-3B:
(1) Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new subdivision
proposals and other proposed development in areas of special flood hazard
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks
and subdivisions):
(a) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; and
(c) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
(2) Encroachments.
(a) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
[1] The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any location; or
[2] The Village of Hamburg agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision,
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all necessary
data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village of Hamburg
for all fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Village of Hamburg for all costs related to the final
map revision.
(b) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood Boundary
and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in
§ 146-3B, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development in the floodway (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
[1] A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
demonstrates, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed
in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such an
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during
§ 146-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 146-5
146:12
occurrence of the base flood; or
[2] The Village of Hamburg agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and floodway
revision, FEMA approval is received, and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village of
Hamburg for all fees and other costs in relation to the application.
The applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Village of Hamburg for all costs related to the final
map revisions.
(c) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, if any development is found to increase or decrease
base flood elevations, the Village of Hamburg shall, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, notify FEMA and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation of the changes by submitting technical or
scientific data in accordance with standard engineering practice.
B. Standards for all structures. The following standards apply to new development,
including new and substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood
hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 146-3B:
(1) Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures in areas
of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(b) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(c) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within Zones
A1-A30, AE, AO or A, new and substantially improved structures shall
have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor, that are usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings of each enclosed area having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot above the
§ 146-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-5
146:13
lowest adjacent finished grade; and
[3] Openings not less than three inches in any direction.
[4] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are
considered basements and are not permitted.
(3) Utilities.
(a) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating, airconditioning,
plumbing connections, and other service equipment shall be
located at least two feet above the base flood elevation, or at least three
feet above the highest adjacent grade in a Zone A without an available
base flood elevation, or be designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and
outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated or designed
to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the components
unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of the electrical part of
the Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of New
York State for location of such items in wet locations.
(b) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer and
storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below the base
flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow valves or other
automatic backflow devices that are installed in each discharge line
passing through a building's exterior wall.
(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) Storage tanks.
(a) Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and
lateral movement during conditions of the base flood.
(b) Aboveground tanks shall be:
[1] Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during
conditions of the base flood; or
[2] Installed at or above the base flood elevation as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 146-3B plus two feet.
C. Residential structures.
(1) Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
§ 146-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 146-5
146:14
requirements in § 146-5A(1), Subdivision proposals, and § 146-5A(2),
Encroachments, and § 146-5B, Standards for all structures:
(a) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
(b) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
(c) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on
the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 146-3B plus
two feet (at least three feet if no depth number is specified).
(d) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on slopes.
D. Nonresidential structures. The following standards apply to new and substantially
improved commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 146-5A(1), Subdivision
proposals, and § 146-5A(2), Encroachments, and § 146-5B, Standards for all
structures:
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements of any
nonresidential structure shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above
two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet above
the base flood elevation, including attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components located below the base flood level must be capable
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy.
(2) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on
the community's FIRM plus two feet (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely
floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing standard specified in
§ 146-5D(1)(b).
§ 146-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-5
146:15
(3) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or other certification shall
be provided to the local administrator that certifies the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of § 146-5D(1)(b), including the specific elevation (in relation
to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on slopes.
(5) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the lowest
floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
E. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. The following standards, in
addition to the standards in § 146-5A, General standards, and § 146-5B, Standards
for all structures, apply, as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard to
manufactured homes and to recreational vehicles which are located in areas of
special flood hazard:
(1) Recreational vehicles.
(a) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH
shall either:
[1] Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
[2] Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
[3] Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 146-5E(2), (3)
and (4).
(b) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
(2) A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.
(3) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that the
bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement.
(4) Within Zone AO, the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis
§ 146-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 146-5
146:16
§ 146-6. Variance procedure.
shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 146-3B
plus two feet (at least three feet if no depth number is specified).
F. Accessory structures, including detached garages. The following standards apply to
new and substantially improved accessory structures, including detached garages,
in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in § 146-3B:
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE, AO, AH, and A, accessory structures must meet
the standards of § 146-5B(1), Anchoring,
(2) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, areas below two feet above the base flood elevation shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) Within Zone AO and Zone A, if base flood elevation data are not available,
areas below three feet above the highest adjacent grade shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(4) Structures must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters in
accordance with § 146-5B(2)(c).
(5) Utilities must meet the requirements of § 146-5B(3), Utilities.
A. Appeals Board.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Hamburg shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
(2) The Village Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Village Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Village Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
§ 146-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-6
146:17
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are
not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
Floodplain Management Program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of flooding;
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including search and rescue operations, maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 146-6A(4) and the purposes of this
chapter, the Village Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, provided that the items in § 146-6A(4)(a) through (l) have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures
upon determination that:
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an "historic structure"; and
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
§ 146-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 146-6
146:18
and design of the structure.
(3) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided that:
(a) The criteria of Subsection B(1), (4), (5) and (6) of this section are met;
and
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threat to
public safety.
(4) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(6) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(7) Notification.
(a) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
over the signature of a community official that:
[1] The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
[2] Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property.
(b) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 146-4C(8) of this chapter.
§ 146-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 146-6
146:19

Chapter 150
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 114.
§ 150-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law of the Village of Hamburg."
§ 150-2. Definitions.
§ 150-3. Authorization to conduct games.38
Authorized organizations may, upon the obtainment of a license from the Clerk of the
Village, conduct games of chance within the Village of Hamburg as provided in Article
9-A of the General Municipal Law and as provided further in this chapter. Such games
of chance shall be conducted in accordance with the general state law and with the rules
and regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and this chapter. An
organization may file with the Village Clerk a summary application, pursuant to General
Municipal Law § 190, subdivision 3.
§ 150-4. Restrictions.39
Restrictions upon the conduct of games of chance within the village shall be as set forth
in General Municipal Law § 189.
§ 150-5. Conduct of games on Sunday.
Games of chance on the first day of the week, commonly known as "Sunday," may be
conducted pursuant to this chapter and appropriate statute and regulation.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CLERK — The Clerk-Treasurer of the Village.
VILLAGE — Village of Hamburg.
B. All of the terms defined in § 186 of the General Municipal Law shall be
incorporated herein.37
37. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
38. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 146-6 GAMES OF CHANCE § 150-6
150:1
§ 150-6. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police of the village shall exercise control over and supervision of all games
of chance conducted under an appropriately issued license. Such officer shall have all
those powers and duties set forth in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 150-7. Applicability.
Except as herein otherwise provided, the provisions of Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law shall apply to the licensing and conduct of games of chance.
§ 150-8. Penalties for offenses.40
The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor with a maximum fine of $1,000 or imprisonment up to one year, or both.
40. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 150-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 150-8
150:2
Chapter 154
INSURANCE
§ 150-8 INSURANCE § 150-8
154:1

ARTICLE I
Fire Liens
[Adopted 3-13-1978 by L.L. No. 3-1978]
§ 154-1. Adoption of procedures.41
The Village of Hamburg hereby adopts the procedures set forth by Chapter 738 of the
Laws of 1977, General Municipal Law § 22 and Insurance Law §§ 331 and 3410 in order
to obtain liens on fire insurance proceeds deriving from real property within the village
as therein defined.
§ 154-2. Release of lien.
In any case where the village has obtained a lien in its favor under the provisions of
this chapter, the General Municipal Law and the Insurance Law, the village may release
such lien or return to the owner of the real property any proceeds collected by the village
by virtue of such lien on the written agreement of the insured to restore the affected
premises to the same or improved condition that it was in prior to the time the lien arose.
In granting such release or refund, the village may impose such conditions as may be
deemed appropriate to guarantee performance of such obligation to restore. In any event,
if such restoration is completed, the village shall release such lien or refund the proceeds
as may be appropriate.
§ 154-3. Disposition of funds.
Amounts realized from liens arising hereunder shall be credited to the general fund of
the village.
41. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 154-1 INSURANCE § 154-3
154:3

Chapter 159
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 175. Taxicab license — See Ch. 216.
§ 154-3 LICENSING § 154-3
159:1

ARTICLE I
Business Licenses
[Adopted 4-6-1970 as Art. I of Ch. 10 of the 1970 Code]
§ 159-1. License required. [Amended 3-15-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982]
No person shall carry on any of the trades, occupations or businesses or install, operate
or maintain any of the devices or machines without first procuring a license for the same
and paying the fee hereinafter prescribed for same.
§ 159-2. Application.
Application shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk-Treasurer for the issuance of
a license to carry on a particular trade, occupation or business, which application shall
state in detail the particular trade, occupation or business for which a license is desired,
the location within the village of the building wherein such trade, occupation or business
is to be carried on or, if there be no such building within the village, then the particular
locality within which it is desired to carry on or engage in said trade, occupation or
business and the name of the person applying for such license, specifying the residence
of such person or the residence of the persons comprising the firm or the principal place
of business of the corporation making the application.
§ 159-3. Businesses, trades, occupations specified. [Amended 3-15-1976 by L.L.
6-1976; 3-15-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Fees for licenses required pursuant to § 159-1 shall be as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.42
§ 159-4. Definitions. [Amended 3-15-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982]
For purposes of §§ 159-1 through 159-8, the following definitions shall apply:
CURRENCY-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — A mechanical, electric or
electronic device used or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a game by the
insertion or placement of currency or by paying currency to have it activated.
CURRENCY-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE PARLOR — A building, place or
establishment containing six or more currency-operated amusement devices, including
devices in operable and in inoperable condition.
§ 159-5. Transfer or assignment.
Any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be transferred or
assigned only upon approval of such transfer or assignment by the Board of Trustees.
§ 159-6. Expiration; new license required; penalty for failure to obtain. [Amended
5-3-1971; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
A. Unless otherwise specified all licenses shall expire per the terms set forth in the
license.
42. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in the Appendix of this Code.
§ 159-1 LICENSING § 159-6
159:3
§ 159-7. License to be exhibited upon demand.
Every person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall keep and upon demand
of any police officer or other lawful authority produce the license issued to him or her.
§ 159-8. Revocation. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Board of Trustees for proper cause.
Upon such revocation, the licensee shall have five days to request a hearing before the
Board of Trustees with regard to the same.
§ 159-9. Penalties for offenses. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum
fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
B. If a business, trade or occupation for which a license has been issued shall be
continued after the expiration of said license, a new license for such business, trade
or occupation must be obtained and the prescribed fee therefor paid by July 1 of the
license year. If such license shall not be obtained and paid for by December 31 of
the license year, the specified license fee shall be added to the property tax role.
The specified fee must be paid before a license shall be issued for such business,
trade or occupation.43 [Amended 8-18-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
43. Editor's Note: Former § 10-6, dealing with the issuance and expiration of junk dealers' licenses, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 3-15-1976 by L.L. No. 6-1976.
§ 159-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 159-9
159:4
Chapter 161
MOBILE FOOD VENDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 185. Sidewalk cafes and outdoor dining — See Ch. 190.
§ 161-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the Village of Hamburg and its residents.
§ 161-2. Definitions.
The following phrases shall have the meanings set forth:
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE — A mobile food unit, either self-powered or towed, other
than a work site concession vehicle, from which prepared food is offered for sale to the
public.
MOBILE FOOD VENDING—The act of vending prepared food through the utilization
of a mobile food vehicle.
PRIVATE CATERED EVENT — Mobile food vending limited to serving the owners,
occupants and guests of just a single- or two-family dwelling as defined in § 250-6
of this Code, a school, club, church, professional office, studio, fire station, medical
building, nursing home, or any building offering personal services as defined in § 250-6,
and where the owner and/or occupants have given their written permission for the event.
RESTAURANT — A building where meals are served to customers.
WORK SITE CONCESSION VEHICLE — A motor vehicle with a maximum gross
weight as reflected upon its registration of not more than 8,600 pounds in which food is
not cooked, baked, grilled, broiled or fried.
§ 161-3. Permit required.
No mobile food vehicle shall be used for mobile food vending unless a permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall first have been obtained, which permit
shall at all times be displayed in a conspicuous location that is visible from the outside
of the vehicle.
§ 161-4. Permit application.
The owner of a mobile food vehicle who wishes to engage in mobile food vending
within the Village of Hamburg shall make a written application to the Village Clerk for
one or more mobile food vehicle permits on a form provided by the Village Clerk. The
application for such permit(s) shall be signed and dated by the owner or by a corporate
officer of the owner, shall identify the signor and shall include the following:
§ 159-9 MOBILE FOOD VENDING § 161-4
161:1
§ 161-5. Fees.
As to each permit application, the fee and renewal fee for a mobile food vending permit
shall be $150 for the first mobile food vehicle, and $50 for each additional mobile food
vehicle.
§ 161-6. Permit term and restrictions.
§ 161-7. Permit revocation.
§ 161-8. Regulations.
A. Name, address and telephone number of each owner of the mobile food vehicle and
in the case of the corporate owner, the name, address and telephone number of each
corporate officer.
B. As to each mobile food vehicle for which a permit is requested, a valid and current
Erie County Department of Health certification of a successful health inspection as
to both the vehicle to be used and the facility where the food is prepared.
C. As to each self-powered mobile food vehicle for which a permit is requested, a valid
insurance certificate, New York State Department of Motor Vehicles registration,
and certificate of inspection.
D. As to each mobile food vehicle for which a permit is requested, a valid and current
certification of a successful fire inspection conducted within the prior 12 months by
the County of Erie, by a municipality or fire department within the County of Erie,
or by the Village of Hamburg Fire Inspector.
E. A signed statement that the vendor shall indemnify and hold harmless the Village
and its officers and employees for any claims for damages to property or injury to
persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on or under the terms of
the permit.
A. The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg retains the right, for good
cause, to revoke any permit.
B. Each mobile food vending permit shall expire on April 1 of every year.
C. The permit shall not be transferrable without the written approval of the Village of
Hamburg.
A. The Village Clerk may, upon any of the following causes, revoke any permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter:
(1) There has been a development or a discovery that the information provided in
the permit application is incorrect, untrue, false, or misleading.
(2) The Erie County Commissioner of Health has advised that the vendor has
violated a provision of law or the sanitary code of the County of Erie.
B. Should the Village Clerk revoke the permit pursuant to this chapter, the Clerk shall
notify the Village Board and the Village Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 161-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 161-8
161:2
A. It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to conduct business in a location
within 100 feet of the primary entrance of a restaurant that is open to the public.
This requirement shall be waived if written permission for the mobile food vending
operation is first obtained from the owner of the restaurant.
B. In the Central Business District, Commercial District, Professional Office District,
Light Industrial District and Industrial District, it shall be unlawful for a mobile
food vendor to conduct business at a single location within a public right-of-way
for duration exceeding three hours.
C. It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to conduct business at a single location
upon a public right-of-way within the Residential 1, Residential 2, and Residential
3 Zoning District for a duration exceeding 20 minutes, except at the time and place
of a block party approved by the Village of Hamburg Board of Trustees or for a
private catered event. In the case of a block party approved by the Village of
Hamburg Board of Trustees, it shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to
conduct business at single location upon a public right-of-way within the
Residential 1, Residential 2 or Residential 3 Zoning Districts for a duration
exceeding the duration of the block party. In the case of a private catered event, it
shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to conduct business at a single location
upon a public right-of-way within the Residential 1, Residential 2 or Residential 3
Zoning Districts for a duration of more than two hours or as permitted by § 161-8M
of this chapter, whichever is less.
D. Mobile food vendors must comply with all applicable federal, state and local
statutes and ordinances.
E. All signage associated with the mobile food vendor must be permanently affixed to
the mobile food vehicle. Accessory signage placed outside or around the mobile
food vehicle is prohibited.
F. All mobile food vendors must provide trash receptacles of sufficient capacity to
contain all trash and waste generated in association with the business of the mobile
food vendor. All waste and trash shall be placed in the trash receptacles. All trash,
waste, litter and debris shall be removed from the site of the vending operation at
the end of each daily operation.
G. It shall be unlawful to discharge liquid waste, fats, oils or grease anywhere in the
Village of Hamburg. Such discharges shall be held in appropriate containers and
then disposed m a legally permissible manner.
H. Mobile food vendors shall not conduct operation from a site that contains a gasoline
service.
I. When parked on the public right-of-way, mobile food vendors shall not dispense
products from the street side of the mobile food vehicle.
J. A self-powered mobile food vehicle shall not be operated in reverse in order to
attempt or make a sale.
K. Mobile food vending shall not be conducted within 60 feet of an intersection of two
or more public highways/roads.
§ 161-8 MOBILE FOOD VENDING § 161-8
161:3
§ 161-9. Enforcement.
§ 161-10. Penalties for offenses.
L. It shall be unlawful for any mobile food vendor to conduct business in a location
within 500 feet of the boundary line of any fair, carnival, circus, festival, special
event or civic event that is licensed and/or approved by the Village of Hamburg,
except when the vendor has obtained a permit to so operate from the Village Clerk
of the Village of Hamburg, with notice to the operator of the fair, carnival, circus,
festival, special event or civic event. Permission may be conditioned upon the
payment of fees charged other vendors with respect to said event.
M. Other than as permitted by § 161-8C with respect to a block party approved by the
Village of Hamburg Board of Trustees, mobile food vending shall not be conducted
before 7:00 a.m. or after 11:00·p.m. In Residential 1 and/or Residential 2 and/or
Residential 3 Zoning Districts, mobile food vending shall not be conducted before
9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
A. A mobile food vehicle, while within the Village of Hamburg, may be inspected at
any time for violations of this chapter by the Village of Hamburg Police
Department, any Health Inspector with jurisdiction within the Village of Hamburg,
and the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Hamburg.
B. Enforcement of the mobile food vending rules and regulations set forth in this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the Village of Hamburg Police Department
and/or the Village of Hamburg Code Enforcement Officer. The Village of Hamburg
Police Department and/or the Village of Hamburg Code Enforcement Officer shall
administer this chapter and be authorized to issue appearance tickets for any
violations of this chapter.
A. The penalty for engaging in mobile food vending without properly obtaining and/
or displaying a permit shall be $250 for the initial offense within a twelve-month
period and $1,000 for every subsequent offense within said twelve-month period.
A permit shall be revoked after the second offense. One who is found guilty more
than once within a twelve-month period of engaging in mobile food vending
without properly obtaining a permit shall in addition to applicable fines be barred
from obtaining a permit for 24 months.
B. Except for violations of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law which shall
be prosecuted as such, penalties for all other violations of this chapter not
referenced in the preceding subsection shall be punishable by a minimum fine of
$250 or by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days or both.
§ 161-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 161-10
161:4
Chapter 164
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 109.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 171.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 175.
Picketing — See Ch. 179.
§ 161-10 NOISE § 161-10
164:1

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Definitions; General Prohibitions
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Hamburg Noise
Ordinance."
§ 164-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the public health, peace, welfare and good
order by suppressing the making, creation or maintenance of excessive, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their
time, place and use and which are detrimental to the environment. It is also the purpose
of this chapter to allow all residents of the village to coexist harmoniously in a manner
which is mutually respectful of the interests, rights and obligations of all persons.
§ 164-3. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the words and phrases used in this chapter
are defined as follows:
DAYTIME HOURS —The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., local time, on any
day.[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity or work necessary to protect persons or property from an
imminent exposure to danger.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — A sound of short duration, usually less than one second, and
of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
MOTOR VEHICLES — Includes but is not limited to automobiles, trucks, buses,
mopeds, minibikes and any other vehicles as defined by the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York, as it may be amended from time to time.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — The hours between 10:00 p.m., local time, on any day and
7:30 a.m. on the following day.
NOISE — A level of sound that is injurious or annoying or disturbing to be heard.
PERSON — Includes the singular and plural and also any individual; any property
owner and/or lessee; any firm; a corporation; a political subdivision; a government
agency, including any agency of the Village of Hamburg; an association or an
organization, including but not limited to officers, directors, employees, agents and/or
independent contractors thereof; or any legal entity whatsoever.
SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT — Any machine or device for the amplification
of the human voice, instrumental music or any other sound. "Sound-amplifying
equipment" shall not include standard automobile radios or tape recorders when used
and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which such automobile radio or tape
recorder is installed. As used in this chapter, "sound-amplifying equipment" shall not
include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning
devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes or authorized fire horns or
§ 164-1 NOISE § 164-3
164:3
other authorized emergency alarms.
§ 164-4. Unreasonable noise prohibited.
A. No person shall intentionally cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm or
recklessly create a risk thereof by making unreasonable noise or by causing
unreasonable noise to be made.
B. For the purpose of implementing and enforcing the standard set forth in Subsection
A of this section, "unreasonable noise" shall mean any sound created or caused to
be created by any person which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of the public or which causes injury to
animal life or damage to property or business. Factors to be considered in
determining whether unreasonable noise exists in a given situation include but are
not limited to any or all of the following:
(1) The intensity of the noise.
(2) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
(3) Whether the origin of the noise is associated with nature or human-made
activity.
(4) The intensity of the background noise, if any.
(5) The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities.
(6) The nature and the zoning district of the area within which the noise emanates
and of the area within 500 feet of the source of the sound.
(7) The time of the day or night the noise occurs.
(8) The time duration of the noise.
(9) Whether the sound source is temporary.
(10) Whether the noise is continuous or impulsive.
(11) The volume of the noise.
(12) The existence of complaints concerning the noise from persons living or
working in different places or premises who are affected by the noise.
C. This section shall not be interpreted to prevent the issuance of permits pursuant to
§ 164-14 that will authorize particular sound sources.
§ 164-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 164-4
164:4
ARTICLE II
Special Noise Sources
§ 164-5. Purpose of article.
The provisions of this Article II complement and supplement the other provisions of this
chapter and shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with and in addition to and not
in lieu of those other provisions. The provisions of this article shall not be interpreted to
prevent the issuance of permits pursuant to § 164-14 that will authorize particular sound
sources.
§ 164-6. Radios, television sets and similar sound-amplifying devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person anywhere in the village to use or to operate any
radio or receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, any other machine
or device for the producing or reproducing of sound or any other sound-amplifying
equipment in a loud, annoying or offensive manner such that noise from the device
interferes with the comfort, repose, health or safety of members of the public within any
building or, outside of a building, at a distance of 25 feet or more from the source of
such sound or interferes with the conversation of members of the public who are 25 feet
or more from the source of such sound.
§ 164-7. Parties and other social events.
§ 164-8. Hawkers and peddlers.44
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, promote or sell anything by outcry within
any area of the village zoned for residential uses. The provisions of this section shall
not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages
at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similar licensed public
entertainment events.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of a party or other social event that
occurs on any private or public property to allow that party or event to produce
noise in a loud, annoying or offensive manner such that noise from the party
interferes with the comfort, repose, health or safety of members of the public within
any building or, outside of a building, at a distance of 25 feet or more from the
source of such sound.
B. For the purposes of this section, a "person in charge of a party or other social event":
(1) That occurs on any public property shall include the person or persons who
obtained permission to utilize that property for that event.
(2) That occurs on private property shall include the person who owns the
premises involved and any adult person who lives in or on the premises
involved in such party or social event.
(3) Shall include the person who is listed on a permit granted pursuant to Article
III of this chapter with respect to such event.
44. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 175, Peddling and Soliciting.
§ 164-5 NOISE § 164-9
164:5
§ 164-9. Machinery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or repair any machinery, motor vehicle,
construction equipment or other equipment, pump, fan, air-conditioning apparatus or
similar mechanical device or to engage in any commercial or industrial activity in any
manner so as to create unreasonable noise as defined in § 164-4 of this chapter. In
making such determination with respect to the matters governed by this subsection,
additional factors to be considered shall include:
§ 164-10. Construction during nighttime hours.
§ 164-11. Applicability of article.
This article shall be applied in addition to § 164-4.
§ 164-12. Continuing noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue or cause to be made or continued
any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or sound that shall continue for more than three
cumulative minutes in any sixty-minute period and which shall exceed the permitted
noise levels specified in this chapter. Any designated official of the Village of Hamburg
may issue a verbal warning that the violation exists and of the penalties that may ensue.
A. The necessity of the work being done.
B. The ability of the creator of the noise to minimize or reduce the amount of noise
created or to otherwise minimize its adverse effects.
A. Except for the purposes specified in Subsection B, during nighttime hours it shall
be unlawful for any person within a residential zone or within 500 feet of a
residential zone to operate construction equipment (including but not limited to any
pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick or steam or electric hoist) or
perform any outside construction or repair work so as to create noise. Any
designated official of the Village of Hamburg shall give a verbal warning that the
violation exists and of the penalties that may result if the violation continues.
B. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit:
(1) Work of an emergency nature.
(2) Work of a domestic nature on buildings, structures or projects being
undertaken by a person(s) residing in such premises; provided that, if any
domestic power tool, including but not limited to mechanically powered saws,
sanders, grinders and lawn and garden tools used outdoors, is operated during
the nighttime hours, no person shall operate such machinery so as to cause
noise within a residential building or across a residential real property
boundary where such noise interferes with the comfort, repose, health or safety
of members of the public within any building or, outside of a building, at 25
feet or more from the source of the sound.
§ 164-9 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 164-13
164:6
§ 164-13. Horns and alarms.
This chapter shall not apply to fire horns or other alarms authorized by the Fire
Department or Police Department and operated in accord with that authorization.
§ 164-13 NOISE § 164-13
164:7

ARTICLE III
Permit Requirements; Penalties
§ 164-14. Permit procedures for certain activities.
A. Where a sound source is planned, installed or intended to be installed or modified
by any person in a manner that such source will create or is likely to create
unreasonable noise or otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
such person must secure a permit pursuant to this section.
B. Where any person uses or plans to use any sound-amplifying equipment in such a
way that such equipment is or will be heard outside of any building between 9:00
p.m. on any day and 7:30 a.m. on the next day, such person must secure a permit
under this section.
C. Where any person uses or plans to use a public-address system that will make sound
outside of a building, such person must secure a permit under this section.
D. The application for the permit shall provide the following information:
(1) The reasons for such usage, including a demonstration why it is desirable or
necessary that the sound source involved be authorized by a permit pursuant
to this section.
(2) Plans and specifications of the use.
(3) Noise-abatement and noise-control methods to be used with respect to the
sound source involved.
(4) The period of time during which the permit shall apply.
(5) The name of the person(s) who is responsible for ensuring that the activity
complies with any permit issued for it pursuant to this section.
(6) When the activity for which the permit is being sought is not a communitywide
or public event, that notification of the application for the permit has been
given to each person reasonably expected to be affected by the noise, the
content of such notification and the manner in which such notification has
been given. The notification shall state to whom the application is being made
and that any person objecting to the granting of such permit may contact the
individual to whom the application is being made to express his/her opposition
to the granting of the permit.
(7) That a copy of the application for the permit has been provided to the Chief of
Police.
E. The application shall be made to the Superintendent of Public Works in connection
with construction work on public rights-of-way or in parks; for all other
construction projects; and for any other events. The issuance of permits shall be
discretionary and shall be issued only where the responsible official determines that
such permit is reasonable and necessary and will allow an activity that is consistent
with the general purposes of this chapter, as stated in § 164-2, provided that no
permit shall be issued pursuant to this section for any sound source that will operate
§ 164-14 NOISE § 164-14
164:9
§ 164-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment; provided, however, that a person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter after having been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter
within the preceding three years shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or
by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment; and
further provided that any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter after
having been convicted two or more times of a violation of any provision of this chapter
within the preceding three years shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $750 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on any day. Any permit granted shall state
that the permit only applies to this chapter and that § 240.20, Disorderly conduct,
Subdivision 2, of the Penal Law of the State of New York provides that "a person
is guilty of disorderly conduct when, with intent to cause public inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm or recklessly creating a risk thereof, ... he makes unreasonable
noise."
F. In order to further the purposes of this chapter and to facilitate its implementation
and enforcement, the Superintendent of Public Works shall have authority to
impose such conditions as they determine are reasonable and necessary on permits
they issue pursuant to this section. Such conditions may govern factors which
include but are not limited to the time and location the involved sound source may
be utilized.
G. The Superintendent of Public Works shall provide the Chief of Police with a copy
of any permit issued pursuant to this section.
§ 164-14 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 164-15
164:10
Chapter 167
PARKS, GARDENS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Interference with village property — See Ch. 171.
§ 164-15 PARKS, GARDENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 164-15
167:1

ARTICLE I
Hours
[Adopted 6-1-1981 by L.L. No. 10-1981]
§ 167-1. Use of public parks; hours permitted.
§ 167-2. Prohibited activities. [Amended 10-21-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996]
§ 167-3. Penalties for offenses.48
Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum
A. Public parks owned or maintained by the Village of Hamburg shall be kept open
and available for public use from sunrise to sunset daily. [Amended 12-3-1990 by
L.L. No. 5-199045]
B. Except as hereinafter provided in Subsection C, no person shall enter, use, occupy
or remain in any such pubic park after sunset and before sunrise daily. [Amended
12-3-1990 by L.L. No. 5-199046]
C. This section shall not be construed to prohibit such entry, use or occupancy during
the actual conduct of a carnival, lawn fete, flea market, department inspection or
similar activity by a veterans' organization, volunteer fire department, charitable or
educational organization, provided that the same is being conducted with express
consent of the Board of Trustees of the village.
A. As per Chapter 105, Alcoholic Beverages, alcohol consumption is prohibited.47
B. Skating, biking, skateboarding, ball playing and horseplay is prohibited in the
following parks: Centennial Gardens (located at the corner of Main Street and
Buffalo Street) and Little Park (located on Buffalo Street, across from the Palace
Show). Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to $100 and/or
up to 15 days in jail, or both.
C. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BALL PLAYING — Any activity involving a ball of any kind or any activity
involving a hackey sack.
BIKING — Any activity involving a bicycle, tricycle, motorized bicycle or other
three-wheeled terrain vehicle.
HORSEPLAY — Rough, rowdy or boisterous play or behavior.
SKATEBOARDING — Any activity involving a skateboard.
SKATING — Any activity involving roller skates, roller blades or ice skates.
45. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
46. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
47. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
48. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-1 PARKS, GARDENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 167-3
167:3
fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 167-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 167-3
167:4
ARTICLE II
Golf
[Adopted 7-20-1992 by L.L. No. 3-1992]
§ 167-4. Golfing prohibited.
§ 167-5. Penalties for offenses.50
Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum
fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
A. Golfing in public parks, gardens, playgrounds and recreation facilities maintained
by the village is prohibited.49
B. For purposes of this section, "golfing" is defined as propelling a golf ball with a
golf club or other club, bat, stick or rod, and also throwing a golf ball by hand.
49. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
50. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-4 PARKS, GARDENS AND RECREATION AREAS § 167-5
167:5

Chapter 171
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 167.
§ 167-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 167-5
171:1

ARTICLE I
Injury to Property
[Adopted 4-6-1970 as § 12-5 of the 1970 Code; amended in its entirety at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 171-1. Interference with public and private property; landmarks.
§ 171-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by a
term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
A. No person shall willfully interfere with or injure any public or private structure,
planting, street, sidewalk, sign, lamp, lamppost or any property belonging to the
village or to any private person within said village.
B. No person shall willfully interfere with remove, injure, damage, deface or destroy
any landmark, monument, survey stake, stone or pipe heretofore or hereafter to be
placed or set or established by the Superintendent of Public Works or by the
direction of the Village Board.
§ 171-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 171-2
171:3

Chapter 175
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 159. Obstructions in streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 203, Art. II.
§ 171-2 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 171-2
175:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
§ 175-1. Title. [Amended 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Soliciting and Peddling Law."
§ 175-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulating itinerant merchandising in order
that the peace, health, safety, welfare and good order in the village and of its inhabitants
shall not be endangered or unduly disturbed.
§ 175-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A permanent building, store or depository
in which or where the person transacts business and deals in the goods, wares or
commodities he or she solicits or peddles in the ordinary and regular course of
business.[Amended 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-199851]
MERCHANDISING — The selling, bartering or trading of, or offering to sell, barter or
trade, any goods, wares, commodities or services.
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling as herein defined.[Added
10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
PEDDLING — [Added 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998] — The selling or offering
for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise for immediate delivery, which the person
selling or offering for sale carries with him in traveling or has in his possession or
control, from house to house, place of business to place of business or in any public street
or public place or by temporarily occupying a room, building or other premises therefor
within the Village of Hamburg, provided that the word "peddling" shall not apply:
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association and principal or agent thereof. 52
SOLICITING — The seeking, taking or accepting of contracts or orders for any goods,
wares or merchandise for future delivery, or for subscriptions, contributions or
donations, from house to house, place of business to place of business or in any public
street or public place in the Village of Hamburg, provided that the word "soliciting" shall
not apply:[Added 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998; amended 9-2-2003 by L.L. No.
2-2003]
To the seeking of or taking of orders by any manufacturer or producer for the
sale of bread or bakery products, milk or milk products, ice cream or ice cream
products, daily papers and/or any other person soliciting or selling recognized
A.
51. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed the former definition of "hawker and peddler," which immediately followed
this definition.
52. Editor's Note: The former definition of "temporary occupancy," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998.
§ 175-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 175-3
175:3
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting as hereinabove
defined.[Added 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
§ 175-4. License required. [Amended 9-2-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
All solicitors, peddlers, or any person merchandising any goods, wares, commodities
or service within the Village of Hamburg shall first obtain a license therefor from the
Clerk of the Village, unless such soliciting, peddling or merchandising is at the personal
request of the person solicited.
§ 175-5. Exemptions.
§ 175-6. Application for license.
products with routes that have been heretofore regularly established within the
Village of Hamburg.
To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers licensed under the
insurance laws of the State of New York for insurance purposes.
B.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any person soliciting at the express invitation of the person solicited or
serving an established customer.
(2) A wholesaler selling articles to dealers or merchants who have an established
place of business within the village.
(3) A child regularly attending any public or parochial or private school or a
representative of any established church maintaining a place of worship or a
member of a veterans organization or a member of a fraternal organization or
civic group. Any person coming within the provisions of this exemption shall
only solicit or peddle in connection with an authorized activity of the
organization of which such person is a member or the school which such
person attends. [Amended 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
B. This chapter shall not apply so as to interfere unlawfully with interstate commerce.
A. Every applicant for a license is required to submit to the Village Clerk a written
application supplying, under oath, the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The applicant's permanent home residence.
(3) The name and address of the firm represented, if any.
(4) The length of time for which the license is required. [Amended 10-19-1998
by L.L. No. 7-1998; 7-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(5) A description of the goods, wares or commodities to be offered for sale,
together with a true invoice of their amount, quality and value.
(6) The applicant's number of arrests or convictions for crimes and the nature
§ 175-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 175-6
175:4
§ 175-7. Grant of license.
Upon receipt of the application and of the license fee and if reasonably satisfied with
the applicant's qualifications, the Village Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant,
specifying the particular business authorized and the location wherein it may be
conducted. This license shall be nontransferable and shall be in the continuous
possession of the licensee while engaged in the business licensed. The license shall be
produced upon the demand of any village official or prospective buyer.
§ 175-7.1. Term of license; expiration. [Added 7-1-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999;
amended 9-2-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
Any license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid on the date of issuance
for a period of 60 days thereafter. Such license shall be revocable in the event of any
violation of the terms and conditions thereof.
§ 175-8. Records.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of the applications, the determinations thereon
and of all licenses issued in accordance with this chapter. The record shall contain the
name and residence of the person licensed, the location of the business, the amount of
the license fee paid and the date of revocation of all licenses revoked.53
§ 175-9. Fees.
The license fees for all licenses issued hereunder shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.54
§ 175-10. Restrictions. [Amended 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
A licensed solicitor or peddler shall:
thereof.
B. To the application must be appended a letter of authorization from the firm which
the applicant purports to represent.
A. Not willfully misstate the quantity or quality of any article offered for sale.
B. Not willfully offer for sale any article of any unwholesome or defective nature.
C. Not call attention to his or her goods by blowing a horn, by playing repetitive music
or sounds, by ringing a bell other than a house doorbell, by shouting or crying or by
any loud or unusual noise.
D. Not frequent any street in an exclusive nature so as to cause a private or public
nuisance.
E. Keep the vehicle and/or receptacles used by him or her in the furtherance of his or
53. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the expiration of licenses, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 7-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999. See now § 175-7.1.
54. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in Ch. A255.
§ 175-6 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 175-10
175:5
§ 175-10.1. Hours. [Added 9-2-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
No person, peddler, solicitor or person engaged in merchandising, whether licensed
or unlicensed, shall enter on private property, go from house to house, from place
of business to place of business, or otherwise disturb persons in their residences or
businesses on Saturday, Sunday or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 175-11. Registration by residents not desiring visits by solicitors or peddlers.
her licensed business in a sound, clean and sanitary condition.
F. Keep his or her edible articles offered for sale well protected from dirt, dust and
insects.
G. Not stand or permit the vehicle used by him or her to stand in one place in any
public place or street for more than 10 minutes or in front of any premises for any
time if the owner of or the lessee of the property objects.
H. Not sell confectionery or ice cream within 250 feet of any school between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days.
A. Any resident of the Village of Hamburg not wanting to be visited or called upon by
solicitors, peddlers or any person merchandising, may register at the office of the
Village Clerk on a list of registrants of the Village of Hamburg who do not desire
to be visited or solicited at their homes, in the following manner: [Amended
10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998; 9-2-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
(1) Said resident or residents shall either personally appear or, on forms supplied
by the Village Clerk, register with the Village Clerk, advising that said resident
or residents do not want solicitors or peddlers to call at their homes.
(2) The Village Clerk shall keep on file at all times a registration book showing
the names and addresses of the residents of the Village of Hamburg who have
registered as not wanting solicitors or peddlers to call at their homes.
(3) Said residents, in addition, shall be furnished a sticker by the Village Clerk,
which may be affixed to the front door of the resident's principal residence
advising that no soliciting and peddling can be done.
B. Every applicant shall personally read said list of residents of the Village of
Hamburg who are registered as not wanting to be approached or contacted for the
sale of goods, wares or merchandise and will sign an affidavit that said list has been
reviewed by the applicant, and the applicant shall obtain from the Village Clerk a
photostatic copy of said list.
C. Any resident or business of the Village of Hamburg not wanting to be visited or
called upon by solicitors, peddlers, or any person merchandising may place a sign
affixed to the resident's principal residence or business advising that no soliciting
and peddling can be done, in accordance with § 250-62 of the Hamburg Village
Code. [Added 9-2-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, peddler, solicitor or any person engaged in
merchandising, whether licensed or unlicensed, to enter upon any residential or
§ 175-10 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 175-11
175:6
§ 175-12. Revocation of license.
A license may be summarily revoked by the Village Clerk by reason of a violation of
the terms of the license, the violation of any municipal law, state or federal statute or
falsification in applying for a license. Written notice of such revocation, stating the terms
thereof, shall be personally served upon the licensee or mailed to the address given in
the application. Upon the filing of such notice of revocation in the Village Clerk's office,
with affidavit of service by mailing, such license shall be revoked. A hearing upon the
revocation of the license shall be granted the licensee if said licensee shall request such
a hearing as hereinafter provided.
§ 175-13. Special provisions for sales of magazines and other periodicals.
[Amended 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
§ 175-14. Appeals upon denial or revocation of license.
In the event of the revocation of a license pursuant to the provisions of § 175-12 hereof
or in the event of the denial of a license to any applicant by the Clerk or the refusal of
the Chief of Police to countersign a license, the applicant may request a hearing within
a period of 30 days after such revocation, refusal or denial. Such requests shall be in
writing and shall be made to the Village Board of the Village of Hamburg and filed with
the Village Clerk within the period provided herein. The Village Board shall hear such
applicant's request for a review of the determination of the Village Clerk or the Chief of
Police.
business premises in the Village of Hamburg where the owner, occupant or person
legally in charge of the premises has posted at the entry to the premises a sign or
sticker bearing the words “No Pedd1ers,” “Solicitors,”or words of similar import.
[Added 9-2-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
A. No person peddling or soliciting the sale of magazines or other periodicals shall
visit a private residence for the purpose of peddling or soliciting except after
procuring a license hereunder, unless such person has been personally invited to
such private residence by the owner or occupant thereof.
B. The license issued to a person peddling or soliciting the sale of magazines or other
periodicals shall, in addition to the other requirements hereby imposed, have the
photograph of the licensee affixed thereto and to the application. Such photograph
shall have been taken within 30 days next preceding the application for such
license.
C. Before a license issued to a person for the purpose of peddling or soliciting the sale
of magazines or other periodicals shall be valid, it shall be countersigned by the
Chief of Police of the Village of Hamburg.
D. The Chief of Police of the Village of Hamburg is hereby empowered to refuse to
countersign any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section if in his or
her opinion the applicant's character does not justify the issuance thereof or if the
issuance of a license to the applicant would not be in the interest of the peace,
health, safety, welfare and good order of the village and its inhabitants.
§ 175-11 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 175-15
175:7
§ 175-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
Any person who shall act as a solicitor or peddler, as herein defined, without a license
or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall continue to act
as a solicitor or peddler subsequent to the revocation of his or her license shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250 and/or imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 15 days, or both, per each day on which such violation occurs.
§ 175-15 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 175-15
175:8
ARTICLE II
Transient Retail Merchants
[Adopted 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
§ 175-16. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the purpose of regulating the conduct and business practices
of transient merchants within the Village of Hamburg.
§ 175-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary association,
incorporated association and principal or agent thereof.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — A retail or wholesale business conducted in a
temporary structure or tent; from a truck, van or trailer; on a parking lot or vacant parcel
of land; on part of a public right-of-way; or in any other place for a temporary period
of time. Lack of a rental or leasing agreement of three months' or more duration, sealed
by monetary consideration, shall be presumptive of a temporary situation. The type of
merchandise being offered for sale will have no bearing on the designation.
§ 175-18. Objectives.
The purpose of this article is to assist the government of the Village of Hamburg, the
management of its business, the preservation of good order and the peace, health, safety
and welfare of its inhabitants and the protection and security of their property.
§ 175-19. License required; fee.
§ 175-20. License application.
An application for a transient merchant's license shall provide the following information:
A. No person shall engage in business as a transient merchant unless he shall first
obtain a license to do so from the Village Clerk-Treasurer no later than two business
days before the first date of business.
B. The license fees for all licenses issued hereunder shall be as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Trustees.55
A. The address of the applicant's residence.
B. The firm or firms represented, together with copies of documents establishing the
firm's state or county, form of organization, ownership and qualifications to do
business in the state and exact relationship between the firm and the transient
merchant.
C. A brief description of the firm and the kind of goods or commodities the applicant
desires to sell.
55. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in Ch. A255.
§ 175-16 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 175-20
175:9
§ 175-21. Exemptions.
This article shall not be held to apply to any of the following:
§ 175-22. Revocation of license.
A license may be summarily revoked by the Village Clerk-Treasurer by reason of a
violation of the terms of the license, the violation of any municipal law, state or federal
statute or falsification in applying for a license. Written notice of such revocation,
stating the terms thereof, shall be personally served upon the licensee or mailed to the
address given in the application. Upon the filing of such notice of revocation in the
Village Clerk-Treasurer's office, with affidavit of service by mailing, such license shall
be revoked. A hearing upon the revocation of the license shall be granted the licensee if
said licensee shall request such a hearing as hereinafter provided.
§ 175-23. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $200 for each offense
and, further, shall be directed to obtain a license pursuant to this article, paying the
appropriate fee. Every day that a violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 175-24. Severability.
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any section, subsection,
sentence, clause or part thereof for any reason is held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any
remaining sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or part of this article.
D. The hotel, room or other location where the applicant proposes to sell such
merchandise and the time during which said business is to be conducted.
A. Sales conducted pursuant to statute.
B. Sales conducted pursuant to the order by any court.
C. Any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles.
D. The sale of fruits and vegetables raised on the property where being sold.
E. Any honorably discharged member of the United States Armed Forces who has
procured a license under Article 4 of the General Business Law of the State of New
York.
F. Persons soliciting, collecting or operating a sale on behalf of any bona fide
charitable, educational, scientific, health, religious, patriotic or other organization
of worthy cause deemed to be in the public interest.
G. Any person selling personal property at a garage sale held at his residence.
§ 175-20 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 175-24
175:10
Chapter 179
PICKETING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 179-1. Declaration of policy.
It is declared that the protection and preservation of the home is the keystone of
democratic government; that the public health, welfare and the good order of the
community require that members of the community enjoy in their homes and dwellings
a feeling of well-being, tranquillity and privacy, and when absent from their homes and
dwellings, carry with them the sense of security inherent in the assurance that they may
return to the enjoyment of their homes and dwellings; that the practice of picketing
before or about residences and dwellings causes emotional disturbance and distress to
the occupants; that such practice has as its object the harassing of such occupants; and
without resort to such practice full opportunity exists, and under terms and provisions
of this chapter will continue to exist for the exercise of freedom of speech and other
constitutional rights; and that the provisions hereinafter enacted are necessary for the
public interest to avoid the detrimental results herein set forth.
§ 179-2. Picketing residence or dwelling unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the residence or
dwelling of any individual in the Village of Hamburg.
§ 179-3. Penalties for offenses.56
Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum
fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
56. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-24 PICKETING § 179-3
179:1

Chapter 182
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 127.
Solid waste — See Ch. 198.
Trees — See Ch. 225.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 233.
§ 179-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 179-3
182:1

ARTICLE I
Removal of Weeds, Brush and Debris
§ 182-1. Duty of owner or occupant.
It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant or person having charge of lands within
the Village to cut down or cause to be cut down all overgrown weeds, grass, brush and
other vegetation and to remove or cause to be removed all garbage and tree limbs or
other debris on said land as necessary to maintain such land in a sanitary and orderly
condition.
§ 182-2. Enforcing official; notification of noncompliance.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to see that the provisions of this
article are enforced. Where violations of this article exist the Code Enforcement Officer
shall notify the owner of such land of the violation. Such notice shall give the owner 10
days to comply with this article.
§ 182-3. Performance of work by Village.
In the event that the owner of such land receives notification to correct the violation
and does not comply therewith, the Code Enforcement Officer shall engage the services
of a private contractor to perform the necessary work. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall charge and bill the owner for the cost of such services. In his or her discretion,
the Code Enforcement Officer may coordinate with the Department of Public Works
Superintendent to do the work, in which case a charge shall be made to cover the cost
incurred to accomplish the work required.
§ 182-4. Reports and assessments.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep an account of all such work done and shall
report to the Village Board all parcels of land upon which such work has been performed
and the names of the owners of said parcels who have not paid for the cost of the work
performed, and the Village Board shall thereupon order assessments upon such lands for
the unpaid sums so reported.
§ 182-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 182-4
182:3

ARTICLE II
General Standards
§ 182-5. Compliance required.
Residential, commercial, storage and industrial buildings, whether occupied or vacant,
and accessory structures shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions of this
article so as to assure the desirable character of the property and its effect on surrounding
areas.
§ 182-6. Maintenance of open areas.
§ 182-7. Display of slaughtered game.
No person shall place, hang, suspend, affix or otherwise display the carcass of
slaughtered game upon any lot or premises except within an enclosed structure or
otherwise shielded from view.
§ 182-8. Maintenance of buildings and structures.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect buildings and
structures and to prevent the development of stagnant ponds.
B. All drainage water from roof surfaces of residential buildings shall be properly
drained into a sewer, or by any alternate method approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer. No buildings or structures shall discharge roof drainage on sidewalk, stairs
or neighboring property.
C. Fences and other minor construction shall be maintained in good repair and in a
safe condition.
D. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall be
maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather conditions.
E. Yards, courts and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards, rodent
harborage and infestation.
F. Heavy undergrowth and accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
STRUCTURES — Includes accessory structures.
SUBSTANTIAL DETERIORATION — A status of either general dilapidation or
specific instances of disrepair, including but not limited to substantial conditions
of peeling, chipping, cracking, splintering, fraying, warping, crumbling, rusting,
corroding, rotting or perforation.
B. General maintenance. Exterior and interior surfaces, including but not limited to
foundations, roofs, floors, walls, ceilings, doors, windows and fixtures of buildings
and structures shall be maintained:
§ 182-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 182-8
182:5
§ 182-9. Infestation and screening.
§ 182-10. Garbage and refuse.
(1) In a clean, safe and sanitary manner; and
(2) Free of substantial deterioration.
C. Supplied items. In leased premises where appliances or furnishings are supplied by
the lessor, in whole or in part, the provisions of Subsection B above shall apply to
such items.
D. Exterior surfaces.
(1) Periodic treatment. In addition, exterior surfaces of buildings and structures
that are not inherently resistant to substantial deterioration shall be periodically
treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative when
necessary.
(2) Conformity. Materials used for repair of exterior surfaces of buildings and
structures, including but not limited to foundations, roofs, walls, windows,
doors, stairs, columns and chimneys, shall be of like nature, grade and quality
as the existing surface, provided that in the replacement of an entire exterior
surface, materials of a different nature may be used.
A. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insects, vermin and
rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for exterminating insects, vermin
and rodents shall conform to generally accepted practice.
B. Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows and other
openings in basements, crawl spaces and cellars used for ventilation shall be
appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
C. All exterior openings that are used for ventilation in all occupied rented dwelling
units, up to and including the third story, shall have installed therein screening of
No. 15 mesh or finer from June 1 to October 1 in each year. In any dwelling where
mechanical ventilation is supplied, screens shall only be required in areas using
natural ventilation. No screens shall be required in upper stories of any dwellings
which are free, due to height, of mosquitoes, flies and other insects. All screens
shall be maintained in good condition.
A. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the collection, storage,
handling and disposal of garbage and refuse in accordance with the provisions of
the Code of the Village of Hamburg and also the following:
(1) In any dwelling containing two or more living units, it shall be prohibited to
store or accumulate garbage or rubbish of any type in any public hall or
stairway.
(2) Every dwelling shall be provided with adequately covered containers of
nondestructible and noncombustible material, and every occupant shall
dispose of all garbage or rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner.
§ 182-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 182-10
182:6
§ 182-11. Unoccupied hazards.
§ 182-12. Sealing of unoccupied buildings.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer shall find an unoccupied or partly unoccupied
building which has openings, including but not limited to doors, doorways, windows
and window openings, through which children, trespassers or other unauthorized persons
may make entry to the building, then this section shall apply.
(3) Every dwelling shall be provided with adequate garbage disposal facilities or
covered containers of noncombustible and nondestructible material for
garbage.
(4) No person shall place ashes, garbage, rubbish, filth, urine or fecal matter in
any place in any dwelling other than the place provided therefor nor keep any
such matter in his or her apartment or upon his or her premises or in his or her
dwelling area such length of time as to create a nuisance.
B. It shall be the duty of every owner of all multiple dwellings to provide proper,
suitable and convenient receptacles or containers as outlined above, and it shall be
the duty of all tenants of one- and two-family dwellings to provide the above
required receptacles or containers where suitable and proper garbage disposal
systems are not available.
C. Garbage chutes other than those directly connected to an incinerator shall be
prohibited. All existing garbage chutes that are not directly connected to
incinerators shall either be removed or all openings to the same permanently sealed.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
UNOCCUPIED HAZARD — Any building or part thereof which remains
unoccupied for a period of more than six months, with either doors, windows or
other openings broken, removed, boarded or sealed up.
B. Buildings and structures shall be maintained in such condition so that they shall not
become unoccupied hazards, as defined in this section.
C. Any building in the condition of an unoccupied hazard, as defined in this section,
shall be repaired, improved and maintained so as to eliminate the conditions
creating an unoccupied hazard, as defined in this section, or demolished, and all
refuse, rubbish and debris caused by such demolition shall be removed from the
premises except acceptable fill which may be used in excavations. The area
formerly covered by any building that has been removed or demolished shall be
graded to the level of the lot.
A. Notice; sealing requirements.
(1) Notice. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice in writing upon the
owner directing the owner to complete the work of enclosing the building as
shall be specified in said notice within four days of service of such notice. Said
notice shall also inform the owner of the date and place of a hearing, at which
time the owner or his or her duly designated representative may present
§ 182-10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 182-12
182:7
evidence and testimony on the question of the necessity of the Village causing
said premises to be boarded. Said notice shall further inform the owner that
upon failure by the owner either to complete the enclosing of the building or
to appear at the hearing, the Village of Hamburg shall have the right to enclose
the building and that all costs and expenses incurred by the Village will be
recovered by action or by local assessment, or both.
(2) Permissible materials. Such openings as the Code Enforcement Officer shall
specify in said notice for enclosure shall be enclosed with one-half-inch or
thicker weatherproof plywood or other weatherproof material which will
secure the building in an equivalent manner. All such plywood or other
material must be painted.
(3) Screen/storm windows. The owner may, in the alternative, enclose such
openings with screen/storm window combinations, provided that said storm
windows are made with unbreakable glass or plastic.
(4) Fastening. Such enclosures shall be fastened to the building so as to secure
them from removal by unauthorized persons.
(5) Appearance. Such enclosures shall be properly fitted and be of such material
and surface that they are neither unsightly nor will materially detract from the
general appearance of the building and neighborhood.
B. Hearing. If the owner or his or her duly designated representative appears at the
time and place specified in the aforementioned notice to contest the necessity of the
Village causing the subject premises to be boarded, a hearing on such question shall
be held before the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her representative. As a
result of such hearing, the original notice directing the enclosing of the subject
premises may be affirmed, modified or vacated, but if the notice is modified, the
time in which to complete enclosure shall not be extended for more than three days.
The owner shall be informed of the result of the hearing.
C. Abatement by Village upon owner's failure to comply. If the owner shall fail to
comply with a notice to enclose within the period specified in such notice or shall
fail to comply with such a notice as modified as a result of a hearing having been
had, the Village shall perform or cause such work to be performed and may recover
the expense either by action or by local assessment on the premises made, levied
and collected as other local assessments, or both. In such event, unless the Village
shall perform such work, the Code Enforcement Officer shall secure at least three
bids on such work of enclosure; whenever the work to be performed under contract
entails an expenditure of more than $10,000 there shall be formal advertising for
bids.
D. Statement of intention. In no event shall such building or structure remain
unoccupied and closed in for a period in excess of two months from the date of the
notice specified in Subsection A hereof unless the owner has first filed a statement
of intention to either demolish or rehabilitate said building or structure with the
Department of Public Works and has been granted written approval for an extension
of time to rehabilitate or to demolish the building or structure by said Department.
The owner must obtain all required permits within four months from the date of
filing a statement of intention as aforementioned. Such statement of intention shall
§ 182-12 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 182-12
182:8
§ 182-13. Pruning or removal of trees. [Added 12-3-2007 by L.L. No. 6-200757]
The Village shall have the right to cause the pruning or removal of any dead, dying,
dangerous or diseased trees on private property within the Village when such trees
constitute a hazard to life or property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the Village. The Village may notify, in writing, the
owners of the property and of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners within
60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of the owners to comply
with such notice, the Village, or its authorized representative, shall have the authority
to remove such trees, charge the cost of removal to the owners and levy the same on
subsequent tax bills.
§ 182-14. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-6-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001]
Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum
fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
expire and shall be of no further force or effect upon the passing of four months
from the date of its filing with the Department. For purposes of this section,
determination of the Department, relative to the condition of a building being
practicable for rehabilitation, shall be determined on the basis of cost for
rehabilitating the building and shall not exceed 50% of the worth of the building
exclusive of value of land and foundation.
E. Alternative measures to remain available. The provisions of this section shall not
be deemed to impair or affect the availability of any other enforcement measures or
remedies afforded by law.
57. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former § 182-13, Penalties for offenses, as § 182-14.
§ 182-12 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 182-14
182:9

Chapter 186
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
Solid waste — See Ch. 198.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 200.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 182-14 SEWERS § 182-14
186:1

ARTICLE I
Rents and Charges
[Adopted 5-24-1965 by L.L. No. 1-1965; amended in its entirety 5-4-1981 by L.L.
No. 5-1981]
§ 186-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the terms "sewer rents," "part," "sewage," "industrial waste" and
"other wastes" shall be as defined in § 451 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 186-2. Scope.
The sewer system of the village for which rents are hereby established and imposed
is all the sewer pipes and other appurtenances which are used in connection with the
collection, transportation or disposal of sewage, industrial waste and other wastes and
which are owned, operated or maintained by the Village of Hamburg, including sewage
pumping and lift stations but not the system of stormwater sewers of the village.
§ 186-3. Imposition of charges and rents.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg does hereby establish and impose
charges and sewer rents for:
§ 186-4. Annual estimates of cost.
The Board of Trustees, as part of its budget adoption process, shall annually estimate
the:
§ 186-5. Manner of computing rents and charges.
A. Services rendered by the village sewer system to real property within the corporate
limits of the village as hereinafter set forth.
B. Direct unit charges imposed on the Village of Hamburg by other agencies for the
transportation, treatment and disposal of sewage beyond the limits of the village.
A. Cost of management, maintenance, operation and repair of the village sewer
system.
B. Amount the village expects to be charged in the next fiscal year by other agencies
for the transportation, treatment and disposal of sewage from the village.
A. The total amount of the sewer rent imposed for each fiscal year shall equal as nearly
as possible the total of the two amounts estimated by the Board of Trustees pursuant
to § 186-4.
B. The sewer rent imposed hereby shall be charged to and paid by the owner of the
premises connected to the sewer system. The owner of the premises shall be the
person or party whose name appears as owner on the most recently filed assessment
roll of properties in the Village of Hamburg.
C. The sewer rent to be paid for each property shall be an amount equal to the unit
§ 186-1 SEWERS § 186-5
186:3
§ 186-6. Disposition of revenues.
Such revenues derived from sewer rents, including interest and penalties, shall be
credited to a special fund to be known as the "Sewer Fund."58
§ 186-7. Collections; penalties for offenses. [Amended 4-19-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
Sewer rents hereby established and imposed are established and imposed pursuant to
Article 14F of the General Municipal Law; the provisions of Article 14F of the General
Municipal Law and of Article 14, Title 2 of the Real Property Tax Law shall apply to
and provide the manner of the levy and collection of same. Any person failing to pay any
sewer rent or any portion thereof, within the time required by this article, shall be subject
to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, § 1-14, Penalties
assessed against unpaid taxes, sewer rents and invoices.
charge(s) estimated or anticipated to be contained in the next subsequent annual
charge to be imposed on the village by the Erie County South Towns Sewer
Agency, or a successor thereto, applicable to each property, plus an additional unit
charge applicable to each property; such additional unit charge being an amount
determined by dividing the amount of the total cost of management, maintenance,
operation and repair of the village sewer system, as estimated by the Board of
Trustees pursuant to § 186-4, by the whole number of units contained in the
properties served by the village sewer system. The sewer rent thus determined for
each property shall be billed as of the first day of June of each year to each property
owner as a separate item and included on the statement of the annual village tax
payable on the property in question in the manner provided by § 1430 of the Real
Property Tax Law.
D. Owners may appeal their assessments to the Village Board of Trustees. The Village
Board of Trustees may reduce the number of sewer units charged, provided that the
owner can provide a valid reason for doing so and that adequate funds exist in the
sewer fund to provide the reimbursement. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
58. Editor's Note: Former Section 8, dealing with surveys and reports of discharge, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
§ 186-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 186-7
186:4
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
§ 186-8. Adoption of standards.
The Village of Hamburg adopts as its rules and regulations for use of the sanitary
sewers within the Village of Hamburg the Erie County Department of Environment and
Planning Division of Sewerage Management Rules and Regulations for Erie County
Sewer Districts as amended from time to time.
§ 186-9. Specifications included.
The rules and regulations for use of village sanitary sewers shall include the
specifications for subdivisions and sanitary sewer extensions and design requirements
for subdivisions and sanitary sewer extensions as adopted by the Erie County
Department of Environment and Planning Division of Sewerage Management as
amended from time to time.
§ 186-10. Administration and enforcement.
The administration and enforcement of these regulations shall be provided by the
Superintendent of Public Works or his designee. The term "district" used in the rules and
regulations shall mean the Village of Hamburg. The term "Board" as used in the rules
and regulations shall mean the Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg.
§ 186-11. Right of entry.
The Superintendent of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the village
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes
of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 186-12. Unsanitary, objectionable deposits prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the village or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the village any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
§ 186-13. Connection to public sewer.
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the village, and abutting on
any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be
located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the village, are hereby required at their
expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90
§ 186-8 SEWERS § 186-13
186:5
days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100
feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
§ 186-14. Damage to sewer works.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to
immediate arrest under the appropriate provisions of the Penal Law of the State of New
York.
§ 186-15. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except § 186-14,
shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the limit of time provided for
in Subsection A shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more
than 15 days, or both.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the
village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the village by reason of such
violation.
§ 186-13 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 186-15
186:6
ARTICLE III
Stormwater
[Adopted 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998; amended in its entirety 9-4-2007 by L.L.
No. 3-2007]
§ 186-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the Village of Hamburg through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges
to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the
SPDES General Permit for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems. The objectives of
this article are:
§ 186-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce
the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or
stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any activity requiring authorization under the
SPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity, GP-02-01, as
amended or revised, including construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one or more acres. Construction activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges
from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such systems are not
designed to accept, process or discharge nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of
trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, grease, oil, petroleum
products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other
pollutants into the MS4.
§ 186-16 SEWERS § 186-17
186:7
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — New York State-licensed professional engineer or
licensed architect.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical,
or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including but not limited
to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the MS4,
except as exempted in § 186-20A of this article.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES Permit for Discharges
from Industrial Activities Except Construction, GP-98-03, as amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains):
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE—Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or
other entity recognized by law.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator residue,
treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water,
any of which may cause or might reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters
of the state in contravention of water quality standards.
Any conveyance which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including treated or
untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the MS4 and any
connection to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless
of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or
approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to
the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Hamburg;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40
CFR 122.2.
D.
§ 186-17 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 186-17
186:8
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved
or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORM SEWER (sometimes termed "storm drain") — A sewer which is designed or
used for collecting or carrying stormwater runoff, snowmelt, and drainage, but which
excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, municipal
engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Village Board of Trustees to
enforce this article. The SMO also accepts and reviews stormwater pollution prevention
plans, forwards the plans to such agency, committee, employee, or board of the Village
of Hamburg which may be reviewing any applications for a construction activity
requiring submission of a SWPPP, and inspects stormwater management practices. The
Village Board of Trustees shall appoint such employee, municipal engineer, or other
public official to act as SMO by resolution.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial uses of
the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use) are impaired by
Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that applies
where a Village has been notified that the discharge of stormwater authorized
under its MS4 permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause
or contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard. Under this
condition, the Village must take all necessary actions to ensure future discharges do
not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards.
A.
303(d) Listed waters. The condition in the Village's MS4 permit that applies where
the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under this condition, the stormwater
management program must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to
the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in the Village's MS4
permit where a TMDL, including requirements for control of stormwater
discharges, has been approved by EPA for a water body or watershed into which
the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL
stormwater allocations prior to September 10, 2003, the Village was required
to modify its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the Village's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL is approved in
the future by EPA for any water body or watershed into which an MS4 discharges.
Under this condition, the Village must review the applicable TMDL to see if
it includes requirements for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not
meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the Village must, within six months of
the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to ensure that
reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
D.
§ 186-17 SEWERS § 186-17
186:9
pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department as required by Section 303(d) of the
Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of
state surface water quality standards and are not expected to improve within the next two
years.
TMDL —Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to be
allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the water, allocated
among the sources of that pollutant.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hamburg.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with pollutants and
has been or will be discarded.
§ 186-18. General provisions.
§ 186-19. Appropriate discharge of unpolluted stormwater.
Stormwater and all other water sources not containing pollutants shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works. The
property owner is responsible for all grading, the receiver installation and the laying of
pipe to and connecting pipe to the Village storm sewer. The Village of Hamburg will
provide any engineering assistance necessary.
§ 186-20. Discharge and connection prohibitions; exceptions.
A. Applicability. This article shall apply to all water entering the Village of Hamburg
generated on any developed or undeveloped land unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
B. Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this article are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.
C. Responsibility for administration. The SMO shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted or duties imposed upon
the authorized enforcement official may be delegated in writing by the SMO as may
be authorized by the Village.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except as provided
below. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the
MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established
by this article, unless the Department or the Village has determined them to be
substantial contributors of pollutants: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream
§ 186-17 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 186-20
186:10
§ 186-21. Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater.
flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains,
crawl space or basement sump pumps, air-conditioning condensate, irrigation
water, springs, water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residential
street wash water, water from fire-fighting activities, and any other water
source not containing pollutants. Such exempt discharges shall be made in
accordance with an appropriate plan for reducing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or property from
imminent harm or damage, provided that such approval shall not be construed
to constitute compliance with other applicable laws and requirements, and
further provided that such discharges may be permitted for a specified time
period and under such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect
such life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and intent of
this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an allowable
discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO prior to the time of the
test.
(4) The prohibition of illegal discharges shall not apply to any discharge permitted
under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Department, provided
that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under
law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a
line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those types of
activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit; or
(2) Cause or contribute to the Village being subject to the special conditions as
defined in § 186-17 of this article.
B. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that cause or
contribute to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit authorization, that
person shall take all reasonable actions to correct such activities such that he or she
§ 186-20 SEWERS § 186-21
186:11
§ 186-22. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater pollutants by use of
best management practices.
§ 186-23. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES stormwater discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said
permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Village prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
§ 186-24. Suspension of access to MS4.
no longer causes or contributes to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
A. Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit discharges, as
defined in § 186-17, or an activity contaminating stormwater, as defined in
§ 186-21, the Village may require implementation of BMPs to control those illicit
discharges and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 through the use
of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises which is or may be the
source of an illicit discharge, as defined in § 186-17, or an activity
contaminating stormwater, as defined in § 186-21, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural
BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of pollutants to the MS4.
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent
practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
A. Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of people, or to the
MS4. The SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable time
thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply
with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the SMO may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize
danger to people.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the
MS4 in violation of this article may have his or her MS4 access terminated if such
termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a
violator in writing of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons
therefor. The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit discharge has
§ 186-21 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 186-24
186:12
§ 186-25. Applicability; access to facilities; monitoring of discharges.
ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its recurrence. Access may be
denied if the SMO determines in writing that the illicit discharge has not ceased or
is likely to recur. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access
to premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This § 186-25 applies to all facilities that the SMO must inspect to
enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the authorized enforcement
agency has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any
premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation
under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with
this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall
make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records
as may be required to implement this article.
(3) The Village shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to this article
such devices as are necessary, in the opinion of the SMO, to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The Village has the right to require the facilities subject to this article to install
monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary to determine compliance
with this article. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow
and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) An unreasonable delay in allowing the SMO access to a facility subject to this
article is a violation of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility
subject to this article commits an offense if the person denies the SMO
reasonable access to the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this article.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises from which
stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder,
then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 186-24 SEWERS § 186-26
186:13
§ 186-26. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a
facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation,
has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting
or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of
such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person
shall notify the Village in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the Village within three business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such
records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 186-27. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Notice of violation. When the SMO finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this article, he/she may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(5) That the Village will seek civil remedies or criminal penalties, including the
imposition of a criminal fine, as provided in § 186-27B; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If abatement of a
violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set
forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be
completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to
remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by
a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof
shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by
law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed six months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a
second offense, both of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or
§ 186-26 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 186-27
186:14
§ 186-28. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the SMO to
the Village Board of Trustees within 15 days of its issuance, which shall hear the appeal
within 30 days after the filing of the appeal, and within five days of making its decision,
file its decision in the office of the Municipal Clerk and mail a copy of its decision by
certified mail to the discharger.
§ 186-29. Corrective measures after appeal.
§ 186-30. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate
the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 186-31. Alternative remedies.
subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed six months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this article
shall be deemed misdemeanors, and, for such purpose only, all provisions of law
relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the
notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five business days of the
decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the SMO, then the
SMO shall request the owner's permission for access to the subject private property
to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a warrant in a
court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter upon the property to
determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon determination that a violation has
occurred, the SMO may seek a court order to take any and all measures reasonably
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The cost of
implementing and maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be given
alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon recommendation of the
Municipal Attorney and concurrence of the Municipal Code Enforcement Officer/
SMO, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional;
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this article;
§ 186-27 SEWERS § 186-31
186:15
§ 186-32. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused
or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to
public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be
summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate,
enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 186-33. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under
any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized
enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(3) Environmental damage was minimal;
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy violation; and/or
(5) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops;
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking; and/or
(3) River, stream, or creek cleanup activities.
§ 186-31 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 186-33
186:16
Chapter 187
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 186-33 SEX OFFENDERS § 186-33
187:1

ARTICLE I
Residency Restrictions
[Adopted 10-15-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
§ 187-1. Legislative intent.
The adoption of Megan's Law59 has increased public awareness of sexual offenders by
requiring them to register with authorities and making such information available to
the public. The Village Board of the Village of Hamburg hereby enacts this article to
prevent sex offenders from residing or living near areas where children regularly meet
and congregate. The Village Board of the Village of Hamburg believes that this article
is necessary to further protect the best interests of all children, and to protect the health,
safety and welfare of residents in the Village of Hamburg.
§ 187-2. Restrictions established.
No person over the age of 18 years who has been convicted of a violation of a sexual
offense upon a child aged 16 years or under, as defined by the New York State Penal
Law, which would require that individual to register as a sex offender under state and/
or federal laws, shall be permitted to reside or live within 1,500 feet of the real property
of any school, park, playground, recreation center or day-care facility in the Village
of Hamburg, unless such residence has been assigned by a supervised release program
which provides close supervision of the sex offender's daily activity or the residency of
said offender was established prior to the enactment of this article.
59. Editor's Note: See NY Correction Law § 168 et seq.
§ 187-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 187-2
187:3

Chapter 190
SIDEWALK CAFES AND OUTDOOR DINING
§ 190-1. Purpose; intent.
This chapter is designed to permit sidewalk cafes and outdoor dining in areas where it
is appropriate and to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
The specific purposes of this legislation are:
§ 190-2. Permit required.
No outdoor dining or sidewalk cafe shall be allowed unless a permit has been first
obtained from the Village Clerk.
§ 190-3. Eligible establishments.
§ 190-4. Application for permit.
A. To ensure adequate space for pedestrians on the sidewalk adjacent to outdoor dining
areas.
B. To preserve and enhance the character of the neighborhoods where such outdoor
dining is permitted in the Village, and to protect the adjacent areas.
C. To promote the most desirable use of land.
A. Only commercial establishments with the proper certificate of occupancy for
restaurant use, which take orders and/or maintain table service within their
establishments, may take orders and serve food and beverages in outdoor dining
areas or sidewalk cafes.
B. Other commercial establishments that are not restaurants may apply for a permit
with the permission of the Board of Trustees.
A. Application for outdoor dining and/or sidewalk cafe shall be made to the Village
Clerk in writing on a form prescribed by the Village Clerk's office. The Village
Clerk shall forward the application to the Code Enforcement Officer for review and
approval. The Village Clerk shall issue the permit upon approval by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Such application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The name, address and telephone of the establishment to be the subject of the
application.
(3) The name and telephone number of the owner and/or operator of the
establishment, or designated responsible representative.
(4) Whether alcoholic beverages are to be served and, if so, a copy of the
appropriate liquor license issued by the State of New York.
§ 187-2 SIDEWALK CAFES AND OUTDOOR DINING § 190-4
190:1
§ 190-5. Standards for issuance of permit.
The following standards shall apply:
§ 190-6. Effect of permit.
(5) A survey of the subject property, indicating the location of the outdoor dining
and/or sidewalk cafe.
(6) A plan showing the complete sidewalk and/or dining area, the location of all
furniture and fixtures to be used, including a seating plan, and the location of
any entrances and/or exits.
(7) Descriptive material showing all furniture and fixtures to be used, and how
such furniture and fixtures shall be stored or secured during nonoperational
hours.
(8) Whether live or mechanically reproduced music is to be played, and a
description of the site of the facilities, equipment or other devices needed for
amplification of sound.
(9) Proof of insurance if required by § 190-8 of this chapter.
(10) Any other information that the Village Clerk may find reasonably necessary to
determine whether a permit should be issued.
A. The proposed outdoor dining and/or sidewalk cafe will not interfere with pedestrian
traffic or use of any publicly owned property adjacent to the establishment.
B. The applicant is in compliance with, and has met, all other applicable provisions of
this chapter, all building codes, zoning codes, architectural design standards, health
codes and any other codes applicable to this premises.
A. Establishments issued a permit hereunder may engage in outdoor dining or have a
sidewalk cafe as set forth in this chapter.
B. The consumption of alcoholic beverages, any and all types and kinds, in such
outdoor dining areas and sidewalk cafe is prohibited unless served by the licensed
premises. It is the responsibility of the owner and/or operator of the premises who
has obtained a permit hereunder for outdoor dining/sidewalk cafe to ensure
compliance with this provision.
C. A permitholder shall be bound by all applicable rules, regulations, ordinances, local
laws and statutes. The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, adopt, from time to
time, any additional rules and regulations pertaining to such permits. The permit
may be conditioned on modifications or restrictions intended to insure compliance
with all applicable rules, regulations, ordinances, local laws and statutes, and the
general protection of the health, safety and welfare.
D. No other activities of any nature conducted now or hereafter by any commercial
establishment, enterprise, business, venture or shop in the Village, otherwise
prohibited by all applicable rules, regulations, ordinances, local laws or statutes are
changed, amended, suspended or altered in any respect because of this chapter.
§ 190-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 190-6
190:2
§ 190-7. Liability of permit holder.
The person or persons to whom a permit for outdoor dining and/or a sidewalk cafe has
been issued shall be liable, and shall indemnify the Village, for any loss, damage, injury
or expense sustained by the Village arising out of any claim or cause of action instituted
or commenced by any person or persons arising out of the issue of such permit, or as
a direct or indirect result of the operation of such outdoor dining area and/or sidewalk
cafe.
§ 190-8. Insurance.
If any portion of the outdoor dining or sidewalk cafe is on public property and/or in
the public right-of-way, the applicant for a permit shall present, prior to the issuance
of the permit, a certificate of insurance for comprehensive general liability, naming the
Village of Hamburg as an additional insured, for the combined single limit of no less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 general aggregate.
§ 190-9. Revocation or suspension of permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a permit
when, in the Officer's sole discretion, the Officer finds a violation of any applicable rule,
regulation, ordinance, local law or statute, or that a continuation of said permit would
constitute a hazard or nuisance, or upon good cause shown.
§ 190-10. Appeal from denial, revocation or issuance of a permit.
Appeals from the issuance, denial or revocation or other condition of a permit may be
taken to the Village of Hamburg Board of Trustees by any aggrieved person within 30
days from the date of the issuance, denial or revocation, by filing a written notice of
appeal with the Village Clerk.
§ 190-11. Maintenance of the premises.
The outdoor dining area, sidewalk cafe, and adjacent areas shall be periodically cleaned
and kept refuse-free. The outdoor dining area, sidewalk cafe and adjacent areas shall be
swept and washed down daily and at all other times as needed. Sufficient containers for
trash shall be placed in the areas.
§ 190-12. Hours of operation.
Outdoor dining activities and food and/or beverage service shall take place during the
hours of operation of the establishment. All outdoor activities shall be subject to other
applicable rules and regulations of this Code and, in particular, the noise ordinances.60
E. Outdoor dining activities shall be limited to the areas granted in the permit. When
at all possible, these areas shall be contained wholly within the property lines of the
establishment, and if these activities do extend to the sidewalk, sidewalk clearance
shall be maintained to provide adequate and unobstructed pedestrian movement,
and any minimum sidewalk width requirements shall be measured from the outer
edge of the curb to the outermost point of the outdoor dining area or sidewalk cafe.
§ 190-6 SIDEWALK CAFES AND OUTDOOR DINING § 190-13
190:3
§ 190-13. Music; lighting; outdoor cooking.
Music may be provided so long as it is not of a type or a volume as to violate any
applicable law or ordinance, or create a nuisance to surrounding residences and/or
property owners. Lighting shall be minimal, and shall be installed so that the direct or
indirect illumination from this sort of light shall not cause in excess of 0.5 foot candles
on any abutting property. No outdoor cooking of any type is permitted.
§ 190-14. Furniture; fixtures; signage.
All furniture and fixtures used in conjunction with the outdoor dining and sidewalk cafe
must be of a temporary nature, and must be brought in at closing time or otherwise
secured during nonoperational hours. No signage shall be permitted to be affixed to any
temporary structures. All furniture and fixtures shall be approved by the Village Clerk in
conformity with the guidelines established by the architectural design standards, where
applicable.
§ 190-15. Permit term and renewals.
§ 190-16. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or establishment committing an offense against any of the provisions of
this chapter, including failure to obtain a permit, or who operate a sidewalk cafe and/
or outdoor dining when their permit has been revoked or suspended, shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $250,
or by a term of imprisonment by not more than 15 days, or both.
A. Permits shall be issued on or after April 1 of each year. All permits, regardless of
when issued, shall expire on the last Sunday in November.
B. Applications for renewal of permits shall be made in the same manner as original
applications. Permits are not assignable.
60. Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Noise.
§ 190-13 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 190-16
190:4
Chapter 191
SMALL CELL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
§ 191-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform policies and procedures for the
deployment and installation of small cell wireless telecommunications facilities ("small
cell facility") in the Village of Hamburg, which will provide a public health, safety,
and welfare benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and
visual qualities in the Village. Any installation of a small cell facility shall require either
a special permit from the Board of Trustees or a small cell permit from the Planning
Commission.
§ 191-2. Permit procedures.
A. Special use permit approval by the Village Board is required under for the
following uses. All special use permit applications must comply with the notice
requirements set forth in § 250-19A.
(1) A substantial change to an existing tower or base station, unless the Building
Inspector has determined it is a modification to be reviewed by the Planning
Board pursuant to § 191-2B(2).
(2) Any other application for placement, installation, co-location or construction
of transmission equipment that does not constitute an eligible facilities request.
(3) Installation of a new tower over 50 feet in height.
(4) Placement of a new antenna on an existing tower or base station that results in
a substantial change to the tower or base station.
(5) Installation of equipment located on a sidewalk.
(6) Installation of equipment on a pole, located at an elevation less than 15 feet
from the ground.
(7) Installation of a small cell facility on a pole located within 20 feet of a dwelling
unit.
B. Small cell permit from the Planning Board.
(1) No person shall install a small cell facility without first filing a small cell
facility application and obtaining a small cell permit from the Planning
Commission.
(2) The Planning Commission shall approve a small cell permit application
concerning any eligible facilities request for modification of an eligible
support structure that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of
such structure. An applicant shall assert in writing that its request is considered
an eligible facilities request. The Planning Commission may require the
applicant to provide documentation or information only to the extent
reasonably related to determine whether the request meets the requirements of
§ 190-16 SMALL CELL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 191-2
191:1
an eligible facilities request.
(3) The Planning Commission may issue a permit for the following:
(a) Co-location of a small cell facility or DAS facility on an existing tower,
utility pole or streetlight not exceeding 50 feet in height on public or
private property. Co-location of a small cell facility or DAS facility on an
existing tower, utility pole or streetlight exceeding 50 feet in height shall
require special permit approval.
(b) Co-location on existing buildings within the Village of Hamburg.
(c) Installation of a monopole or utility pole for a small cell or DAS facility
in the public right-of-way that does not exceed 50 feet in height.
(4) Small cell permit application for Planning Commission approval.
(a) The small cell permit application shall be made by the wireless
telecommunications provider or its duly authorized representative and
shall contain the following:
[1] The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and e-mail
address.
[2] The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of
all consultants, if any acting on behalf of the applicant with respect
to the filing of the application.
[3] A general description of the proposed work and the purpose of the
work proposed.
[4] Identify and disclose the number and locations of any small cells that
the applicant has installed or locations the applicant has considered
in the past year for small cell infrastructure within the Village and
those submitted or anticipated to be submitted within a one-year
period.
[5] A description of the anticipated maintenance needs, including
frequency of service, personnel needs and equipment needs, and the
potential traffic safety and noise impact of such maintenance.
[6] Any amendment to information contained in a small cell permit
application shall be submitted in writing to the Village within 30
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
(5) A wireless telecommunications provider shall pay to the Village an application
fee and administrative fee as set forth in this chapter.
(6) A wireless telecommunications provider is authorized, after 30 days' written
notice to the Village Building Inspector, to remove its facility at any time from
the rights-of-way and cease paying the Village the administrative fee.
§ 191-2 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 191-3
191:2
§ 191-3. Location.
Location of a small cell facility approved by the Planning Commission:
§ 191-4. Small cell facility permit fees.
In order to ensure that the limited private use of the public right-of-way authorized herein
does not become an additional cost to the Village, it is hereby determined by the Village
Board that the following fees shall be charged to small cell permit applicants and small
cell permit holders:
A. The following locational priorities shall apply in the order specified, consistent with
the Village's obligation to create the least amount of adverse aesthetic impact and
to preserve the scenic values of the Village:
(1) On the roof of any Village-owned or federal, state or local government-owned
buildings or structures.
(2) Location on privately owned buildings.
(3) Location on an existing Village-owned utility pole.
(4) Location on Village-owned infrastructure on private poles.
(5) Location on Village-owned property, where there is no existing pole.
(6) Location on privately owned utility poles.
B. If the proposed site is not the highest priority listed above, then a detailed
explanation must be provided as to why a site of higher priority was not selected.
The person seeking such an exemption must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason
or reasons why such a permit should be granted for the proposed site and the
hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were not granted for
the proposed use.
A. Small cell permit application fee: shall be $250 (nonrefundable) due to the Village
Building Department upon submittal of a completed application for review.
B. Annual small cell permit fees:
(1) For placement on existing private utility poles: $500 per year per pole.
(2) For placement on existing Village-owned buildings, utility poles,
infrastructure or property: $750 per year.
(3) For placement of new poles in the right-of-way: $1,000 per year per pole.
C. Fee start date. The annual permit fee shall be payable January 2 of the year
following installation. Failure to pay the annual permit fee shall result in the
imposition of a 5% penalty fee, additional co-location fees if necessary, and
suspension or revocation of the permit.
§ 191-3 SMALL CELL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 191-5
191:3
§ 191-5. Aesthetics and neighborhood impact mitigation.
Planning Commission requirements as to aesthetics and neighborhood impact mitigation
for small cell permits:
A. In order to preserve the character and integrity of Village neighborhoods, the
Village Board finds that the following requirements are essential to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, and scenic preservation:
(1) New small cell facilities shall not be located in the Historic District, unless the
applicant demonstrates to the Planning Board's satisfaction that the selected
site is necessary to provide adequate service. The applicant will be required to
receive approval from the Historic District Commission pursuant to Chapter
44 of the Village Code.
(2) New small cell facilities shall include stealth technology designs, unless the
Planning Commission makes a written determination that such designs are not
feasible.
(3) The Planning Commission may consider alternative locations for equipment,
whether pole-mounted or ground-mounted.
(4) All small cells placed on any roof shall be set back at least 15 feet from the
edge of the roof along any street frontage, unless the Planning Commission
makes a written determination waiving the setback requirement.
(5) The Planning Commission shall consider all impacts to sight lines and
aesthetic views.
(6) Except within the public right-of-way, all proposed poles, pole equipment and
enclosures shall comply with the designated setback requirements.
(7) Up to three small cells will be allowed per utility pole if technically feasible
and if, in the determination of the Planning Commission, there are no safety or
aesthetic concerns. Small cells must be designed and placed in an aesthetically
pleasing manner to the reasonable satisfaction of the approving agency.
(8) No small cell placement shall be allowed on ornamental streetlighting poles as
determined by the Building Inspector.
(9) No small cell facilities shall obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic in any way.
(10) In no event shall any utility pole or wireless telecommunications support
structure as of January 1, 2019, installed in the public right-of-way, exceed 50
feet in height, unless special permit approval is obtained from the Board of
Trustees pursuant to § 191-2A(3). A shorter pole may be required if the initial
proposal is deemed out of character of with the neighborhood as determined
by the Planning Commission.
(11) Each new small cell facility, including antennas or other associated equipment,
installed in the public right-of-way shall not exceed more than 10 feet above
the existing utility pole or wireless telecommunications support structure on
which it is being located, unless special permit approval is obtained from the
§ 191-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 191-5
191:4
§ 191-6. Utility infrastructure.
The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall forward a copy of the Planning
Commission decision to the Village Clerk/Treasurer to allow the Village to better assess
the utility infrastructure for wireless telephone facilities.
§ 191-7. Duration of permit.
Construction pursuant to a small cell permit issued by the Planning Commission under
this chapter must be commenced within 12 months of issuance of the small cell permit
and diligently pursued thereafter, or such small cell permit shall expire.
§ 191-8. Routine maintenance and replacement.
An application shall not be required for:
§ 191-9. Information updates.
Any amendment to information contained in a small cell building/work permit
application shall be submitted in writing to the Village within 30 days after the change
necessitating the amendment. On an annual basis, the wireless telecommunications
provider shall provide a list of existing small cell locations within the Village.
§ 191-10. Removal, relocation or modification.
Removal, relocation or modification of a small cell facility in the public right-of-way:
§ 191-11. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Board of Trustees pursuant to § 191-2A(3).
A. Routine maintenance; and
B. The replacement or upgrade of a small cell facility with another small cell facility
that is same as or smaller in size and height at the same location.
A. Notice. Within 90 days' following written notice from the Village, the wireless
provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any small facilities
within the public right-of-way whenever the Village has determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration is necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the Village in or upon, the public right-of-way.
B. Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a small facility within the public
rights-of-way of the Village, the wireless provider shall notify the Village within 90
days. Following receipt of such notice, the Village may direct the wireless provider
to remove all or any portion of the small cell facility if the Village, or any of its
departments, determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 191-5 SMALL CELL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 191-11
191:5
ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT — Any equipment servicing or being used in conjunction
with a wireless telecommunications facility or wireless support structure. The term
includes utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables,
equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmits or receives
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency signals. Such waves shall include, but not
be limited to, radio, television, cellular, paging, personal telecommunications services
(PCS) and microwave telecommunications.
BASE STATION — A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables
Commission-licensed or -authorized wireless communications between user equipment
and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower, as defined in this
section, or any equipment associated with a tower.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an
eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio
frequency signals for communications purposes.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS) — A network of spatially separated
antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST — Any request for modification of an existing
tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such
tower or base station, involving:
ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any tower or base station, as defined in this
section, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the
Village of Hamburg.
MONOPOLE—A tower which consists of a single pole structure, designed and erected
The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless
communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as
well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave
backhaul.
A.
The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment,
regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems
and small-cell networks).
B.
The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the Village of Hamburg pursuant to this chapter, supports
or houses equipment described in Subsections A and B of this definition that has
been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, even
if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such
support.
C.
A. Co-location of new transmission equipment;
B. Removal of transmission equipment; or
C. Replacement of transmission equipment.
§ 191-11 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 191-11
191:6
on the ground or on top of a structure, to support communications antennas and connect
appurtenances.
SMALL-CELL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY or SMALL
CELL FACILITY — Small cells are low-powered wireless base stations that function
like cells in a mobile wireless network, typically covering targeted indoor or localized
outdoor areas ranging in size from homes and offices to stadiums, shopping malls,
hospitals, and metropolitan outdoor spaces. A "small cell facility" meets both the
following qualifications:
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A modification substantially changes the physical
dimensions of an eligible support structure (tower or base station) if it meets any of the
following criteria:
Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume
or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its
exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic
feet; and
A.
All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more
than 17 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment
are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter,
concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based
enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and
vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
B.
The mounting of the proposed antenna on existing towers, other than towers in
the public rights-of-way, would increase the existing height of the tower by more
than 10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from
the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other
eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10%
or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater;
A.
The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve the installation of more than
the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to
exceed four, or more than one new equipment shelter;
B.
The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve adding an appurtenance to the
body of existing towers, other than towers in the public rights-of-way, that would
protrude from the edge of the towers more than 20 feet, or more than the width of
the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other
eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the
structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet,
except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits herein
if necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna
to the tower via cable;
C.
The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve excavation outside the
current existing structure site, defined as the current boundaries of the leased
or owned property surrounding the existing structure and any access or utility
easements currently related to the site;
D.
E. The modification defeats concealment and/or stealth elements of the support
§ 191-11 SMALL CELL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 191-11
191:7
TOWER — Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any
licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that
are constructed for wireless communications services, including, but not limited to,
private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and
fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.
UTILITY POLE — A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part for the
purpose of carrying electric distribution lines or cables or wires for telecommunications,
cable or electric service, or for lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function,
regardless of ownership, including Village-owned poles. Such term shall not include
structures supporting only wireless telecommunication service facilities. Any pole in
excess of 50 feet shall be deemed a tower.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — A wireless
telecommunications infrastructure provider or a wireless telecommunications services
provider.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FACILITY — A structure,
facility or location designed or intended to be used as, or used to support, antennas.
It includes, without limit, freestanding towers, guyed towers, monopoles, small cell
telecommunications facilities on utility poles in the public right-of-way or property
of the Village of Hamburg or of another municipal corporation within the Village of
Hamburg and similar structures that employ camouflage technology, including, but not
limited to, structures such as a multistory building, church steeple, silo, water tower, sign
or other similar structures intended to mitigate the visual impact of an antenna or the
functional equivalent of such. It is a structure intended for transmitting and/or receiving
radio, television, cellular, personal telecommunications services, commercial satellite
services or microwave telecommunications, but excluding those used exclusively for
dispatch telecommunications, or exclusively for private radio and television reception
and private citizens bands, amateur radio and other similar telecommunications.
§ 191-12. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are separable; and if any provision, clause, sentence,
subsection, word or part thereof is held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, or
inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity or
unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, clauses, sentences, subsections, words or parts of this chapter or their
application to other persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared to be the legislative
intent that this chapter would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provision, clause, sentence, subsection, word or part had not been
included therein and if such person or circumstance to which the chapter or part hereof
is held inapplicable had been specifically exempt therefrom.
structure; or
The modification does not comply with prior conditions of the approval for the
existing structure and/or site; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply
to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed
the thresholds identified above.
F.
§ 191-11 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 191-13
191:8
§ 191-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
§ 191-13 SMALL CELL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 191-13
191:9

Chapter 193
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Employee smoking policy — See Ch. 89, Art. I.
§ 193-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Hamburg Smoke-Free
Policy."
§ 193-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the public health and welfare by creating
a healthier community, and a cleaner environment and by offering a role model for
children by prohibiting smoking in the Village's parks and playgrounds. It is also the
purpose of this chapter to allow all of the residents of the Village of Hamburg to
coexist harmoniously in a manner which is mutually respectful of the interests, rights
and obligations of all persons.
§ 193-3. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking is prohibited in all Village parks and playgrounds, including, but not limited
to, the Hamburg Swim Center, Legion Field Baseball Complex, Community Center
Playground, Glen Meadows Park, Lake Street Memorial Park, Centennial Park and the
Peace Park. It is also unlawful for any person to dispose of any smoking materials,
including, but not limited to, cigarette/cigar butts and filters, in any place other than a
designated receptacle.
§ 193-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $250.
§ 191-13 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES § 193-4
193:1

Chapter 198
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal waste — See Ch. 109.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 132.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 182.
Sewers — See Ch. 186.
Junk vehicles — See Ch. 233.
§ 193-4 SOLID WASTE § 193-4
198:1

ARTICLE I
Health and Sanitation
[Adopted 4-6-1970 by §§ 8-3 through 8-7 of the 1970 Code]
§ 198-1. Use of animal, vegetable matter to fill in land.
No sunken places shall be filled in or made land constructed with any materials
containing an admixture of putrescible animal or vegetable matter.
§ 198-2. Dead carcasses; unwholesome, offensive substances.
No person shall bring, deposit or leave exposed within this Village any dead carcasses
or other unwholesome or offensive substance.
§ 198-3. Offensive, noxious deposits.
No swill, brine, urine of animals or any stinking noxious or offensive liquid of any kind
or any foul, filthy matter whatever shall be allowed to drip, run or fall from or out of any
building, vehicle or structure into or upon any street or public place.
§ 198-4. Deposits of refuse.
§ 198-5. Penalties for offenses. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by a
term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
A. Definition. For the purposes of this section, an "off-street parking area" shall be
construed to mean an area maintained by or leased to the Village or maintained by
private persons, firms or corporations open to the public or the customers, invitees
or licensees of a particular business or group of businesses or maintained by
churches, schools or fraternal organizations open to and for the use of their
members, attendants, invitees or licensees.
B. Deposits prohibited. No person shall throw, sweep or deposit any dirt, refuse,
garbage, rubbish or filth, including but not limited to wastepaper, ashes, sweepings,
dust, garbage, offal, plaster, lint, rags, glass, wrappings, scrap materials or tin cans,
and leave the same on any sidewalk or within the limits of any street, alley, public
place, park, school grounds, playgrounds or off-street parking areas or upon the
banks of or in the Eighteen Mile Creek.
C. Exception. It shall not, however, be unlawful to place at curbs or between paved
portions of the street and the public sidewalk such materials as above in this section
defined for collection by public or private refuse and rubbish collectors.
§ 198-1 SOLID WASTE § 198-5
198:3

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Management
[Adopted 7-20-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
§ 198-6. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Municipal Solid Waste Law" of the Village of
Hamburg.
§ 198-7. Purpose; effective date; garbage totes and recycling containers.
§ 198-8. Definitions. [Amended 7-18-2016 by L.L. No. 6-2016]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — A person, individual, partnership or corporation or
employee or agent thereof authorized by contract or license with the Village of Hamburg
to collect solid waste from residential, commercial and institutional properties as herein
defined under the terms and conditions of this article. In the event of the Village of
Hamburg collection, this definition shall include the governing body and employees
A. The reduction, reuse and recycling of solid waste are important public concerns and
will aid in the protection and preservation of the environment, and the Solid Waste
Management Act of 1988 mandates passage of a source separation ordinance or law
to be passed by each local municipality within New York State by September 1,
1992, to require that solid waste which has been left for collection or which is
delivered by the generator of such waste to a solid waste management facility shall
be separated into recyclable, reusable or other components for which economic
markets for alternate uses exist. The Village of Hamburg establishes mandatory
recycling within the Village of Hamburg will be effective on September 1, 1992.
B. Effective March 1, 2016, all improved real property located in the Village of
Hamburg which receives solid waste and/or recyclable collection service from the
Village of Hamburg shall be assessed a one-time user fee on the 2017-2018 Village
tax bill to cover the cost of a garbage tote(s) and/or a recycling container(s) as
required by this Code. The cost of said user fee shall be equal to the amount charged
by the third-party private contractor utilized by the Village for the purchase of
garbage totes and recycling containers in the Village of Hamburg and shall be
charged and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest at the same rate as
taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers in the same manner
as taxes. In the event that replacement totes and/or containers are required, they
shall be purchased directly through the Village of Hamburg at a cost to be
determined by the Village of Hamburg. [Added 3-21-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
C. Should any amount of said user fee be due and owing, including any late fees, as of
November 1 of the year in which the fee was issued, the property owner shall be
mailed an invoice in the amount of the tote fee and penalty. Any amount of said
bill, including fees and penalty charges, not paid within 30 days of the date of the
invoice shall become a lien upon the real property, superior to any other deed or
claim, except the lien of any existing charge imposed by the Village of Hamburg.
[Added 12-18-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 198-6 SOLID WASTE § 198-8
198:5
thereof.
BRUSH — Cuttings from shrubs, hedges and trees which are less than four inches in
diameter.
BULKIES—Large items, such as sofas, upholstered chairs, mattresses and box springs,
but excluding large appliances (white goods), such as refrigerators, stoves, dishwashers,
washers, dryers, etc., which are considered recyclable.
COLLECTOR — The Village of Hamburg Department of Public Works or those
collectors/haulers engaged in the collection of and/or transportation of solid waste by the
Village of Hamburg.
COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS — All properties used for industrial or commercial
purposes, including but not limited to retail and wholesale establishments, apartments,
trailer courts, offices, garages, gas stations, manufacturing and repair establishments,
banks, motels, restaurants and other similar and related facilities.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Discarded building material,
concrete, stones, earth from excavations or grading and all other refuse matter resulting
from the erection, repair or demolition of buildings, structures or other improvements of
property.
CONTAINER—Can, bin, box, bag or other unit used for storage of recyclable materials
or municipal solid waste.
FACILITY — Any solid waste management resource recovery facility employed
beyond the initial solid waste collection process which is to be used, occupied or
employed for or is incidental to the receiving, transporting, storage or processing or
disposal of solid waste or the recovery by any means of any material or energy product
or resource therefrom, including recycling centers, transfer stations, processing systems,
resource recovery facilities, sanitary landfills, plants and facilities for composting or
landspreading of solid wastes, secure land burial facilities, reprocessing and recycling
facilities, surface impoundments and waste oil storage, incinerators and other solid waste
disposal, reduction or conversion facilities.
HAZARDOUS WASTE—Solid waste that is especially harmful or potentially harmful
to public health. This shall include, but not be limited to, explosives, toxic materials
and medical waste. For purposes of this article, hazardous waste does not include small
quantities of such waste available on a retail basis to the homeowner (e.g., aerosol cans,
pesticides, fertilizers, etc.).
INSTITUTION — An organization or establishment devoted to the promotion of a
particular object or cause, including schools, religious institutions, nursing homes and
retirement homes, health facilities, governmental facilities, libraries, fire halls, etc.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) — All putrescible and nonputrescible materials,
including garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials, including but not limited
to solid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations
and from community activities. Liquids, semisolids and contained gaseous materials
are hereby defined as solid waste. It shall not include solids or dissolved material in
domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved
or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents, dissolved materials in irrigation
return flows or other common water pollutants. In addition, it shall not include hazardous
waste.
§ 198-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 198-8
198:6
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, institution or
other entity.
PRIVATE COLLECTOR—A person, firm, corporation or legal entity providing for the
collection of municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials. To operate in the Village
of Hamburg, they shall be required to obtain a license from the Village and be subject to
the rules and regulations of the Village.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS —
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, processing, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be disposed of
as solid waste.
RECYCLABLE CONTAINER — A rigid plastic container or bin, provided to the
residents by the Village of Hamburg, or other like metal or rigid plastic container with
drainage holes to be used solely for the placement of recyclable materials as defined by
Those materials specified by the municipality for separate collection in accordance
with recycling regulations. Such materials may include, but are not limited to:
ALUMINUM — Aluminum products and containers fabricated primarily of
aluminum and commonly used for soda, beer, beverage or other food or drink.
(1)
METAL CANS — Containers fabricated primarily of steel and tin or bimetal
cans of steel, tin and/or aluminum, but not including aluminum cans.
(2)
GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS— New and used glass
food and beverage containers which have been rinsed and are free of food
contamination, including clear (flint), green and brown (amber) colored glass
bottles and jars. Glass shall not include ceramics, plate glass, auto glass,
Pyrex®, leaded glass, mirrored glass or flat glass.
(3)
PLASTIC FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Includes highdensity
polyethylene (HDPE) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET),
designated respectively as 1, 2 and 3 on the recycling code located on the
containers.
(4)
(5) NEWSPRINT — Any common newspaper, including inserts.
CORRUGATED— Wood pulp-based material which is usually smooth on
both sides with a corrugated center, commonly used for boxes; excludes
material with a wax coating.
(6)
HIGH-GRADE PAPER— White and colored office bond, duplicating paper,
computer paper and other high-quality paper.
(7)
(8) MAGAZINES — Magazines, glossy catalogs and other glossy paper.
LARGE APPLIANCES— Stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers, washing
machines, water heaters and other large appliances and scrap metal, but
excluding air conditioners, microwaves and televisions.
(9)
A.
The above materials will be reviewed quarterly and will be modified as the need
arises by the Superintendent of Public Works or other designated person.
B.
§ 198-8 SOLID WASTE § 198-8
198:7
this Code. When filled, this container should not exceed 40 pounds in weight.
REFUSE TOTE — A Village-authorized container of a capacity of either 65 gallons
or 95 gallons for the storage and collection of municipal solid waste, including but not
limited to garbage and nonrecyclable refuse and rubbish. All refuse totes shall be owned
by the Village of Hamburg and will be assigned to residential units and/or buildings
and structures as more particularly set forth in this Code. Any refuse tote assigned to a
residential unit and/or a building or structure shall remain at that residential unit and/or
building or structure and shall not be removed from same.
RESIDENT —A person residing within the Village on a temporary or permanent basis,
but excluding persons residing in hotels or motels.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Properties used as primary dwellings.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT—The purposeful, systematic control of the storage,
collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Removing or separating recyclable materials from the
municipal solid waste stream at the point of waste generation.
TIRES — Any rubber automobile or truck tires.
TREE PARTS — Cuttings from shrubs, hedges and trees which are more than four
inches in diameter.
WASTE GENERATOR — Any person or legal entity which produces waste requiring
off-site disposal.
WASTE OIL — Used engine-lubricating oil and any other oil, including but not limited
to fuel oil, motor oil, gear oil, cutting oil, transmission fluid, hydraulic fluid, dielectric
fluid, oil storage tank residues, animal oil and vegetable oil, which has been
contaminated by physical or chemical impurities, through use or accident, and has not
subsequently been re-refined.
YARD WASTE — Organic yard and garden waste, leaves, grass clippings, brush and
tree parts.
§ 198-9. Duty of owners and occupiers of property. [Amended 7-18-2016 by L.L.
No. 6-2016]
A. No person shall permit any municipal solid waste to accumulate for a period of
longer than seven days upon property owned or occupied by said person in the
Village of Hamburg. Owners or occupiers of residential property are hereby
required to make accumulated municipal solid waste available for collection as
scheduled under the terms hereof.
B. Residential properties which receive solid waste and/or recyclable collection
services from the Village of Hamburg are required to have a refuse tote(s) and/or
recyclable container(s). Single-family households are required to have one refuse
tote and one recyclable container, and two-family households are required to have
two refuse totes and two recyclable containers. Such containers shall be stored
behind the front setback line of the building on the lot or shall be secured in a
separate structure located on the property approved by the Building Inspector until
placed to the curb for collection.
§ 198-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 198-9
198:8
§ 198-10. Properties to be kept clear of solid waste.
C. An owner or occupier of a property that contains more than two dwelling units, or
property conducting commercial or institutional operations and which receives
solid waste and/or recyclable collection services from the Village of Hamburg, shall
be required to have a minimum of two refuse totes and two recyclable containers
or, in the alternative, an appropriate number of said totes and containers as
determined by the Superintendent of Public Works that allows the owner/occupier
to comply with this Code. All municipal solid waste shall be kept in closed refuse
totes, or in dumpsters which have been approved for such use on such property by
the Building Inspector, until ready for collection. Such containers shall be kept,
until placed for collection, behind the front setback line of the building on the lot or
secured in a separate structure on the lot approved by the Building Inspector.
D. All municipal solid waste accumulated on any residential, commercial, industrial
and institutional property in the Village of Hamburg may be collected, conveyed
and disposed of by the authorized collector in accordance with the provisions of this
article. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and dispose of any municipal
solid waste within the Village of Hamburg except as provided in this article.
E. All municipal solid waste accumulated on commercial and institutional properties
may be collected, conveyed and disposed of by authorized collectors under contract
with, or licensed by, the Village of Hamburg. In such case where a commercial or
institutional establishment contracts directly with a collector, the fee or payment
shall be a matter of private agreement between the owners or occupiers and the
collector. When approved by the Village of Hamburg, owners of nonresidential
properties may collect, convey and dispose of privately generated municipal solid
waste by their own containers and/or trucks, provided that they comply with the
provisions of this article applicable thereto and New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation regulations.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of every dwelling, store or other
building within the Village of Hamburg to keep such buildings free, clear and clean
of all kinds of municipal solid waste of any kind or description and to keep sidewalk
and yard areas free, clear and clean of all municipal solid waste of any kind or
description.
B. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of every store or other building
within the Village of Hamburg, excepting dwellings, to keep all municipal solid
waste and recyclable material containers inside the building on the occupied
premises or in a suitable structure considered for that particular purpose of
approved design from approved noncombustible building materials in accordance
with the building regulations of the Village, but nothing herein shall be construed
to require the alteration, modification or reconstruction of any existing structure or
portion thereof presently in use for such purposes in the Village of Hamburg. Said
structure shall be located behind the front setback line of the building on the lot or
shall be secured in a separate structure on the lot approved by the Building
Inspector. [Amended 7-18-2016 by L.L. No. 6-2016]
§ 198-9 SOLID WASTE § 198-11
198:9
§ 198-11. Source separation of recyclable materials.
Municipal solid waste generated or originated within the Village of Hamburg which
has been left for collection shall be handled in the following manner: Prior to initial
collection or transport, source separation shall be required of each and every person or
party discarding municipal solid waste and/or recyclable materials. Recyclable materials
shall not be commingled with other solid waste during collection, transportation or
storage following collection. Collectors shall refuse to collect municipal solid waste
from any person, residential, commercial, institutional or industrial property or party
who has clearly failed to source separate the recyclable materials and/or who has
not properly prepared the recyclable materials to the specifications of the Village of
Hamburg.
§ 198-12. Preparation for collection. [Amended 7-18-2016 by L.L. No. 6-2016]
No person shall dispose of municipal solid waste or recyclable materials except as
follows:
§ 198-13. Collection and disposal.
Only authorized collectors shall collect, pick up, remove or cause to be collected, picked
up or removed any solid waste recyclable materials so placed for collection. Where
the authorized collector has refused to collect certain recyclable materials because they
have not been separated, placed or treated in accord with the provisions of this article,
A. All municipal solid waste, including garbage and nonrecyclable refuse and rubbish,
shall be stored in a refuse tote or a dumpster as set forth in this Code. All municipal
solid waste and nonrecyclable refuse placed into a refuse tote shall be placed either
loosely, in a trash compactor bag or in a clear plastic bag. The lids on all refuse
totes and dumpsters must be completely closed. No refuse tote shall exceed 150
pounds in weight when filled.
B. All recyclable materials shall be placed in a recyclable container as defined in this
Code.
C. From the time of placement of recyclable materials at the curb by a resident for
collection in accordance herewith, such recyclable materials shall become and be
the property of the Village of Hamburg or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation
of this article of the Code of the Village of Hamburg for any person without
authority from the Village of Hamburg to collect, pick up, remove or cause to be
collected, picked up or removed any recyclable materials, and each such collection,
picking up or removal from one or more premises shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense in violation of the Code of the Village of Hamburg.
D. It shall be a violation of this article of the Code of the Village of Hamburg for any
person to place at the curb for collection any can or container other than one which
contains municipal solid waste or recyclable materials.
E. The Village of Hamburg will not collect any municipal solid waste or recyclables
from any residential, commercial, industrial or institutional property within the
Village of Hamburg where the municipal solid waste and recyclables are not
separated in accordance with this article.
§ 198-11 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 198-13
198:10
the person responsible for initially placing those materials for collection may and shall
remove those materials from any curb, sidewalk or street side. Nothing herein shall
prevent any person from making arrangements for the private collection, sale or donation
of recyclable materials prior to placement at the curbside.
§ 198-14. Construction and demolition debris, large appliances and bulkies.
§ 198-15. Collection schedule; time for placement; removal of empty containers.
A. The Director of Public Works shall determine, subject to the approval of the Board
of Trustees, schedules for the collection of construction and demolition debris, large
appliances and bulkies.
B. No person shall place or store construction and demolition debris with municipal
solid waste. The person creating construction and demolition debris shall remove
same and dispose of same in a sanitary manner. In the event construction and
demolition debris results from work performed by an owner or resident
individually, the debris may be placed at the curb for pickup by the Village, except
that the quantity of such debris may not exceed 10 containers or bundles of not more
than 60 pounds each. Quantities of such debris in excess of the amount stated shall
be removed by the property owner or resident at his or her expense.
C. Any and all debris from work done by a contractor must be removed by the
contractor that did the work. The Village will not collect any contractor debris.
D. All large appliances or bulkies which are to be discarded from a residence where
the appliance or furnishing was actually in use shall be placed by the owner of said
appliance or furnishing at the curb on the scheduled collection day for pickup by
the Village. It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner to dismantle the
appliance or furnishing so that it will not be a hazard to the public. In this respect,
doors shall be removed from the appliance or furnishing before placing it at the curb
for collection.
E. The Village shall have no obligation to pick up and remove any construction and
demolition debris, large appliance or household bulkies which were not used in a
residence in the Village of Hamburg.
A. The Director of Public Works shall designate the days and hours for collection of
municipal solid waste and recyclable materials and nonrecyclable rubbish.61
B. Village employees or equipment shall not enter private property or structures in
making collections.
C. All municipal solid waste, recyclable materials, construction and demolition debris,
large appliances and bulkies to be picked up must be at the curb no later than 7:00
a.m. on the day of collection, and no material may be placed at the curb before
12:00 noon of the day preceding the scheduled pickup day. [Amended 4-23-2001
by L.L. No. 3-2001]
D. Empty containers shall be removed from the curbline or other places of collection
61. Editor's Note: The current solid waste collection schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 198-13 SOLID WASTE § 198-15
198:11
§ 198-16. Yard waste.
§ 198-17. Collectors; license; requirements; records.
by the occupants of the property before the end of the day on which collection is
made from the property.
A. The Director of Public Works is authorized to provide for the collection of brush
and tree parts at such times and in such manner as the Board of Trustees shall from
time to time provide.
B. The authorization provided for in the preceding subsection shall apply only to brush
and tree parts produced by the individual activity or efforts of the owner or occupant
of the property.
C. Brush and tree parts produced by commercial contractors must be removed from
the property by the contractor or by the owner or occupant of the property. Such
brush and tree parts may not be placed at or near the curb or street right-of-way,
except temporarily as may be necessary in the course of the work which produced
the brush and tree parts.
D. The Village of Hamburg will not collect or remove brush or tree parts produced by
commercial contractors.
A. All authorized collectors must obtain a solid waste collection license from the
Village of Hamburg. A fee for such license shall be set by the governing body on
an annual basis, and all licenses shall be issued for the fiscal year, or such portion
thereof.62 There shall be no reduction in the fee for a license issued after the
beginning of any fiscal year. An authorized collector sticker shall be prominently
displayed on each vehicle operated by or on behalf of the authorized collector.
[Amended 8-17-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
B. Authorized collector applications may be denied if the applicant or license has been
adjusted or administratively determined to have committed one or more violations
of this article during the preceding fiscal year. All authorized collectors licensed by
the Village of Hamburg indemnify and hold harmless the Village of Hamburg for
any pending, threatened or actual claims, liability or expenses arising from waste
disposal by the authorized collector in violation of this article. Authorized
collectors shall offer collection services for all recyclable materials to all
commercial, industrial and institutional customers from whom they provide
municipal solid waste services. Each collector who shall apply for a license under
this section shall state the manner of collection and the place and method of disposal
of the municipal solid waste and recyclable materials from its commercial,
industrial and institutional customers. [Amended 8-17-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
C. Records.
(1) Each collector shall maintain separate monthly records of solid waste and
recyclable materials collected, transported or disposed of by the authorized
collector which include the following information:
62. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in the Appendix of this Code.
§ 198-15 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 198-17
198:12
§ 198-18. Noncompliance; denial, suspension or revocation of license.
When the designated public officials determine that a failure to comply with this article
may have occurred, Director of Public Works shall recommend to the Village of
Hamburg that the authorized collector application or the license be denied, suspended or
revoked or its holder subjected to a reprimand or fine or that the generator or originator
of the solid waste or recyclable materials be subject to sanctions, fines or penalties as
described herein. Notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided prior to the
denial, suspension or revocation of a solid waste license or authorized collector permit
or the issuance of a sanction, fine or penalty.
§ 198-19. Notice of violation.
§ 198-20. Hearings; determination; conviction.
(a) The municipality or geographical area and number of units in which the
solid waste or recyclable material was generated.
(b) The quantity, by ton, of solid waste and of each type of recyclable
material collected.
(c) The quantity, by ton, of recycled material delivered to a recycling
facility(ies) and the location of the recycling facility(ies).
(d) The quantity, by ton, of solid waste delivered to each facility.
(2) Reports containing the information required as stated above shall be compiled
and delivered to the Village Director of Public Works or other designated
individual for each reporting period as designated by the regulations, but
which shall be no more frequently than quarterly.
D. Authorized collectors shall not accept for collection municipal solid waste which
has not been source separated in conformity of this article.
A. The Director of Public Works shall notify the affected generator, applicant or
licensee of the alleged failure in writing. The notice shall include the following:
(1) A statement of the condition allegedly violated, referring to the pertinent law,
rule or regulation.
(2) A short and plain statement of the alleged misconduct.
(3) A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing.
B. The notice shall be personally served or sent by registered mail to the generator,
applicant or licensee's last known address, at least 10 days before the hearing date,
with a copy to the Administrator.
A. Hearings shall be held before the Village Justice within a reasonable period, which
shall be at least 10 days after service of notice. The generator, applicant or licensee
may be represented by counsel at the hearing and may offer evidence and crossexamine
witnesses. Within 20 days after the close of the hearing, the Village Justice
shall determine whether the alleged failure to comply with this article has occurred
§ 198-17 SOLID WASTE § 198-20
198:13
§ 198-21. Final determination.
Disposition may be made by stipulation, agreed settlements, consent order, default or
other informal method, prior to final determination by the Village Justice. The Village
Justice shall promptly notify the applicant or licensee, in writing, of his or her final
determination, decision or order.
§ 198-22. Inspection.
All portions of vehicles and containers used to haul, transport or dispose of municipal
solid waste materials, including such containers placed outside residential, commercial,
industrial or institutional sites, shall be subject to inspection to ascertain compliance with
this article.
§ 198-23. Unauthorized disposal of garbage, recyclable rubbish, nonrecyclable
rubbish or construction and demolition debris.
No person shall cart to, dump or deposit any municipal solid waste upon any property in
the Village except under the authorization, supervision and direction of the Director of
Public Works.
§ 198-24. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-3-2016 by L.L. No. 7-2016]
and, if the Village Justice determines that such a failure has occurred, decide
whether the generator or applicant shall be subject to fine or penalty.
B. Upon conviction of a violation by the Village Justice, after a hearing or default in
appearing by the alleged violator in addition to any fine or penalty, the Director of
Public Works may, without further hearing, issue a reprimand, suspend the
violators authorized collector's license for a period not to exceed 90 days from the
date of suspension order or revoke the authorized collector's license.
A. The failure of any person engaged in the business of collecting municipal solid
waste and/or recyclable materials or rendering solid waste and/or recycling
services, who is not authorized by the Village or who collects, picks up, removes or
causes to be collected, picked up or removed municipal solid waste or recyclable
materials in a manner not in compliance with this article, shall be guilty of a
violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $500 and not exceeding the sum of
$5,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day
such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Violations.
(1) Failure of a waste generator to comply with the provisions in this article
designated as a violation shall be punishable as follows:
(a) For the first violation: by a written warning clearly stating the nature of
the violation and a schedule of fines for future violations.
(b) For the second violation within one year: by a fine of $50.
(c) For the third violation within one year: by a fine of $100.
§ 198-20 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 198-24
198:14
§ 198-25. Enforcement.
The Director of Public Works, a police officer or such other person as may be designated
by the Board of Trustees is authorized and directed to enforce these articles and to cause
collections to be made accordingly.
(d) For the fourth violation and each subsequent violation within one year:
by a fine of $200.
(2) All fines imposed under this § 198-24B shall double if not paid within 15 days
of the date of issuance of the violation notice.
C. Any penalties or damages recovered or imposed under this article are in addition to
any other remedies available at law or equity. No penalties, fines, civil sanctions or
other enforcement actions will be commenced prior to October 17, 2016, in order
to permit persons regulated hereunder to come into compliance with this article.
§ 198-24 SOLID WASTE § 198-25
198:15

Chapter 200
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 146.
Sewers — See Ch. 186.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 200-1. Findings; purpose.
A. Findings. It is hereby determined that:
(1) Land development activities and associated increases in site-impervious cover
often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, or
sediment transport and deposition;
(2) This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitats for fish and other desirable
species;
(3) Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion and add
to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitats;
(4) Improper design and construction of stormwater management practices can
increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby increasing stream bank
erosion and sedimentation;
(5) Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
(6) Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on the
waters of the municipality;
(7) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from
land development activities;
(8) The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates
and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source
pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will
minimize threats to public health and safety.
(9) Regulation of land development activities by means of performance standards
governing stormwater management and site design will produce development
compatible with the natural functions of a particular site or an entire watershed
and thereby mitigate the adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from
§ 198-25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 200-1
200:1
§ 200-2. General provisions.
development.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public residing within this jurisdiction and to address the
findings of fact in § 200-1A. This chapter seeks to meet those purposes by
achieving the following objectives:
(1) Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the NYS Department
of Environmental Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, as amended or
revised;
(2) Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit for
Construction Activities, Permit No. GP-02-01, as amended or revised;
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development activities in
order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and
streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels;
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows from any
specific site during and following development to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source
pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management practices and
ensure that these management practices are properly maintained and eliminate
threats to public safety.
A. Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities as
defined in § 200-3 of this chapter.
B. Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from review under this
chapter:
(1) Agricultural activity, as defined in § 200-3 of this chapter;
(2) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are subject
to this chapter;
(3) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility;
(4) Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed necessary
§ 200-1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 200-2
200:2
§ 200-3. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter or in documents prepared or reviewed under this chapter
shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY—The activity of an active farm, including grazing and
watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using land for growing agricultural
products, and cutting timber for sale, but shall not include the operation of a dude ranch
or similar operation, or the construction of new structures associated with agricultural
activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an
application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof,
designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100
square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse, with a definite bed and banks, that
conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general
public use.
by the Stormwater Management Officer;
(5) Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the
Village of Hamburg on or before the effective date of this chapter;
(6) Land development activities for which a building permit has been approved on
or before the effective date of this chapter;
(7) Cemetery graves;
(8) Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of
posts or poles;
(9) Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or natural
resources;
(10) Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing flowers,
vegetables and other plants primarily for use by that person and his or her
family;
(11) Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
C. Title. This chapter shall be known as "Chapter 200, Stormwater Management."
D. Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.
§ 200-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 200-3
200:3
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL—The "New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual"
(New York State Department of Environmental Conservation), most recent version
or its successor, including applicable updates, which serves as the official guide for
stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The "New York Standards and Specifications
for Erosion and Sediment Control" (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water
Conservation Society, 2004), most current version or its successor, commonly known as
the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that cannot
effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building rooftops, pavement,
sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which
regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or
specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
hydrophytic vegetation.
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including clearing,
grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that results in land disturbance
of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities disturbing less than one acre of total
land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale disturbing one acre
or more in the aggregate, even though multiple separate and distinct land development
activities may take place at different times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the
right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the
land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as a
property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater
management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than from any
discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include but not be limited to
pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and
urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the stabilization
of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement that
addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or siltation) and any other
§ 200-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 200-3
200:4
pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body that will
receive a discharge from the land development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the
site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold-water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches,
groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, or habitats for threatened,
endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one or more
acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate storm sewers for
compliance with EPA-established water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater
control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction activity
on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in typical
stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural practices
that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its adverse impacts on
property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of controlling
stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee or officer
designated by the Village Board of Trustees to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans (SWPPPs), forward the plans to such agency, committee, employee,
or board of the Village of Hamburg which may be reviewing any application for
a construction activity requiring submission of a SWPPP, and inspect stormwater
management practices. The Superintendent of Public Works, or his designee, shall act as
the SMO.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPS) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means
of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source
pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
§ 200-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 200-3
200:5
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after construction
activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting from
precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK—Lakes, bays, sounds, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets,
canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial seas of the State of New York and all
other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public
or private (except those private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with
natural surface or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment systems, including
treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria of this definition, are not waters
of the state. This exclusion applies only to man-made bodies of water which neither were
originally created in waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted
from impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either
natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public
storm drain.
§ 200-4. Requirements.
A. The municipality shall designate an SMO who shall accept and review all SWPPPs.
The SMO may review the plans; upon approval by the Village Board of Trustees,
engage the services of a registered professional engineer to review the plans,
specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule
established by the Village Board of Trustees; or accept the certification of a
licensed professional that the plans conform to the requirements of this chapter.
B. All land development activities subject to review and approval by the Planning
Commission, Board of Trustees, or Building Inspector of the Village of Hamburg
under site plan, special permit, subdivision and/or development permit regulations
shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained in this chapter. Within 30 days
of receipt of a SWPPP, the SMO shall forward the SWPPP, together with his or her
written recommendation to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
SWPPP, to such agency, committee, employee, or board of the Village of Hamburg
which may be reviewing any application for a land development activity requiring
submission of a SWPPP. Approval shall only be given if the SWPPP meets the
requirements of this chapter. In making a recommendation to conditionally approve
or disapprove the SWPPP, the SMO shall state the reasons for the decision in
writing. In order to be approved, an applicant must revise a conditionally approved
or disapproved SWPPP in accordance with the recommendations of the SMO and
submit the revised SWPPP to the SMO for review.
C. Any land development activities not subject to review by the Planning Commission,
Board of Trustees or the Building Inspector of the Village of Hamburg, as described
in § 200-4B, shall be required to submit a SWPPP to the SMO, unless such activity
§ 200-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 200-4
200:6
§ 200-5. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
is specifically exempt pursuant to § 200-2B. Within 30 days of receipt of a SWPPP,
the SMO shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the SWPPP. Approval
shall only be given if the SWPPP meets the requirements of this chapter. In
conditionally approving or disapproving the SWPPP, the SMO shall state the
reasons for the decision in writing. In order to be approved, an applicant must
revise a conditionally approved or disapproved SWPPP in accordance with the
recommendations of the SMO and submit the revised SWPPP to the SMO for
review.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for approval of
a land development activity shall be reviewed until the SMO and the Planning
Commission have received a SWPPP prepared in accordance with the
specifications in this chapter.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information and erosion
and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project;
(b) Site map/construction drawings for the project, including a general
location map. The site map should be at a scale of no smaller than one
inch to 100 feet. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site
area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will not be
disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface
waters; wetlands and drainage patterns that could be affected by the land
development activity; existing and final slopes; locations of off-site
material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas; and locations of the
stormwater discharges;
(c) Description of the soils present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation and
grading, utility and infrastructure installation, and any other activity at the
site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with the Erosion Control
Manual, not more than five acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless
pursuant to an approved SWPPP;
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used to
control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris from
becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be stored onsite,
with updates as appropriate, and a description of controls to reduce
pollutants from these materials, including storage practices to minimize
exposure of the materials to stormwater, and spill prevention and
response;
§ 200-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 200-5
200:7
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to be used
for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control for each stage
of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing to project close-out;
(h) A site map/construction drawings specifying the locations, sizes and
lengths of each erosion and sediment control practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all erosion
and sediment control practices, including the siting and sizing of any
temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control
measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and sediment
control practices, including the timing of initial placement and duration
that each practice should remain in place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of the
erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Names of the receiving waters;
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each part of
the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from exposed
soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants
from exposed areas of the site to the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
(2) Land development activities as defined in § 200-3 of this article and meeting
Condition "A", "B" or "C" below shall also include water quantity and water
quality controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in
§ 200-5B(3) below as applicable:
(a) Condition A: Stormwater runoff from land development activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water identified
on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a total maximum
daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which pollutants in
stormwater have been identified as a source of the impairment.
(b) Condition B: Stormwater runoff from land development activities
disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C: Stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the course of the
project, exclusive of the construction of single-family residences and
construction activities at agricultural properties.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Condition A, B or C:
(a) All information in § 200-5B(1) of this chapter;
§ 200-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 200-5
200:8
(b) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(c) Site map/construction drawings showing the specific locations and sizes
of each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of the
stormwater management system for the applicable design storms;
(e) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with
predevelopment conditions;
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of
each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater management
practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair. Easements
shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in effect with transfer of
title to the property;
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the on-site stormwater management measures in
accordance with § 200-7 of this chapter; and
(j) For Condition A only, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must be
signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meets the requirements in
this chapter.
C. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable
environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the land development
activity prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan. Any notice of intent
(NOI) submitted to the Department pursuant to the SPDES General Permit for
Construction Activities, GP-02-01, should be submitted to the SMO concurrently
therewith.
D. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who will be
involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice
installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification statement
before undertaking any land development activity: "I certify under penalty of
law that I understand and agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the
stormwater pollution prevention plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the
signature; the address and telephone number of the contracting firm; the
address (or other identifying description) of the site; and the date the
certification is made.
§ 200-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 200-5
200:9
§ 200-6. Performance and Design Criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance and design
criteria:
§ 200-7. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater facilities.
(3) The certification statements shall be included with and become part of the
SWPPP for the land development activity.
E. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land development activity
during construction from the date of initiation of construction activities to the date
of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following documents shall
serve as the official guides and specifications for stormwater management.
Stormwater management practices that are designed and constructed in accordance
with these technical documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed
by this chapter:
(1) The Design Manual; and
(2) The Erosion Control Manual.
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management practices are
not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant or developer must
demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards set forth in § 200-6A and the
SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed professional.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause an increase
in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in
surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity or his or her
representative shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and
systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve compliance with the
conditions of this chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or
sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(2) For land development activities as defined in § 200-3 of this chapter and
meeting Condition A, B or C in § 200-5B(2), the applicant shall have a
qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the effectiveness
of all erosion and sediment control practices every seven days and within 24
hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more.
Inspection reports shall be maintained in a site logbook.
(3) The applicant or developer or his or her representative shall be on site at all
times when construction or grading activity takes place and shall inspect and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices.
§ 200-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 200-7
200:10
§ 200-8. Administration and enforcement.
B. Maintenance easements. Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a stormwater
management facility as one of the requirements, the applicant or developer must
execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall
provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village of Hamburg to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working
condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this
chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the grantor in the office of the County
Clerk after approval by the counsel for the Village of Hamburg.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent stormwater
management practices installed in accordance with this chapter shall ensure they
are operated and maintained to achieve the goals of this chapter. Proper operation
and maintenance also includes, as a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical facilities and
systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which are installed
or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new
maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause or
contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance with § 200-6 of
this chapter.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village of Hamburg shall approve a formal
maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities binding on all
subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the County Clerk as a deed
restriction on the property prior to final plan approval. The maintenance agreement
shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of Schedule A of this chapter
entitled "Sample Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement."63 The
Village of Hamburg, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may
accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility,
provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes
adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for
inspection and regular maintenance.
A. Construction inspection.
(1) Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(a) The SMO may require such inspections as necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter and may either approve that portion of the
work completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply
with the requirements of this chapter and the SWPPP as approved. To
obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the SMO at least 48 hours
before any of the following, as required by the SMO:
63. Editor's Note: A copy of the sample stormwater control facility maintenance agreement is on file in the Village offices.
§ 200-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 200-8
200:11
[1] Start of construction;
[2] Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
[3] Completion of site clearing;
[4] Completion of rough grading;
[5] Completion of final grading;
[6] Close of the construction season;
[7] Completion of final landscaping; or
[8] Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(b) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be notified
in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective
actions. No further work shall be conducted, except for site stabilization,
until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has
received approval by the SMO.
(2) Stormwater management practice inspections. The SMO is responsible for
conducting inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All
applicants are required to submit as-built plans for any SMPs located on site
after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design
specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified
by a professional engineer.
(3) Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but not
limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon
complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins
or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type
associated with higher-than-usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or
with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to
cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the
SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include but
are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage
control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and
other stormwater management practices.
(4) Submission of reports. The SMO may require monitoring and reporting from
entities subject to this chapter as are necessary to determine compliance with
this chapter.
(5) Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management facility
is installed on private property or when any new connection is made between
private property and the public stormwater system, the landowner shall grant
to the Village of Hamburg the right to enter the property at reasonable times
§ 200-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 200-8
200:12
and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in
§ 200-8A(3).
B. Performance guarantee.
(1) Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and faithful
completion of all land development activities related to compliance with all
conditions set forth by the Village of Hamburg in its approval of the SWPPP,
the Village of Hamburg may require the applicant or developer to provide,
prior to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of
credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees
satisfactory completion of the project and names the Village of Hamburg as
the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be determined by the
Village of Hamburg based on submission of final design plans, with reference
to actual construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall
remain in force until the surety is released from liability by the Village of
Hamburg, provided that such period shall not be less than one year from the
date of final acceptance or such other certification that the facilities have been
constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that
a one-year inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to
be acceptable to the Village of Hamburg. Per annum interest on cash escrow
deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released from
liability.
(2) Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the developer
or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility,
the developer, prior to construction, may be required to provide the Village of
Hamburg with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial
institution or surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of all
stormwater management and erosion control facilities both during and after
construction, and until the facilities are removed from operation. If the
developer or landowner fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater
management and erosion and sediment control facilities, the Village of
Hamburg may draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation
and maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
(3) Recordkeeping. The Village of Hamburg may require entities subject to this
chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this chapter.
C. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) Notice of violation. When the Village of Hamburg determines that a land
development activity is not being carried out in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of violation to the
landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
(b) The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or
land upon which the violation is occurring;
§ 200-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 200-8
200:13
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed
against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the
municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service
of notice of violation.
(2) Stop-work orders. The Village of Hamburg may issue a stop-work order for
violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be
required to halt all land development activities, except those activities that
address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order
shall be in effect until the Village of Hamburg confirms that the land
development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily
addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may result
in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement
measures authorized in this chapter.
(3) Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is conducted
contrary to this chapter may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in
a manner provided by law.
(4) Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or
by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for
conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within a period
of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed
within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors,
and, for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors
shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute
a separate additional violation.
(5) Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land development
activity is installed or conducted in violation of this chapter, the SMO may
prevent the occupancy of said building or land.
(6) Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a
reasonable time after notice, the Village of Hamburg may take necessary
corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until
paid.
§ 200-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 200-8
200:14
D. Fees for services. The Village of Hamburg may require any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at
prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
performed by the Village of Hamburg or performed by a third party for the Village
of Hamburg. The fee shall be set by the Village Board of Trustees by resolution.
§ 200-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 200-8
200:15

Chapter 203
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 182.
Sewers — See Ch. 186.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 207.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 216.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 229.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 200-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 200-8
203:1

ARTICLE I
Notification of Defects
[Adopted 10-5-1953 by L.L. No. 3-1953]
§ 203-1. Statutory authority. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Section 6-628 of the Village Law, as it applies to the Village of Hamburg, is hereby
amended to read as follows.
§ 203-2. Liability of Village in certain actions.
No civil action shall be brought or maintained against the Village of Hamburg for
damages or injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed or in consequence of the existence or accumulation of snow
or ice upon any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk unless written
notice of the existence of such condition, relating to the particular place, had theretofore
actually been given to the Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg, and there
had been a failure or neglect on the part of said Village to cause such condition to be
corrected or such snow or ice to be removed or the place otherwise made reasonably safe
within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 203-3. Existing claims.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or cause of action
now barred by any existing requirement or statute of limitations nor to waive any
existing limitation now applicable to any claim or cause of action against the Village of
Hamburg.
§ 203-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 203-3
203:3

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
[Adopted 4-6-1970 as Arts. I through III of Ch. 15 of the 1970 Code]
§ 203-4. Permission required for excavations. [Amended 4-1-1991 by L.L. No.
2-1991]
No person shall injure any pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk or sewer or dig any area
sewer or other excavation in any public street nor remove any earth or stone therefrom
within the Village without obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works
and under such conditions as the Board of Trustees or such Director may impose, and
the Board of Trustees may order any sewer or excavation constructed contrary to the
provisions of this section to be filled up or altered at the expense of the owner of the
adjoining lands.
§ 203-5. Curb cutting.
No person being the owner, lessee or occupant of land fronting on intersecting highways
or streets within the Village shall permit the depressions, removal or cutting of the curb
or entrance or access, ingress or egress of vehicles to or from the property within 25 feet
from the street side point of intersection of the sidewalks. The Board of Trustees may
grant a permit to suit particular circumstances involving hardship notwithstanding the
foregoing provision of this section.
§ 203-6. Excavations to be guarded.
Whenever any public street within the Village is in process of construction or repair or
whenever any other excavation is made in any of the streets, sidewalks or public places
of the Village or within four feet of the line of any street, it shall be the duty of the person
performing the work to place and maintain such sufficient guards about said construction
as to secure public safety until said street is ready for public use and at all times during
the night to keep lighted lamps not more than 20 feet apart upon said guards so as to give
warning to all persons of such construction.
§ 203-7. Interference with safety measures.
No unauthorized person shall remove or interfere in any way with any lamps or other
danger signals or any barriers erected for public safety.
§ 203-8. Interference with construction or repair.
No person shall hinder or obstruct the construction or repair of any pavement, sidewalk,
crosswalk, sewer or other public improvement within the Village which shall be then
under any order of the Board of Trustees or of the Director of Public Works, nor hinder
or obstruct any person employed by said Board in doing any work upon any public street
or place.
§ 203-9. Obstructions to streets and sidewalks.
A. No person shall place any merchandise or obstruction of any kind upon any street
or sidewalk upon the public streets of the Village. No person shall place or suffer to
§ 203-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 203-9
203:5
§ 203-10. Moving buildings. [Amended 6-15-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
§ 203-11. Building materials in streets.
§ 203-12. Throwing stones, missiles or other objects.
No person shall throw or cast any stone or other missile or thing in, from or onto any
street, lane, alley, park, public place or enclosed grounds within the Village.66
remain any barrel, crate, article or other obstruction upon any street or place within
said Village so as to obstruct the free passage of people, except while actually
engaged in loading or unloading goods.
B. No person, either in the course of, or as a result of shoveling, blowing or plowing
snow on or from any sidewalk or driveway, shall pile snow or permit snow to be
piled or accumulated on any public sidewalk or on the paved portion of any public
street. [Added 5-2-1977 by L.L. No. 5-1977]
A. Permit required. No building or part thereof or structure of any kind shall be moved
upon or along any public street or place within the Village without permission in
writing from the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, which consent
shall specify the route to be used and approval of the method to be used. The fee for
this permit will be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.64
B. Bond. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works may require a bond
to be given signed by the applicant and one or more responsible sureties approved
by the Superintendent of Public Works, conditioned that the applicant will in all
respects comply with the terms and conditions of such permit and indemnify the
Village against any damage or loss occasioned by reason of such removal.
A. Permission required. No person shall place any materials for building, or any other
purpose, upon any public street within the Village without permission in writing
from the Director of Public Works. Such permission shall not be for a longer period
than three months, nor shall it authorize the obstruction of more than 1/3 of the
sidewalk.
B. Materials to be guarded. Any person to whom permission is granted as aforesaid
shall cause all said materials to be enclosed within sufficient guards so as to secure
public safety and shall at all times during the night keep lighted lamps upon said
grounds in such a manner as to give warning to all persons of the presence of said
materials or rubbish.
C. Removal of materials. All such building materials and all rubbish arising therefrom
shall be removed from any public street at the expiration of the time limited in the
above mentioned permit, or upon the revocation of said permit.
D. Revocation of permit. Any such permit may be revoked without notice by the Board
of Trustees or the Director of Public Works at any time.65
64. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
65. Editor's Note: Former § 15-10, dealing with scattering materials on streets or sidewalks, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 6-15-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988.
§ 203-9 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 203-13
203:6
§ 203-13. Incomplete streets.
No person shall ride or drive any vehicle or animal upon any street in the Village until
the same is completed and opened to public use.
§ 203-14. Skating or sliding on sidewalks.
No person shall skate or slide over any sidewalk within the Village in such a manner as
to hinder or endanger pedestrians.
§ 203-15. Projections onto streets or sidewalks.
The construction of any building, projection or addition to any structure or building over,
into or upon any street or sidewalk within the limits of the Village is hereby prohibited.
§ 203-16. Trapdoors in sidewalks.
No person shall erect or maintain any trapdoor or grate in any of the sidewalks within the
Village without written permission from the Board of Trustees, and no trapdoor or grate
in any of the sidewalks within the Village shall be kept open at any time, except during
the receiving and delivery of goods, and during such time the same shall be surrounded
by sufficient barriers as to secure public safety.
§ 203-17. Gates.
No person shall construct or maintain a gate that shall swing outward over any sidewalk
in the Village.
§ 203-18. Awnings. [Amended 6-16-1975 by L.L. No. 9-1975]
A. Definitions. The term "awning" means a structure, having no concealed or enclosed
spaces, attached to the face of a building wall, the function of which is to protect
openings such as windows, doors, vents and the like.
B. Construction requirements. Awnings shall be constructed and erected in conformity
with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Construction Code.
[Amended 6-15-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
C. Projection over public right-of-way. No awning shall extend over the public rightof-
way of any street or any sidewalk customarily used by the public except when
authorized by a permit issued by the Building Department of the Village in
accordance with Chapter 123, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
(1) No awning shall project over such public right-of-way or such sidewalk for a
horizontal distance of more than one foot less than the horizontal distance
between the lowest point of attachment of the awning to the wall of the
building and a line extended vertically from the curbline (or paved portion of
the public right-of-way.
(2) No awning shall project over such public right-of-way or public sidewalk
66. Editor's Note: Former § 15-12, dealing with vehicles or animals on sidewalks, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 6-15-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988.
§ 203-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 203-18
203:7
§ 203-19. Signs and banners.
§ 203-20. Erection of posts. [Amended 6-15-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
No person shall place or erect any post or posts in any street in the Village except at such
place or places and in such manner as may be directed by the Board of Trustees.
§ 203-21. Paving contractor and striping contractor; fee and job permit. [Added
2-18-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
unless the vertical distance between the lowest part of such awning and grade
level is at least nine feet.
(3) Awnings projecting over such public right-of-way or such public sidewalk
shall be kept free of snow, ice, water, debris, vegetation or an accumulation of
any kind of material.
(4) No merchandise or articles of any kind shall be hung from or affixed to any
awning projecting over such public right-of-way or such public sidewalk.
(5) Awnings projecting over such public right-of-way or such sidewalk must be
constructed without additional or exterior support and must not form an
integral part of the building structure.
D. Permits. Any permit issued by Building Department to the extent that it authorizes
the projection of an awning over a public right-of-way or a public sidewalk shall
constitute a temporary license revocable by the Building Department on 30 days
notice to the owner or occupant of the premises at which the awning is located.
A. Distance from sidewalk. No person shall erect or suspend any sign or banner over a
public street within the Village without the consent of the Board of Trustees, and
no sign attached to any building adjoining a public street shall be less than nine feet
from the sidewalk.
B. Liability insurance; permit. No such sign shall be placed or attached to a building
so that any portion thereof shall be over any portion of any public street or sidewalk
until a bond or liability insurance policy issued by a casualty or surety company
authorized to do business in the state shall have been given to the Village,
conditioned that the company will save the Village harmless on account of any
injury sustained to person or property arising from the erection, maintenance or
removal of such sign over the public street and will defend any action brought
against the Village on account of the erection, maintenance or removal thereof, and
until a written permit be obtained, signed by the Mayor or Village Clerk-Treasurer,
which permit shall be valid only for such time as such bond or insurance policy or
renewal thereof shall be in force and the maintenance of any such sign without such
bond or insurance policy shall be a violation of this section.
A. Annual license fee. An annual license fee as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees is hereby imposed on any contractor who does
paving/blacktop work in the Village. The license issued upon payment of said fee
shall be valid for the fiscal year in which it is issued. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L.
No. 3-1998; 8-17-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
§ 203-18 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 203-21
203:8
§ 203-22. Indemnity bonds.
B. A right-of-way permit is required for any paving work performed within any rightof-
way within the Village of Hamburg.
C. The license and the right-of-way permit are issued by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
A. Required. All applications made to the Board of Trustees or to any Village officer
to make any excavation in or upon any public street, avenue, alley or other public
place within the Village for the purpose of making sewer, water or gas connections
therein, or for permission to construct and maintain an areaway under the sidewalk,
or under any public street or place within the Village, or for consent or permission
to plant, trim, cut or remove any tree or part of a tree, or to place any obstruction,
temporary or otherwise, except as hereinafter mentioned in any street, avenue or
other public place within the Village, shall be accompanied by a bond in such
amount as may be determined by the Board of Trustees, with sufficient sureties to
be approved by the Board of Trustees and as to form and manner of execution to be
approved by the Village Attorney, to be given by the person by or in whose behalf
such consent or permission is requested, indemnifying the Village against all loss,
cost, damage or expense sustained or recovered on account of any negligence,
omission or act of the applicant for such permit, or any of his or her servants or
agents arising or resulting directly or indirectly by reason of such permit or consent,
or any excavation, construction, cutting, removal or other act done, made or
permitted under authority of any such permit or consent.
B. Stipulation that permits are revocable. All permits or consents for the making of
any excavation, the construction or maintenance of any areaway, the planting,
trimming, cutting or removing of any tree, the placing of any such obstruction or
the doing of any other act shall be given subject to the right of the Board of
Trustees, or any other authorized Village official, servant or agent, to revoke the
same at any time to the expiration thereof, either absolutely or to continue the same
upon such terms and conditions as it may deem advisable, and all bonds given in
pursuance of the provisions of this article as a condition precedent to the granting
of any application aforesaid shall contain a stipulation to that effect.
C. General bond. Licensed plumbers, contractors and all persons engaged within the
Village in the telephone business, gas or electric business, compressed air cleaning
business or any other business the nature of which would require or result in
frequent applications for permits to make obstructions or excavations in the streets
or highways in the Village shall not be required to furnish a separate bond for every
permit as a condition precedent to the granting of the same, but in all such cases a
general bond shall be given before the granting of any permit indemnifying the
Village from any and all loss, cost of damage as aforesaid resulting or arising,
directly or indirectly, at any time from any act done or permitted in pursuance of
any such permit or consent thereafter granted in such amount as may be determined
by the Board of Trustees in the manner and form to be approved as provided in
§ 203-22. The Board of Trustees shall have the right to require a new bond which
may be in such amount as may be determined by said Board to be filed by any
person engaged in any or either of the classes of business above specified whenever
from time to time it shall deem a new bond necessary in order to protect the interests
§ 203-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 203-22
203:9
§ 203-23. Specifications for construction of sidewalks. [Amended 6-20-1988 by
L.L. No. 4-1988]
All sidewalks constructed in the Village of Hamburg shall be constructed of concrete
unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees. Sidewalks shall be installed
in conformity with a line and grade established by the Department of Public Works.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in conformity with specifications prepared from time to
time by the Superintendent of Public Works and approved by the Board of Trustees.
§ 203-24. Penalties for offenses. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum
fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
of the Village.
§ 203-22 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 203-24
203:10
ARTICLE III
Public Sidewalks
[Adopted 4-16-1990; amended in its entirety 8-19-1991]
§ 203-25. Sidewalks required.
Sidewalks are required on all properties in the Village of Hamburg along all adjoining
public streets except on properties on so-called dead-end streets. To the maximum extent
practicable, sidewalks shall be installed within the street right-of-way at the street rightof-
way line and shall extend the entire length of the street right-of-way.
§ 203-26. Installation and maintenance. [Amended 12-20-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
A. Required sidewalks shall be installed and repaired at the expense of the respective
property owners, except in the case of a property adjoining more than one public
street, only the sidewalk installed along the longer street right-of-way line shall be
installed and repaired at the expense of the property owner, and the sidewalk
installed along the shorter street right-of-way shall be installed and repaired at
Village expense.
B. The owner or occupant of any premises fronting or abutting any street or highway
shall repair, keep safe and maintain any sidewalk abutting the premises and keep it
free and clear from snow, ice, dirt or other obstruction. Any such owner or occupant
shall be liable for any injury or damage by reason of omission or failure to repair,
keep safe and maintain such sidewalk or to remove snow, ice or other obstruction
therefrom, or negligence in performing those functions.
C. No person shall plow, shovel, sweep or pile snow, ice or other materials in or on
any sidewalk, street, or public highway or cause such to be done so as to interfere
with the safety and convenience of public travel.
D. No person shall remove snow or ice from any parcel or property and place it upon
another parcel or property without the express permission of the owner of the parcel
upon which the snow or ice is to be placed.
E. Snow and ice shall be removed within 24 hours after the end of a snowfall. In
addition, sidewalks in front of commercial establishments and along commercial
parking lots shall be kept free of snow and ice at all times between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
F. In case snow or ice on any sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it cannot be
removed without injury to the sidewalk, it shall, within the time specified within
this article, be strewn and kept strewn with sand, salt, or other suitable commercial
snow and ice melting products, so as to no longer be dangerous to life and limb. As
soon as practical thereafter, the sidewalk shall be completely cleared of snow and
ice and other materials strewn thereon, as provided in this article.
G. The owners or occupants of buildings adjacent to public sidewalks shall take
measures to protect the public from falling snow, ice or water from such buildings.
§ 203-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 203-27
203:11
§ 203-27. Asphalt surface in lieu of sidewalk.
Where an asphalt surface has been heretofore installed in a location where a sidewalk
would otherwise be located, such surface may be used for sidewalk purposes, provided
that it is in good condition and is at correct grade and elevation with respect to sidewalks
on adjoining parcels. Asphalt sidewalks shall not be resurfaced with asphalt. They
may be replaced only with concrete sidewalks installed in accordance with Village
specifications. In the case of newly annexed property up to five years grace to be granted
for construction of the same.
§ 203-28. Repair, replacement and realignment of public sidewalk.
A. With respect to the repair, replacement and realignment of public sidewalks in the
Village of Hamburg, the following shall be the policy of the Village of Hamburg,
effective April 16, 1990. Following a receipt of a notice to repair or replace
designated sidewalks, the owner or occupant of the affected property may proceed
as follows:
(1) Sidewalk slabs marked for replacement must be replaced.
(2) Sidewalks out of alignment by more than 3/4 inch with adjacent slabs of
sidewalk must be replaced. However, the resident may elect to raise or lower
the appropriate slab of sidewalk and must advise the Village for inspection.
(3) Sidewalks that have a two-inch drop or rise in 10 feet must be replaced.
However, the resident may elect to raise or lower the appropriate slabs of
sidewalk and must advise the Village for inspection.
(4) Should the resident advise the Village that he or she wishes to do the work
himself or herself, and the work is not completed by the time the contractor
starts work for the Village, that work will be completed by the contractor and
the appropriate amounts billed to the resident.
(5) Sidewalks with single or multiple cracks rendering the slab structurally
inadequate must be replaced.
(6) Slabs adjacent to sidewalk being removed that are cracked will have to be
removed if further damage occurs.
(7) The decision as to what slabs will be replaced will be at the sole discretion of
the Department of Public Works.
(8) The costs incurred by the Village for replacement of any sidewalk pursuant to
this section shall be billed and assessed to the homeowner. Should any amount
of said bill be due and owing, including any late fees, as of December 31 of
the year in which the bill was issued, the specified assessment and penalty
shall be added to the property tax roll. [Added 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
B. Village contractors are not authorized to repair or realign sidewalks or sidewalk
slabs. Village contractors will in each and every instance replace (not repair)
affected sidewalks.
§ 203-27 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 203-29
203:12
§ 203-29. Penalties for offenses. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a maximum
fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 203-29 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 203-29
203:13

ARTICLE IV
Plowing
[Adopted 3-1-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
§ 203-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
VEHICLE — Any vehicle (as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York) licensed to operate on the highways of the State of New York and used to
plow snow, but the term shall not include a vehicle used solely by a person, firm or
corporation to plow snow within the confines of his or its own property, whether owned
or leased.
§ 203-31. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall plow snow or cause or allow the same to be plowed
by the use of any vehicle within the Village of Hamburg unless a permit therefor, as
hereinafter prescribed, issued by the Village Clerk, is in full force and effect and such
permit is prominently displayed by being affixed to the vehicle so as to be readily visible
from the exterior thereof.
§ 203-32. Permit application; fee; issuance and term of permit.
§ 203-33. Revocation of permits; penalties for offenses.
A. Application for such permit shall be made to the Village Clerk by the owner of the
vehicle, in writing, upon forms to be furnished by said Village Clerk, which forms
shall contain the owner's name and address, the vehicle identification number, the
New York State license number attached thereto and such additional information as
the Village Clerk shall require. The Village Clerk may require such documents and
information as may be reasonably necessary to verify the facts stated in such
application.
B. The permit fee shall be established and amended as necessary by resolution of the
Village Board. The applicant shall, at the time of the filing of his application, pay
the current permit fee as established for each vehicle.67 If such application or
applications shall be approved by the Village Clerk, a permit or permits shall be
issued to the applicant. Such permits shall commence June 1 and expire May 31 in
each year and shall be in such form as the Village Clerk shall prescribe. Such
permits shall not be transferable to another owner or vehicle.
A. The Clerk-Treasurer may, following a hearing, revoke the permit or permits granted
to any person, firm or corporation under the authority of this article for failure to
comply with any of the terms of this article or any law, ordinance, rule or regulation
relating to snowplowing or snow removal.
B. In addition to any other penalties that may be invoked under this article, any
violation by a person, firm or corporation of any provision of this article shall be
67. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in Ch. A255.
§ 203-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 203-33
203:15
deemed an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or by imprisonment for
a period not to exceed 15 days, or both.
C. Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this article shall also be
subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 203-33 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 203-33
203:16
Chapter 207
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 123.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 141.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 146.
Sewers — See Ch. 186.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 200.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 203.
Trees — See Ch. 225.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 207-1. Authority; purpose. [Amended 10-20-1969]
By authority of the resolution adopted by the Village Board of Trustees on the 24th day
of July, 1967, pursuant to the provision of Article VIA of the Village Law, the Planning
Commission of the Village of Hamburg is empowered and authorized to approve plans
for land subdivision within the Village of Hamburg. These regulations are adopted
for the purpose of providing for the future growth and development of the village
and affording adequate facilities for the housing, transportation, distribution, comfort,
convenience, safety, health and welfare of its population.
§ 207-2. Title; definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, which shall be known and may be cited as the
"Village of Hamburg Subdivision Regulations," certain words used herein are defined as
follows:
BOND — Performance bond.
COMMISSION — The Village of Hamburg Planning Commission.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS - Type of lot that has frontage on two parallel streets
(front and rear lot line). ENGINEER — The duly designated engineer of the Village of
Hamburg.
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT—The final map, drawing or chart on which the owner's
or subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented for approval and which, if approved, will
be submitted to the County Clerk for recording.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive plan prepared by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to Section 179g of the Village Law, which indicates the general locations
recommended for the various functional classes of public works, places and structures,
includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such
plan or parts thereof.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a parcel of land into five lots or parcels, or
fewer, for the purpose of building development or transfer of ownership, provided that
no new street is involved.[Added 9-19-1983]
§ 203-33 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 207-2
207:1
OFFICIAL MAP—The map established by the Village Board under Section 179e of the
Village Law, showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid out, adopted by
the Village Board, or additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats.
OWNER — Person or persons having title to the parcel of land registered in County
Clerk's office.
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT — The preliminary drawings and supplementary material
indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning
Commission for its consideration.[Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
STREET — The right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, thruway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or
however otherwise designated.
SUBDIVISION [Amended 9-19-1983] — The division of a parcel of land into six or
more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development,
or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land, provided that none of the
following shall be considered to be a subdivision for the purposes of these regulations:
§ 207-3. Procedure.
ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — Those used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and principal streets for circulation within such
a development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to
the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
E.
The division of land into lots or parcels of 5 acres or more and not involving a new
street.
A.
A transfer of ownership for the purpose of enlarging an adjoining lot or parcel
without creating either a new street or a separate building lot.
B.
C. The division of land upon court order.
The division of land to carry out the terms of a decedent's will to the decedent's
devisees.
D.
A. Application.
(1) Preapplication meeting. Prior to the filing of any application, it is the intention
that an informal discussion between the developer (owner/subdivider) and the
§ 207-2 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 207-3
207:2
Planning Commission be held to discuss the meaning and intent of these
regulations and the procedure to be followed in order that all parties concerned
are aware of their individual and group responsibilities.
(2) Whenever any subdivision of land as hereinbefore defined is proposed to be
made or whenever a proposed annexation of an area to be subdivided is
referred to the Commission for approval prior to and as a condition of
annexation, before any contract for the sale of or any offer to sell such
subdivision or any part thereof is made, the subdividing owner thereof, or the
owner's agent, shall apply in writing to the Commission for approval of such
subdivision. The subdividing owner shall first file with the Commission a
preliminary layout and subsequently a formal plat as hereinafter specified.
B. Conditional approval of preliminary layout. [Amended 9-4-2007 by L.L. No.
3-2007]
(1) On reaching conclusions regarding his or her general program and objectives,
the owner shall submit a preliminary layout, together with other
supplementary material, as specified in § 207-6, and together with a
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required for the proposed
subdivision under Chapter 200, Stormwater Management. Any SWPPP
required under Chapter 200, Stormwater Management, shall be submitted
together with the written recommendation of the Stormwater Management
Officer to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant
to § 200-4B of the Code of the Village of Hamburg, and shall meet the
performance and design criteria in § 200-6 of the Code of the Village of
Hamburg. Three copies of the preliminary layout, required supplemental
material, and any SWPPP required under Chapter 200, Stormwater
Management, shall be submitted to the Commission, with written application
for conditional approval, at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which it is to
be considered.
(2) Following review of the preliminary layout and other material submitted
therewith and following negotiations with the owner on changes deemed
advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the owner
in accordance with the requirements of § 207-5, the Commission shall act
thereon as submitted, or as modified. If a SWPPP was submitted together with
a preliminary layout in accordance with § 207-3B(1), such SWPPP and
preliminary layout shall be approved only if they meet the requirements of
Chapter 200, Stormwater Management. If the preliminary layout, which is for
layout only and not approval for construction, is approved, the Commission
shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the specific
conditions of such approval, if any. If the preliminary layout is disapproved,
the Commission shall state the reasons for its disapproval. Within three days
of the regular meeting, the Planning Commission shall inform the applicant in
writing relative to changes, conditional approval or disapproval.
(3) The action of the Commission shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary
layout, to which shall be attached referenced statements of any conditions and
requirements determined by the Commission in accordance with these
regulations. One copy shall be returned to the owner and the other retained by
§ 207-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 207-3
207:3
the Commission. Conditional approval of a preliminary layout shall not
constitute approval of the final subdivision plat. Rather, it shall be deemed
an expression of approval to the layout submitted in preliminary form as a
guide to the preparation of the final subdivision plat, which will be submitted
for approval of the Commission and for recording upon fulfillment of the
requirements of these regulations and the conditions of the conditional
approval, if any, and approval by the County Health Department, when
required.
C. Approval of final subdivision plat. [Amended 7-19-1976; 9-4-2007 by L.L. No.
3-2007]
(1) The final subdivision plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary
layout, as approved, and shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 200,
Stormwater Management. If desired by the owner, the final subdivision plat
may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary layout which the
owner proposes to record and develop at the time, provided that such portion
conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
(2) Application for approval of the final subdivision plat shall be submitted in
writing to the Commission at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which it is
to be considered and shall include three copies of the plat and other exhibits
required for approval, as specified in § 207-6, together with a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required for the proposed subdivision
under Chapter 200, Stormwater Management. Any SWPPP required under
Chapter 200, Stormwater Management, shall be submitted together with the
written recommendation of the Stormwater Management Officer to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to § 200-4B of the
Code of the Village of Hamburg, and shall meet the performance and design
criteria in § 200-6 of the Code of the Village of Hamburg. Such application
shall be submitted within six months after approval of the preliminary layout;
otherwise such preliminary approval shall become null and void unless an
extension of time is applied for and granted by the Commission.
(3) Before the Commission will approve the final plat, it will hold a public
hearing. A filing fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, shall be paid prior to setting the hearing date and publishing the
notice of hearing.68 Said fee is necessary to cover the cost of publication and
time and materials used to mail notices of the hearing to all property owners
within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision. Thereafter and within 45 days
after the application for approval of the plat was filed, the Commission will
approve, modify and approve or disapprove such plat. If a SWPPP was
submitted together with the final plat in accordance with § 207-3C(2), such
SWPPP and final plat shall be approved only if they meet the requirements of
Chapter 200, Stormwater Management. Approval, however, shall not be
deemed final until the subdivider has complied with the provisions of § 207-6
with respect to certification that required improvements have been completed
or satisfactory bond has been posted in lieu thereof.
68. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in the Appendix of this Code.
§ 207-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 207-3
207:4
§ 207-4. Design standards.
(4) The owner will be required to tender offers of cession in a form certified as
satisfactory by the Village Attorney of all sewers, drains, waterlines and all
land included in streets, parks or other public areas not specifically reserved
by the owner, and all easements, but approval of the plat by the Commission
does not constitute an acceptance by the Village of the dedication of any street,
park or other public open space.
(5) After the completion of the foregoing details and notation to that effect upon
the plat, it shall be deemed to have final approval. The developer must file
such plat with the County Clerk or Register prior to the expiration date of plat
approval as provided in § 7-728 of the Village Law or such approval will
expire as provided in § 7-732 of the Village Law.
A. Streets.
(1) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the Master Plan and to the Official Map, if any, and shall be
considered in their relations to other existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served and/or abutted
by such streets.
(2) Where such is not shown in the Master Plan, the arrangement of streets in a
subdivision shall either provide for the continuation or appropriate projection
of existing principal streets in surrounding areas, or be adopted by the
Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other
conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
(3) Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
(4) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street,
the Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with
screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property
line, deep lots with or without rear service alleys or such other treatment as
may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
(5) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
controlled access highway right-of-way, the Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate
districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
(6) Reserve strips controlling access to streets, water plants or sewage treatment
plants, or to other land dedicated or to be dedicated to public use, shall be
prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the village under
conditions approved by the Village Board.
§ 207-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 207-4
207:5
(7) Streets jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
(8) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on
minor and collector streets or of such lengths as may be deemed necessary by
Commission for arterial streets.
(9) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more
than 10º, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius at the inner street
line of not less than 350 feet for minor and collector streets, and of such greater
radii as the Commission shall determine for special cases.
(10) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles,
and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 75º. Any change in
street alignment to meet this requirement shall occur at least 100 feet from the
intersection.
(11) Street right-of-way lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius
of 10 feet, or with a greater radius where the Commission may deem it
necessary. The Commission may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place
of rounded corners.
(12) Curb radii at intersections shall be not less than 20 feet.
(13) Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the Master Plan, and where not
shown therein shall be not less than as follows:
Street Type
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Arterial 100 to 1201
Collector 80
Minor 60
1Not including right-of-way for
marginal access streets, if any.
(14) Half streets shall be prohibited.
(15) Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall be not longer than 400
feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an
outside roadway diameter of at least 110 feet and a street property line
diameter of at least 140 feet.
(16) No street names shall be used which will duplicate or likely be confused with
the names of existing streets. Street names shall be cleared with officials
designated by the Village Board, police departments and postal authorities.
House numbers should follow standard practice of house numbering in village.
(17) Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following, with due
allowance for reasonable vertical curves and with not less than 200 feet
between changes of grade:
§ 207-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 207-4
207:6
Street Type
Maximum Grade
(Percentage)
Arterial 4%
Collector 5%
Minor 6%
Marginal access 6%
(18) Except as otherwise provided for in Chapter 200, Stormwater Management, in
order to facilitate drainage, no street grade shall be less than 0.5%, which
requirement may be reduced to 0.3% if there are street curbs or if pavement
wearing surface is smooth finished, but only with approval of the Engineer.
Except as otherwise provided for in Chapter 200, Stormwater Management,
drainage structures and adequate ditches shall be provided by the owner
(subdivider) to prevent ponding or damage to public or private property.
[Amended 9-4-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
(19) Grades at street intersections shall be held to a maximum of 3% for a distance
of 100 feet in any direction from the point of intersection of the street center
line.
B. Alleys.
(1) Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the
Commission may waive this requirement when other definite and assured
provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and
parking, consistent with the access adequate for the uses proposed.
(2) The width of an alley shall be not less than 24 feet.
(3) Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where
necessary shall be provided with sufficient corner cutoffs to permit safe
vehicular movement.
(4) Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but, if unavoidable, shall be
provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined by
the Commission.
C. Easements.
(1) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for
utilities where necessary and shall be at least 20 feet wide.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-ofway
of not less than 20 feet in width conforming substantially with the lines of
such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in
connection therewith.
D. Blocks.
§ 207-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 207-4
207:7
(1) The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard
to:
(a) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the
type of use contemplated.
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
(c) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
traffic.
(d) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
(2) Block dimension shall be at least twice the minimum lot depth and generally
not more than 12 times the minimum lot width.
(3) Intersections with arterial streets should be held to a minimum and preferably
spaced at least 1,000 feet apart.
(4) Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide, shall be required where
deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
E. Lots.
(1) The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building
setback lines and side, front and back yards of lots shall be in accordance with
Chapter 250, Zoning, and for the type of development and use contemplated.
(2) Land subject to flooding shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for
such other uses as may increase danger to life or property or aggravate the
flood hazard.
(3) Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 250, Zoning, and
to the following standards: Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out
for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the
off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated.
(4) Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate
building setback from and orientation to both streets.
(5) The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public
street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street.
(6) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
planting screen easement at least 10 feet wide, across which there shall be no
right of access, shall be provided along the line of lot abutting such a traffic
artery or other disadvantageous use.
(7) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
§ 207-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 207-4
207:8
(8) In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than normal building lot, such
parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical
further resubdivision.
(9) In case only a portion of a tract is subdivided, or when the plan submitted
covers only a portion of the owner's entire holding, a sketch of the perspective
future street system of the entire holding shall be submitted to the
Commission.
F. Public sites and open spaces.
(1) The Commission may require the dedication of suitable park, playground or
other public recreation area within a proposed subdivision. Such dedication
shall not be required in excess of:
(a) One acre of proposed recreation land for each 25 residential lots or major
fraction thereof; or
(b) Ten percent of the gross area of a subdivision. Where the proposed
recreation area exceeds the amount for which dedication may be required,
the remainder shall be reserved for a period of five years from the date of
plat filing with the County Clerk, after which, if such additional area has
not been acquired for public recreational purposes, it may be used for any
lawful purpose.
(2) In lieu of the dedication of suitable land, the Commission may require the
payment to a municipality of a sum not to exceed 1/25 of the value of an acre
of unimproved subdivision land per lot or, on an acreage basis, the cash
payment for recreation of 10% of the value of the unimproved subdivision land
may be made. Cash payments in lieu of land shall be reserved and utilized
exclusively for the acquisition and/or development of public recreation areas
deemed to be of benefit to the proposed subdivisions.
(3) A recreation area offered for dedication under the preceding subsections of this
Subsection F shall:
(a) Contain not less than three acres (or be adjacent to other public recreation
land, together with which it will comprise at least three acres).
(b) Have direct frontage or convenient and safe access to a public street or
highway.
(c) Be of usable proportions and topography.
(d) Be conveniently located in relation to the residential area it is intended to
serve, with special reference to maximum walking distances for the age
groups likely to use it.
(4) Where deemed essential by the Commission upon consideration of the
proposed subdivision development and especially in large-scale projects, such
as a complete community or a neighborhood unit, the Commission may
require the dedication or reservation of land for schools, municipal utilities and
other public services. Such areas shall be suitable as to character, extent and
§ 207-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 207-4
207:9
§ 207-5. Required improvements.
§ 207-6. Plats and data.
location to the needs created by such development. Within such a development
the Commission may also require the reservation, for a period not longer than
five years, of sites for churches and other community or neighborhood service
facilities.
G. The design of any streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, public sites, and open
spaces shall conform to the substantive requirements of Chapter 200, Stormwater
Management, where applicable. [Amended 9-4-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
A. Monuments and lot corner markers.
(1) Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points and points of
curves in streets and at intermediate points as required by the Engineer. The
monuments shall be of such material, size and length as may be approved by
the Engineer.
(2) Markers shall be located in the ground to final grade at all lot corners. Such
markers shall be of ferrous metal, 3/4 inch in diameter and at least 24 inches
long.
B. Utility and street improvements.
(1) Utility and street improvements shall be provided in each new subdivision in
accordance with the standards and requirements on file in the office of the
Superintendent of Public Works or the Planning Commission. These utility
and street improvements shall include the following:
(a) Public water system, complete with house laterals to the front line.
(b) Public sewer systems.
(c) Sanitary sewers, complete with house laterals to the front property line.
(d) Storm sewers, complete with laterals to the front property line.
(e) Street pavements.
(f) Concrete curbs.
(g) Concrete sidewalks.
(h) Streetlighting. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
(i) Tree planting. [Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
(2) The installation or construction of all utility and street improvements must be
observed by an inspector hired by the village. The developer shall reimburse
the village for the cost of this inspector.
A. Preliminary layout (conditional approval).
§ 207-4 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 207-6
207:10
(1) Existing conditions data shall include the following, except when otherwise
specified by the Board:
(a) Key plan showing location, including name of town or towns, and
boundaries of tract.
(b) Property lines and easements location, width and purpose of easements,
existing platting, if this is a resubdividing project.
(c) Streets on and adjacent to the tract location, size and invert elevation of
sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains;
location of gas line, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and street
lights. If water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract,
indicate the direction and distance to and size of nearest ones, showing
invert elevation of sewers. Where drainage is to be to a natural
watercourse, lake, swamp, sink or roadside or drainage ditch, the
elevation of water in such watercourse or ditch at recognized flood stage
shall be shown. The Engineer will assist in determining such recognized
flood stage.
(d) Ground elevations on the tract based on a datum plane approved by the
Engineer: for land that slopes less than approximately 2%, show spot
elevations at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales
and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for
land that slopes more than approximately 2%, either show contours with
an interval of not more than five feet if ground slope is regular and such
information is sufficient for planning purposes, or show contours with an
interval of not more than two feet if necessary because of irregular land
or need for more detailed data for preparing plans and construction
drawings.
(e) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Commission,
location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and
groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater unless test pits are dry at a
depth of five feet; location and results of soil percolation tests if
individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
(f) Other conditions on the tract: watercourses, marshes, rock, outcrop,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more in diameter,
houses, other buildings and other significant features.
(g) Other conditions on adjacent land: approximate direction and gradient of
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and
other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of
adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat
by name, recordation date and number and show approximate percent
buildup, typical lot size and dwelling type.
(h) Photographs, if required by the Commission, camera locations, directions
of view and key numbers.
§ 207-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 207-6
207:11
(i) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(j) Proposed public improvements: highways or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
(k) Land title and survey: deed description according to official records;
names and addresses of record owners; map of survey of tract boundary,
including all pertinent bearings and distances, made and certified by a
registered land surveyor, tied into established town reference points and
where possible related to the state system of plane coordinates established
by Chapter 545 of the Laws of 1938; notations stating acreage scale,
North point, datum, bench marks and date of survey.
(2) Preliminary subdivision plan shall be at a scale of not more than 200 feet to
the inch (preferred scale: one inch equals 100 feet). It shall show or be
accompanied by existing conditions data required above in Subsection A(1)
and shall show all proposals including the following:
(a) Streets: names, right-of-way and roadway widths, approximate grades
and gradients, similar data for alleys, if any.
(b) Other rights-of-way or easements: location, width and purpose.
(c) Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits.
(d) Lot lines, sublot number and block letters, block letters to be consecutive,
sublot numbers to be consecutive throughout subdivision. Street address
shown on each lot as per Department of Public Works.
(e) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or other
public uses.
(f) Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches,
industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings.
(g) Minimum building setback lines.
(h) Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size and acres
in parks, etc.
(i) Subdivision name or title (under which to be eventually recorded), also
scale, North point, date and name and address of subdivider and designer.
(3) Other preliminary plans. When required by the Commission, the preliminary
layout shall include profiles showing existing and proposed ground surface
and proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance
beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; typical cross sections of the
proposed grading, roadway and sidewalk; preliminary designs of any bridges
and culverts which may be required; preliminary plan of proposed water mains
to connect with existing public water supply or alternative means of water
supply approved by the Erie County Health Department; preliminary plan of
proposed sanitary sewers (with grades and sizes indicated), connecting with
existing sanitary sewerage systems, or alternative means of treatment and
§ 207-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 207-6
207:12
disposal approved by the Erie County Health Department; preliminary plan
for collecting and discharging storm drainage; and proposals for street lighting
and street trees. All elevations shall be based on datum plane approved by the
Engineer.
(4) Draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land
used in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development.
(5) Proposed zoning, if different from existing.
B. Subdivision plat final approval.
(1) Final subdivision plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink on Mylar or
equally printable sheets either 20 inches by 20 inches or 20 inches by 40
inches. The scale shall be 100 feet to the inch or larger. Where necessary, the
plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the
entire subdivision. For large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the Commission.
The final plat shall show the following:
(a) Primary control points, approved by the Engineer, or descriptions and ties
to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and
similar data on the plat shall be referred.
(b) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other
rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves.
(c) Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
(d) Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements.
(e) Number to identify each lot or site in numerical order within blocks;
letters to identify each block.
(f) Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or
reserved.
(g) Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
(h) Finished surface drainage of all lots within the subdivision and the lots
adjacent to the subdivision. This data shall be shown on the filed
subdivision map.
(i) Location and description of monuments (show thus "X") and lot corner
markers (show thus"O").
(j) Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
(k) Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by
record name, date and number.
(l) Certification by registered land surveyor, including name, address, New
§ 207-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 207-6
207:13
York State license number and seal, certifying to accuracy of survey and
plat.
(m) Certification of title showing that applicant is the land owner.
(n) Offers of cession by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites
for pubic uses and agreements covering the improvements and
maintenance of unceded public spaces and the conditions and time limits,
if any, applying to site reservations.
(o) Title, scale, North point and date.
(2) Cross sections and profiles of streets, drains and sewers, showing grades
approved by the Engineer. The profiles shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth
to standard scales. Elevations shall be based on a datum plane approved by the
Engineer.
(3) Plan showing the following:
(a) Waterline: pipe size, valve, hydrant and house lateral locations.
(b) Sanitary sewer: pipe sizes, grades, manhole locations, manhole details
and house lateral locations.
(c) Storm sewers: pipe sizes, grades, manhole locations, manhole details,
receiver locations, receiver details and house lateral locations.
(d) Pavement: cross section, widths and location within the right-of-way.
(e) Curb: cross section, including curb base and curb drains.
(f) Sidewalk: location within the right-of-way and widths. This plan shall be
drawn in ink on tracing cloth and shall be updated by the developer after
construction to show all dimensions and details as built.
(4) Certificate by the Engineer certifying that the subdivider has complied with
one of the following alternatives:
(a) All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of
these regulations and with the action of the Commission giving
conditional approval of the preliminary layout.
(b) A bond or certified check has been posted, which is available to the
village and in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all required
improvements.
(5) Certificates by the Village Attorney approving as to legal sufficiency all offers
of cession, all covenants governing the maintenance of unceded public open
space and any action taken to approving the sufficiency of any bond offered in
lieu of the completion of required subdivision improvements.
(6) Protective covenants in form for recording, including covenants governing the
maintenance of unceded public spaces or reservations.
(7) Other data. Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or other
§ 207-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 207-6
207:14
§ 207-7. Variances.
§ 207-8. Public improvement permits. [Added 2-2-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
agreements as may be required by the Board in the enforcement of these
regulations.
A. Hardship. Where the Commission finds that because of unusual circumstances of
shape, size, topography or other physical features of the subdivision tract or because
of the nature of adjacent developments, extraordinary hardships may result from
strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that no
such variation shall be granted which will have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of the Master Plan, of the Erie County Sanitary Code or of these
regulations.
B. Large scale development. The standards and requirements of these regulations may
be modified by the Commission in the case of a plan and program for a complete
community or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the Commission
provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation,
light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated and
which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure
conformity to and achievement of the plan.
C. Minor subdivisions. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be
modified by the Commission in the case of a minor subdivision, provided that any
modification allowed or authorized shall be determined by the Planning
Commission to carry out the general intent of the Code of the Village of Hamburg
and any other applicable codes and to serve the best interest of the applicant and of
the public. [Added 9-19-1983]
D. Conditions. In granting variances and modifications, the Commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements, as varied or modified.
A. Actions requiring permit. All improvements intended by a property owner or
developer to be dedicated to the Village of Hamburg, or to be maintained by the
Village of Hamburg, either within a subdivision or as part of the development of a
single parcel or lot, or any public improvement, shall require a public improvement
permit, and no such public improvement shall be installed without a public
improvement permit issued by the Village of Hamburg. Without limitation, public
improvement permits must be obtained for the construction, whether public or
private, of roadway pavements, curbs and gutters, sanitary sewers, ditches,
channels, drainage systems, storm sewers and water mains. Permits shall expire one
year from the date of approval of the permit.
B. Applications. Before the construction of any public improvement is commenced,
the landowner or developer shall apply to the Village of Hamburg and its Engineer
for a public improvement permit for the construction thereof. The application shall
be made on a form provided by the Village Engineer and shall be based on complete
plans and specifications for the public improvement project approved by the Village
§ 207-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 207-8
207:15
Engineer. Such plans and specifications shall include descriptions of the proposed
public improvements, including locations, dimensions, types of material proposed
to be used and detailed, itemized quantities.
C. Determination of costs of improvements. The estimated construction costs of the
proposed public improvements shall be subject to the approval of the Village
Engineer.
D. Fees.
(1) Public improvement permit fees are intended to recover the cost of inspection
of the construction improvements. Such inspection shall be provided by the
Village Engineer or by authorized agents or representatives of the Village
Engineer. Fees for public improvement permits shall be determined on the
basis of estimated construction costs of proposed public improvement permits
and in accordance with the fee schedule for public improvement permits. The
public improvement permit fees do not include survey or stakeout work. Such
survey and stakeout work is to be borne at the expense of the permit applicant,
with work to be done by competent, qualified personnel acceptable to the
Village Engineer.
(2) Public improvement permit fees shall be payable to the Village Clerk prior to
the issuance of a public improvement permit pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
(3) Public improvement fees shall be as follows:
Value of Work Fee Percentage
$50,000 or less 8%
$50,001 to $250,000 6%
$250,001 to $500,000 5%
Greater than $500,000 4.5%
(4) After the effective date of this section, the Village Board may amend such fees
by simple resolution.
E. Performance bond.
(1) Where, by action of the Village Board, the owner is permitted to defer to a
later date the construction of required public improvements or a subsequent
part or phase of the development of a subdivision or single lot or parcel, the
owner shall furnish and pay for a performance bond, acceptable to the Village
Attorney, in an amount at least equal to 100% of the estimated construction
costs of said required public improvements. Such performance bond shall
constitute security for the construction of the public improvements, the
construction of which has been deferred, within the time specified by the
Village Board, in accordance with approved plans and specifications, and for
the payment of all persons performing labor and furnishing materials in
connection with such construction.
(2) The application for a public improvement permit for any subdivision or parcel
§ 207-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 207-8
207:16
or lot on which the construction of required improvements has been deferred
shall state the name and address of the surety company that has furnished the
performance bond and the amount of the performance bond.
(3) The Village Board may accept cash or certified funds by placing same in
escrow with the Village in lieu of furnishing a performance bond. Such cash
or certified funds will be released when the deferred work is completed and
the Village Engineer has issued a certificate of approval.
F. Maintenance bond.
(1) The owner shall furnish and pay for surety bonds, acceptable to the Village
Attorney, for the maintenance, restoration and replacement of any parts of the
public improvements where an unsatisfactory condition or damage develops
due to defects in workmanship and materials, erosion, settlement of backfill or
other causes within a period of one year from the date of issue of the certificate
of approval. The maintenance bond shall be for an amount at least equal to
50% of the estimated construction costs of the proposed improvements.
(2) The application for a public improvement permit shall state the name and
address of the surety company that has furnished the maintenance bond and
the amount of the maintenance bond.
G. Special district agreements. Where applicable, prior to the issuance of a public
improvement permit, the owner will be required to submit special district and
homeowners' association agreements acceptable to the Village Attorney. Easements
and right-of-way deeds for drainage purposes, with prior approval by the Village
Attorney, must be filed with the Erie County Clerk's office prior to receipt of the
public improvement permit.
H. Requirements of owner's statement. The application for a public improvement
permit shall include statements by the owner, to be subscribed and sworn to before
a notary public, to the effect that:
(1) All work will be performed in accordance with approved plans and
specifications and requirements of federal, state and local laws.
(2) The owner will obtain and pay for all necessary permits.
(3) The owner will commence work no later than 60 days from the date of
approval of the public improvement permit by the Village Board and will
complete all work within one year of said date of approval.
(4) The owner will notify the Village Engineer 48 hours before commencing work
under the public improvement permit.
(5) The owner is cognizant of the fact that the public improvement permit fee is
based on work being performed during normal working hours (7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.), Monday through Friday, except for legal holidays, and that
deviations from such schedule or hours will require Village Board approval
and may also involve the imposition of additional fees.
I. Issuance of certificate of approval. Upon completion of all work included in the
§ 207-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 207-8
207:17
public improvement permit in a manner satisfactory to the Village Engineer, the
Village Engineer will issue a certificate of approval.
J. Number of application copies. Applications for public improvement permits shall
be submitted in quadruplicate to the Village Clerk, together with four complete sets
of drawings (prints) and four complete copies of specifications for the project.
K. Approval required. The granting of a public improvement permit will be contingent
upon approvals by the Village Engineer, the Village Department of Public Works,
and the Village Board. The public improvement permit shall not be effective until
approval by the Village Board and until the Village Clerk has certified that the total
public improvement permit fee has been paid.
§ 207-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 207-8
207:18
Chapter 212
TAXATION
§ 207-8 TAXATION § 207-8
212:1

ARTICLE I
Fees for Tax Searches
[Adopted 12-1-1969 by L.L. No. 4-1969]
§ 212-1. Fees specified. [Amended 6-1-1987 by L.L. No. 3-1987; 4-1-1991 by L.L.
No. 3-1991; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall charge and be paid for the services specified
hereinafter upon delivery of the certificates therefor, the sums set forth as follows: for
searching and certifying as to the village taxes and assessments affecting a single parcel
of land separately assessed upon the village tax rolls and special assessment rolls and
records, a sum as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.69
69. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is included in the Appendix of this Code.
§ 212-1 TAXATION § 212-1
212:3

ARTICLE II
Utility Tax
[Adopted 2-2-1953 by L.L. No. 2-1953]
§ 212-2. Tax on the furnishing of utility services. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State of New
York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the first day of June, 1953,
is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in the Village of Hamburg which is
subject to the supervision of the State Department of Public Service, which has a gross
income for the 12 months ending May 31st in excess of $500, except motor carriers or
brokers subject to such supervision under Article 3-b of the Public Service Law70 and a
tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after the first day of June, 1953,
is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business in the Village of Hamburg
which has a gross operating income for the 12 months ending May 31st in excess of
$500, which taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of the Village
of Hamburg, and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any
other provision of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating or
consummated outside of the territorial limits of the Village of Hamburg, notwithstanding
that some act be necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such
limits.
§ 212-3. Definitions. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
The terms used in this article shall have the meanings provided in § 186-a, Subdivision
2, of the Tax Law and § 5-530 of the Village Law.
§ 212-4. Records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its business,
and in such form, as the Village Treasurer may require, and such records shall be
preserved for a period of three years, except that the Village Treasurer may consent to
their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer.
§ 212-5. Rates to be filed; information required; supplemental returns; affidavit.
[Amended 11-1-1976 by L.L. No. 22-1976]
A. Every public utility subject to tax hereunder shall file on or before the 15th day of
March of each year a rate for the year ended on the preceding December 31, except
that the year ended December 31, 1976, shall be deemed for purposes of this section
to have commenced on June 1, 1976, including any period for which the tax
imposed hereby is effective.
B. Every return shall state the gross income or gross operating income for the period
covered thereby. Returns shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be
furnished by the Treasurer for such purpose and shall contain such other data,
information or matter as he or she may require to be included therein.
70. Editor's Note: Article 3-b of the Public Service Law was repealed by Chapter 267 of the Laws of 1970. See now § 240 of
the Transportation Law.
§ 212-2 TAXATION § 212-5
212:5
§ 212-6. Payment of tax and penalty. [Amended 11-1-1976 by L.L. No. 22-1976]
C. The Village Treasurer, in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require
at any time a further or supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may
be specified by him or her, and the Treasurer may require any utility doing business
in the Village of Hamburg to file an annual return which shall contain any data
specified by him or her, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this
article.
D. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility
making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer
of the corporation if such business be conducted by a corporation, to the effect that
the statements contained therein are true.
A. All taxes and fees imposed by this article which are payable to the Village of
Hamburg shall be due and payable at the time of filing the return required by
§ 212-5 hereof or in case such return is not filed when due on the last day specified
for filing thereof.
B. Failure to pay tax.
(1) If any corporation, association, joint-stock company, incorporated company,
person, partnership or other entity liable to pay any such tax or any portion
thereof shall, without intent to evade such tax, fail to pay any such tax when
due, there shall be paid in addition to the amount of such tax, a sum as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, § 1-14, Penalties assessed against
unpaid taxes, sewer rents and invoices. [Amended 4-19-1999 by L.L. No.
2-1999]
(2) If any corporation, association, joint-stock company, unincorporated
company, person, partnership or other entity, with intent to evade any such tax,
shall fail to pay the same when due, such tax shall be doubled and the doubled
tax shall be increased by 1% for each month or fraction of a month from the
time the tax was originally due to the date of payment.
C. Every corporation, association, joint-stock company, unincorporated company,
person, partnership or other entity failing to make any return required by this article
within the time specified for the making thereof or failing to make any special
report required by the Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Hamburg, within any
reasonable time to be specified by him, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
$1,000 to be assessed and collected in the manner provided for the assessment and
collection of real property or in a civil action at the instance of the Board of
Trustees, and any officer or agent of any such corporation, association, joint-stock
company, unincorporated company, or other entity, or person or member of a
partnership or other entity making or certifying a false or fraudulent report or
statement with intent to defeat or evade the payment of the taxes prescribed by this
article shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500, to be assessed and
collected in like manner.
D. The Board of Trustees in its discretion may modify the penalties or additional
amounts provided in this section without regard to whether such penalties or
§ 212-5 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 212-6
212:6
additional amounts have been included in a statement of account or an application
for revision of such account has been filed.
E. Each such tax shall be a lien and binding upon the real and personal property of the
corporation, joint-stock company, association, unincorporated company, person,
partnership or other entity liable to pay the same, situate in the Village of Hamburg,
until the same is paid in full. But the lien of each such tax shall be subject to the
lien of any mortgage indebtedness existing against real property previous to the
time when the tax became a lien and where such mortgage indebtedness has been
incurred in good faith and was not given, directly or indirectly, to any officer or
stockholder of the corporation owning such real property, whether as a purchase
money mortgage or otherwise, and shall also be subject to the lien of local taxes
and assessments, without regard to when the lien for such taxes and assessments
may have accrued. In any action to foreclose any such mortgage, or to foreclose the
lien of local taxes or assessments, to which the Village of Hamburg shall have been
made a party defendant by reason of the existence of a lien for any such tax or, if
no such tax was due or a lien at the time of the commencement of such action and
the filing of the notice of pendency thereof, but such a tax becomes due or a lien
subsequent to the time of the commencement of such action and the filing of the
notice of pendency thereof, such real property shall be sold and conveyed in such
action free from any such lien, and any such lien may become a lien on any surplus
moneys which may result from such sale, to be determined in the proceedings for
the distribution of such surplus moneys. Where title to real property passes from an
individual, or from a corporation owing no franchise tax, to another corporation
which is in default for such tax, the lien herein provided shall not be enforceable
except at to any equity after the prior mortgage encumbrance.
F. The Board of Trustees may, upon application made to it and the payment of a fee
of $25, release any real property from the lien of any tax or taxes due, or to become
due, imposed by that article, provided that payment be made to the Clerk-Treasurer
of the Village of Hamburg of such a sum as the Clerk-Treasurer shall deem
adequate consideration for such release, or deposit be made of such security or such
bond be filed as he or she shall deem proper to secure payment of any tax or taxes
the lien of which is being released. The application for such release shall contain an
accurate description of the property to be released, together with such other
information as the Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Hamburg may require. Such
release may be recorded in any office in which conveyances of real estate are
entitled to be recorded.
G. Where an application for consent to dissolution, as provided by Section 1004 of the
Business Corporation Law, is filed with the Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of
Hamburg prior to the commencement of any tax year, or period, by a corporation
subject to tax under this article, such corporation shall not be liable for any tax
imposed by that article for such following year or period, provided that the
certificate of dissolution for such corporation is duly filed in the office of the
Secretary of State within 60 days after the commencement of such tax year or
period and such corporation does not conduct business in the Village of Hamburg
in such tax year or period.
H. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the Clerk-Treasurer of the
Village of Hamburg may grant a reasonable extension of time for payment of any
§ 212-6 TAXATION § 212-6
212:7
§ 212-7. Declaration of estimated tax. [Added 11-1-1976 by L.L. No. 22-76]
§ 212-8. Payments of estimated tax. [Added 11-1-1976 by L.L. No. 22-76]
tax imposed by this article under such conditions as he or she deems just and proper.
A. Every taxpayer subject to the tax imposed by this article shall make a declaration of
its estimated tax for the current taxable year containing such information as the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Hamburg may prescribe.
B. The term "estimated tax" means the amount which the taxpayer estimates to be the
taxes imposed by this article for the current taxable year less the sum of any credits
which it estimates to be allowable against such taxes.
C. A declaration of estimated tax shall be filed in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer of
the Village of Hamburg on or before July 15 of taxable years beginning on and after
January 1, 1977.
D. A taxpayer may amend a declaration of estimated tax in the manner provided by the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Hamburg or by the Tax Commission of the State
of New York.
E. If the taxable period for which a tax is imposed by this article is other than 12
months, every taxpayer required to make a declaration of estimated tax for such
taxable period shall make such declaration in the manner provided by the rules of
the Tax Commission of the State of New York.
A. For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1977, every taxpayer subject to
tax under this article shall pay in each such year an amount equal to 25% of the tax
imposed hereby for the preceding taxable year. Such amount shall be paid with the
return or report required to be filed with respect to such tax for such preceding
taxable year or with an application for extension of the time for filing such return
or report.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, any taxpayer
required under this section to pay an amount equal to 25% of its tax for the taxable
year ending on December 31, 1976, shall compute such amount as if its tax for such
taxable year were determined on the basis of its gross income or gross operating
income, as the case may be, for either the preceding 12 months ending on such date
or for the period from the date of its incorporation under the laws of this state or the
date it commenced carrying on or doing business in the Village of Hamburg to and
including December 31, 1976, if such date of incorporation or commencement of
the carrying on or doing business was within the twelve months immediately
preceding December 31, 1976.
C. The estimated tax for each taxable year with respect to which a declaration of
estimated tax is required to be filed under this article shall first be reduced by any
amount paid under Subsection A, and the balance shall be paid in three equal
installments as follows: July 15, October 15 and January 15.
D. If any amendment of a declaration is filed, the remaining installments, if any, shall
be ratably increased or decreased (as the case may be) to reflect any increase or
§ 212-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 212-8
212:8
§ 212-9. Application of Article 27 of the Tax Law. [Added 11-1-1976 by L.L. No.
22-1976]
The provisions of Article 27 of the Tax Law which pertain to declarations and payments
of estimated taxes shall be applicable to declarations and payments of estimated tax
required under this article as if this article had been specifically incorporated in and
referred to in such provisions.
§ 212-10. Insufficient returns.
decrease in the estimated tax by reason of such amendment, and if any amendment
is made with or after the last installment of estimated tax is due for the taxable year
under Subsection B, any increase in the estimated tax by reason thereof shall be
paid at the time of making such amendment.
E. Any amount paid pursuant to Subsection A shall be applied as a first installment
against the estimated tax of the taxpayer for the taxable year shown on the
declaration required to be filed pursuant to § 212-6, or if no declaration is filed
pursuant to such section, any such amount shall be considered a payment on
account of the tax shown on the return or report required to be filed by the taxpayer
for such taxable year.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1088 of this Tax Law or Section 16 of
the State Finance Law, if an amount paid pursuant to Subsection A of this section
exceeds the tax shown on the return or report required to be filed by the taxpayer
for the taxable year during which amount so paid pursuant to Subsection A exceeds
such tax, at the rate set by the Tax Commission pursuant to subdivision (e) of
Section 1090 of the Tax Law, or if no rate is set, at the rate of 6% per annum, from
the date of payment of the amount so paid pursuant to such Subsection A or the
15th day of March of the taxable year, whichever is later, to the 15th day of March
following the close of the taxable year; provided, however, that no interest shall be
allowed or paid under this subdivision if the amount thereof is less than $1.
G. This section shall apply to a taxable period of less than 12 months in accordance
with regulations of the Tax Commission of the State of New York.
H. The Clerk-Treasurer may grant a reasonable extension of time, not to exceed six
months, for the payment of any installment of estimated tax required pursuant to
this section, on such terms and conditions as it may require, including the furnishing
of a bond or other security by the taxpayer in an amount not exceeding twice the
amount for which any extension of time for payment is granted; provided, however,
that interest at the rate set by the Tax Commission pursuant to subdivision (e) of
Section 1096 or, if no rate is set, at the rate of 6% per annum for the period of the
extension shall be charged and collected on the amount for which an extension of
time for payment is granted under this subdivision.
I. A taxpayer may elect to pay any installment of estimated tax prior to the date
prescribed in this section for the payment thereof.
A. Estimation of tax; notice. In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be
insufficient or unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, and if a corrected or
§ 212-8 TAXATION § 212-10
212:9
§ 212-11. Requirements for giving notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may be given by
mailing the same to the person for who it is intended in a postpaid envelope addressed
to such person at the address given by such person in the last return filed by him or
her under this article, or, if no return has been filed, then to such address as may be
obtainable. The mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of
the name by the person to whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined
according to the provisions of this article by the giving of notice shall commence to run
from the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 212-12. Failure to file return or pay tax on time. [Amended 4-19-1999 by L.L.
No. 2-1999]
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax or any portion
thereof, within the time required by this article shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, § 1-14, Penalties assessed against unpaid taxes,
sewer rents and invoices, excepting the first month, after such return was required to be
sufficient return is not filed within 21 days after the same is required by notice
from the Treasurer, or if no return is made for any period, the Village Treasurer
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he or she is able
to obtain, and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices
or otherwise. The Village Treasurer shall give notice of such determination to the
person liable for such tax.
B. Appeal of determination; decision; further appeals. Such determination shall finally
and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall,
within 30 days after the giving of notice of such determinations, apply to the Village
Treasurer for a hearing, or unless the Village Treasurer of his or her own motion
shall reduce the same. After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give notice of
his or her decision to the person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act of the State of New York
if application therefor is made within 90 days after the giving of notice of such
decision. An order to review such decision shall not be granted unless the amount
of any tax sought to be reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall
be first deposited with the Village Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him, in
such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve,
to the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant
will pay all cost and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such
proceeding or, at the option of the applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum
sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which
event the applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a
condition precedent to the granting of such order.
C. Time limitation. Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with
intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the
expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a return; provided,
however, that where no return has been filed as required by this article the tax may
be assessed at any time.
§ 212-10 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 212-12
212:10
filed or such tax became due, but the Village Treasurer, for cause shown, may extend the
time for filing any return and, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or
any portion of the penalty fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 212-13. Refunds.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or the court shall determine
that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously or illegally collected,
the Village Treasurer shall refund the amount so determined. For like cause and within
the same period, a refund may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer.
However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination
of the Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided, unless the Village Treasurer, after a
hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of the Treasurer's own motion, shall have reduced
the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding under Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Act of the State of New York that such determination was erroneous
or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this article. An
application for a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application
for the revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the Village Treasurer may
receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After making the determination, the
Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and he or she shall
be entitled to an order to review such determination under said Article 78, subject to the
provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 212-14. Tax to be paid by utility.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the utility and
shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility to customers or others
but shall constitute a part of the operating costs of such utility.
§ 212-15. Action by Village Attorney.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this article, the
Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer, bring an action to
enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action
shall be paid to the Village Treasurer. Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the
property of the person liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent
that the tax and penalty imposed by Section 186-A of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 212-16. Powers of Village Treasurer.
In the administration of this article, the Village Treasurer shall have power to make such
reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the
exercise of the his or her powers and the performance of his or her duties and to prescribe
the form of blanks, reports and other records relating to the administration and the
enforcement of the tax, to take testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any
matter within the line of his or her official duty under this article and to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 212-17. Confidentiality; penalties.
§ 212-12 TAXATION § 212-17
212:11
§ 212-18. Disposition of collected moneys.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article shall be paid
into the treasury of the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund
of the village.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or an otherwise provided by law, it
shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer or any agent, clerk or employee of the
Village of Hamburg to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross
income or gross operating income, or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any
return under this article.
B. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to
produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or
proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Village of Hamburg in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on behalf of the State Tax
Commission in an action or proceeding and the provisions of the Tax Law of the
State of New York, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are directly
involved in such action or proceeding in either of which events the court may
require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said returns or of
the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his or her
duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return filed by that person, nor to
prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of delinquent lists
showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in
the manner provided for by this article, together with any relevant information
which in the opinion of the Village Treasurer may assist in the collection of such
delinquent taxes; or the inspection of by the Village Attorney or other legal
representatives of the Village of Hamburg of the return of any person who shall
bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom any action
has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
D. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both, and if
the offender be an officer, agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Hamburg, the
offender shall be dismissed from office and shall be incapable of holding any office
or employment in the Village of Hamburg for a period of five years hereafter.
E. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer may exchange
with the Chief Fiscal Officer of any city or any other village in the State of New
York information contained in returns filed under this article, provided that such
city or other village grants similar privileges to the Village of Hamburg, and
provided that such information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the Village
Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commissioner with any
information contained in such returns.
§ 212-17 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 212-19
212:12
§ 212-19. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 212-19 TAXATION § 212-19
212:13

ARTICLE III
Business Exemption (3-6-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995)
§ 212-20. Percentage of exemptions.
On and after the effective date hereof, the percentage of exemptions allowed by the
Village of Hamburg pursuant to Section 485-B of the Real Property Tax Law of the State
of New York is zero.
§ 212-21. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its adoption, March 6, 1995.
§ 212-20 TAXATION § 212-21
212:15

ARTICLE IV
Alternative Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 4-7-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
§ 212-22. Alternative tax exemption for veterans.
The maximum exemption limits for the Alternative Veterans Exemption to be $18,000,
$12,000 and $60,000 as set forth in Section 458-a2(d)(ii) of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law.
§ 212-22 TAXATION § 212-22
212:17

ARTICLE V
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-19-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
§ 212-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant a partial exemption from taxation to the extent of
50% of the assessed valuation of real property which is owned by certain persons with
limited income who are 65 years of age or over meeting the requirements set forth in
§ 467 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 212-24. Conditions for exemption.
Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over,
or real property owned by husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over,
meeting the requirements set forth in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, shall be
exempt from real property village taxes to the extent of 20% to 50% of the assessed
valuation, subject to the following conditions:
A. The owner or all of the owners must file an application annually in the Town of
Hamburg Assessor's office at least 90 days before the day for filing the final
assessment roll or such other time as may be hereafter fixed by law.
B. The income of the owner or the combined income of the owners must not exceed
the following amounts for the 12 consecutive months prior to the date that the
application is filed. Where title is vested in either the husband or wife, the combined
income may not exceed such sum.
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
Less than $12,500 50%
More than $12,500, but less than $13,500 45%
$13,500 or more, but less than $14,500 40%
$14,500 or more, but less than $15,500 35%
$15,500 or more, but less than $16,400 30%
$16,400 or more, but less than $17,300 25%
$17,300 or more, but less than $18,200 20%
C. Title to the property must be vested in the owner or, if more than one, in all the
owners for at least 12 consecutive months prior to the date the application is filed.
D. The property must be used exclusively for residential purposes, be occupied in
whole or in part by the owners and constitute the legal residence of the owners.
§ 212-23 TAXATION § 212-24
212:19

ARTICLE VI
Veterans Tax Exemption
[The Town of Hamburg Veterans Tax Exemption is the controlling standard in
the Village of Hamburg.]
TAXATION § 212-24
212:21

ARTICLE VII
Historic Property Exemption
[Adopted 3-19-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 212-25. Legislative intent.
§ 212-26. Exemption.
Historic property, as defined herein, within the Village of Hamburg altered or
rehabilitated subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be exempt from Village
real property and special ad valorem levies, subject to and in accordance with the
schedule set forth in § 212-27, provided such property meets the requirements as set
forth in § 212-28.
§ 212-27. Amount of exemption.
Historic property, as defined herein, shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any
increase in assessed value attributable to such alteration or rehabilitation pursuant to the
following schedule:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 100%
2 100%
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 80%
A. This real property tax exemption is being enacted in order to achieve the following
goals: to increase incentives for property owners in historic districts or who own
landmarks, to invest in the upkeep and rehabilitation of properties; to provide an
incentive for the restoration and rehabilitation of structures which qualify in order
to provide financial advantages; to assist homeowners who are interested in
restoring their own properties but may not be able to afford to do so when faced
with potential increases in taxation as the result of alterations which would qualify
for this exemption; and to provide a concrete benefit to offset the possible financial
disadvantage of owning historically significant properties which are subject to the
regulations of the Village of Hamburg's Historic Preservation Law.71
B. The Village of Hamburg's real property exemption is intended to apply to alteration
or rehabilitation of historic property as authorized pursuant to § 444-a of the Real
Property Tax Law.
C. This article is intended to create a property tax exemption that preserves or
increases the historic character of real property located within the Village of
Hamburg.
71. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Historic Preservation.
§ 212-25 TAXATION § 212-27
212:23
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
7 60%
8 40%
9 20%
10 0%
§ 212-28. Requirements.
A. No such exemption shall be granted for such alterations or rehabilitation unless all
of the following requirements have been met:
(1) Such property must be "historic," which shall mean that the property has been
designated as a landmark or is a property that is located in and contributes to
the character of a designated historic district, as set forth in Chapter 44 of the
Hamburg Village Code; and
(2) Alteration or rehabilitation of exteriors and public interiors (to the extent that
public interiors are regulated by the local preservation law) of historic local
property must meet the regulations and design standards established by the
Village of Hamburg; and
(3) Alterations and rehabilitation of exteriors and public interiors (to the extent
that public interiors are regulated by the local preservation law) of historic
local property are approved pursuant to the design standards and Chapter 250
of the Code of the Village of Hamburg prior to commencement of work; and
(4) Alteration or rehabilitation must be for the purpose of historic preservation if:
(a) Only exterior work is involved; or
(b) Interior work involves the portion of the building that is used by the
public; or
(c) The project returns to use a building which has not been used for a
permissible purpose under applicable zoning laws for a continuous period
of at least two years; and
(5) Alterations or rehabilitation must be commenced subsequent to the effective
date of this article.
B. Such exemption will be granted only by application of the owner of the historic real
property on a form prescribed by the State Board. The application shall be filed
with the Building Inspector, who shall forward the application to the Assessor upon
completion of the alterations or rehabilitation pursuant to the above regulations.
This exemption shall be granted where the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is
entitled to an exemption pursuant to this section. The Assessor shall approve such
application and such property shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special
ad valorem levies for Village real property taxation as provided in the schedule
established in this article commencing with the assessment roll prepared on the
basis of the taxable status date referred to in § 212-29 of this article. The assessed
valuation of any exemption granted pursuant to this section shall be entered by the
§ 212-27 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 212-28
212:24
§ 212-29. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessment rolls completed
on or after such effective date.
Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable property, with the amount of the
exemptions shown in a separate column.
§ 212-28 TAXATION § 212-29
212:25

Chapter 216
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 216, Taxicabs, adopted 4-6-1970 as Ch. 16 of the 1970 Code, as
amended, was repealed 12-18-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017.]
§ 212-29 (RESERVED) § 212-29
216:1

Chapter 225
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 182.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 225-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to provide for the progressive management of the urban
forest on public land and, if advantageous, on private land in the Village of Hamburg,
pertinent to planting, removing, replanting, pruning, nurturing and protecting trees, as
well as protecting the structures around trees, with thoughtful regard for balance between
aesthetics and practicality.
§ 225-2. Rationale.
Village residents and business people acknowledge the beauty and attractiveness of treelined
streets and shaded parks. They appreciate enhanced property values created by the
fullness of mature trees along the right-of-way, sometimes called "curb appeal." They
are aware of the environmental advantages of gas-absorbing, noise-suppressing foliage
on busy streets, but they also recognize that street trees can interfere with utility services
and sound sidewalks. Common sense dictates that any successful community tree plan
must accommodate the need to beautify and to preserve service.
§ 225-3. Provisions.
A. The Village of Hamburg Department of Public Works is authorized to manage all
aspects of this policy with regard to plantings in the area known as the right-of-way,
development strip, tree lawn or street lawn. Plantings in parks, gardens and other
public places will be managed by the Department of Public Works and the Parks
and Recreation Department. Street medians will be treated in the same way as the
right-of-way.
B. The Environmental Commission is authorized and requested to devise and submit
an annual planting plan to the Village Board prior to budget preparation time.
C. The Village Board will budget and expend funds annually to ensure the proper
management of trees in public places and, if needed, on private property.
D. The expenditure of funds for tree management under this policy may include the
cost of materials, equipment and labor required to produce the most efficacious
results.
E. Trees removed for cause from public places must be replaced in a timely (normally
two years) and thoughtful manner and in accordance with this policy, or the
§ 212-29 TREES § 225-3
225:1
property owner nearest the removed tree must be notified that the tree will not be
replaced because of the restrictions in Subsection F.
F. Location, spacing and species of trees to be planted initially of as replacements for
trees removed will be determined by the restrictions imposed by the proximity of
utility equipment, immediate environment of the site, growth characteristics of the
trees and the desired aesthetic effect.
G. Trees may be planted in the street lawn of streets which previously had no trees
planted in the street lawn of those streets, curbed or uncurbed.
H. Trees may be planted on privately owned land adjacent to the right-of-way, when
the planting serves the best interests of the village plan and when a proper easement
has been executed. (Appendix B)72
I. No person shall plant any tree or trees in any street in the village, except at such
place or places, and in such manner as may be directed by the Board of Trustees.73
J. Under this policy, suitable street trees shall be those named in Appendix A,74 and
they shall be bare root, approximately two to three inches caliper-measured and
have their initial bifurcation or lowest branches at least six feet above ground level.
Balled trees may be substituted for bare root trees.
K. Trees to be planted in other public places must be those named in Appendix A,75
but they may be of a larger caliper measurement and have a lower initial bifurcation
and may be balled.
L. Contractors, builders and developers must plant street trees in accordance with this
policy, cognizant of the need to plant one street tree, or more, for each lot developed
or redeveloped or an alternate as determined by the Planning Commission.
M. General welfare of the community dictates that trees may not be planted:
(1) In a street lawn less in depth than four feet, except in the central business
district;
(2) Within six feet of on-ground or underground individual lot utility equipment;
(3) Within eight feet of a sidewalk when a tree is planted by the village on private
land;
(4) In a location where its expected mature height would be equal to the height of
the overhead high voltage wires;
(5) Within four feet of a ground or unground stump;
(6) Off-center of the determined center of the street lawn;
(7) Within six feet of the outer edge of a driveway approach;
72. Editor's Note: Appendix materials are on file in the village offices.
73. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
74. Editor's Note: Appendix materials are on file in the village offices.
75. Editor's Note: Appendix materials are on file in the village offices.
§ 225-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 225-3
225:2
(8) Within detrimental proximity of an existing healthy tree; nor
(9) Within 50 feet of stop signs when planted in the street lawn.
N. When a tree is planted under this policy, the person most capable of doing so must
be informed in writing that he or she is expected to water and care for the tree
according to the instructions in the written notification. (Appendix C)76
O. Besides emergency or resident-requested pruning, annual pruning of public trees
must be scheduled and accomplished by the Department of Public Works, assisted
with long-range advisement by the Environmental Commission, and cognizant of
the advisability of pruning newly planted trees on a two-year cycle.
P. This policy supersedes previous tree replacement policies adopted in 1993 and
before, but it does not contradict any village law. (See Appendix D)77
Q. The Village of Hamburg will continue to remove dead, dying or dangerous trees
located in public places, as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works. All
others are restrained from removing, planting, pruning or treating trees in public
places, as prohibited according to village law.78 (See also Appendix E for utility
company notice)79
76. Editor's Note: Appendix materials are on file in the village offices.
77. Editor's Note: Appendix materials are on file in the village offices.
78. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
79. Editor's Note: Appendix materials are on file in the village offices.
§ 225-3 TREES § 225-3
225:3

Chapter 229
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 225-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 225-3
229:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 229-1. Definitions.
§ 229-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Department of Public Works shall install and maintain traffic control devices when
and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make effective the provisions of
this chapter, and may install and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he
may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law
of the State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 229-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter,
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section for the purposes of this chapter:
CURBLINE —The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the absence of a
curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD—Whenever certain hours are named herein or on
traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard which is in current use in
this state.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations adopted under
the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby established a system of schedules,
appearing as Article VI of this chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations
after adoption. Such schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they
refer. All regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule as
indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees in accordance with
provisions of the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or by an officer or
agency authorized by the Board of Trustees to adopt regulations pursuant to § 1603
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 229-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-3
229:3

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 229-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of those streets
described in Schedule I (§ 229-36), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-5. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets or highways
within the Village is hereby established at 30 miles per hour, except that the speed limit
for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule
II (§ 229-37), attached to and made a part of this chapter, shall be as indicated in said
schedule.
§ 229-6. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in Schedule III
(§ 229-38), attached to and made a part of this chapter, in the areas described in said
schedule.
§ 229-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 229-39), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 229-8. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of the locations
described in Schedule V (§ 229-40), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at
any of the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 229-41), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 229-10. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 229-42), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets. Traffic control devices
shall be installed on each street intersecting the through street.
§ 229-11. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 229-43), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 229-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-12
229:5
§ 229-12. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 229-44), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
§ 229-13. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule X (§ 229-45), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as lane use reservations, and traffic shall move only
as indicated.
§ 229-14. Commercial vehicles.
§ 229-15. Vehicle weight limits. [Amended 7-19-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle or other tractor,
trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight in excess of three tons on any
Village street, unless otherwise provided in Schedule XII (§ 229-47), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, except for the purpose of making local deliveries on that
street.
A. Definitions as used in this section shall having the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every type of motor driven vehicle used for
commercial purposes such as in the transportation of goods, wares and
merchandise; motor vehicles and coaches carrying or designated to carry
passengers for hire; tractors and tractor trailer combinations, including trailers,
semitrailers and emergency vehicles not operating in emergency or training modes.
B. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent the delivery or pick
up of merchandise or the furnishing of commercial services along or at premises
abutting streets from which such vehicles are hereby or hereafter otherwise
excluded, described in Schedule XI (§ 229-46), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 229-12 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-15
229:6
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 229-16. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or official traffic control device.
§ 229-17. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIII (§ 229-48), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-18. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule XIV (§ 229-49), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-19. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule XV (§ 229-50), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-20. No standing in apartment complex driveways.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon the apartment complex driveways described in
Schedule XVI (§ 229-51), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-21. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XVII (§ 229-52)
of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-22. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVIII (§ 229-53)
of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-23. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XIX (§ 229-54) of
any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in said schedule, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-24. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in Schedule XX
(§ 229-55) at any time between the hours listed in said schedule of any day, unless
otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said schedule,
§ 229-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-24
229:7
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 229-25. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in
Schedule XXI (§ 229-56), attached to and made a part of this chapter, except at the angle
designated and only within the painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where
angle parking is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall
be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 229-26. Off-Street parking.
A. No person shall park, stand, store or leave a motor vehicle upon any publicly or
privately owned premises or property, parking areas or parking lots or between 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in cemeteries without the consent and permission of the owner
or lessee of such premises.
B. To effectuate the prohibition of parking on such premises as above described, a
conspicuous sign or signs shall be posted at the entrances to such parking lots,
parking areas or cemeteries informing the public as to the permitted conditions of
parking thereon. A sign as hereinafter described shall be deemed substantial
compliance with this section:
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
PARKING RESTRICTED
(6 inches)
EXCEPT FOR (list persons
or conditions
permitted)
ONLY
(4 inches)
ALL OTHERS KEEP OUT
(6 inches)
UNDER PENALTY OF LAW
CHAPTER ___,
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
SECTION __
OF THE CODE OF
THE VILLAGE OF HAMBURG
(2 inches)
§ 229-24 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-26
229:8
§ 229-27. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 229-57), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 229-28. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXIII (§ 229-58), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 229-29. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXIV (§ 229-59), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 229-30. Handicapped parking.
POLICE ENFORCEMENT
(2 inches)
C. Such sign or signs shall be at least three feet high by four feet wide, with red
lettering of a size not less than above indicated upon a white backgrounds. The
words "police enforcement" and "under penalty of law" on such signs shall be
construed, among other things, to mean a request by the owner or lessee that the
police or special patrolmen shall enforce the provisions of this section against
persons parking, standing, storing or leaving vehicles on such premises without the
consent of the owner or lessee, and that the police are authorized to enter upon such
premises authorized by the owner or lessee to use said premises for parking, or
both; and persons not included within such authorization or violating the
regulations and conditions set out on said signs shall be deemed to be using said
premises unlawfully without the authority or consent of the owner or lessee.
D. No parking of any vehicle, trailer or boat is allowed on a required front lawn, except
on a paved driveway. The paved driveway area may not exceed 40% of the required
front lawn.
A. Time limit handicapped parking permits. The standing of vehicles is hereby
prohibited during certain hours except that a vehicle operated by or for a
handicapped person holding a permit issued pursuant to Section 1203-a or 1203-b
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or a vehicle registered pursuant to Section 404-a of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law and being used for the transportation of handicapped
person or persons is not prohibited from standing in any of the locations described
in Schedule XXV (§ 229-60), attached to and made a part of this chapter, for longer
than the time limit shown.
B. No time limit handicapped parking permits. The standing of vehicles during certain
hours in the locations described in Schedule XXV (§ 229-60), except that a vehicle
operated by or for a handicapped person holding a permit issued pursuant to Section
1203-a or 1203-b of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or a vehicle registered pursuant to
Section 404-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and being used for the transportation
§ 229-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-30
229:9
of a handicapped person or persons is not prohibited from standing in said locations.
C. Off street parking of vehicles: handicapped parking permits.
(1) The Board of Trustees shall, by resolution, designate one of the parking spaces
in the parking lot located on the site of the Village Hall at 100 Main Street for
use only by the handicapped. The space shall be located as close as reasonably
practicable to the front (north) entrance to the Village Hall. The space so
designated may by used only by drivers displaying a special municipal parking
permit, as provided for in Section 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or
by motor vehicles registered in accordance with Section 404-a of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law and being used for the transportation of a handicapped person
or persons.
(2) The parking space designated pursuant to the preceding Subsection shall be
clearly identified for use by or for the handicapped which designation may
include the use of painted lines or markings and the international symbol of
access.
(3) Any person who parks in such space clearly marked for use by the
handicapped person in accordance with Subsection (2) above, without a
special municipal parking permit or whose motor vehicle is not registered in
accordance with Section 404-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and being used
for the transportation of a handicapped person, shall be subject to a fine of
$100 for the first offense and $150 for every offense thereafter.
(4) As used in §§ 229-30A, 229-30B and 229-30C, the term "handicapped" shall
also include a "severely disabled person" as defined in Section 404-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 229-30 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-30
229:10
ARTICLE IV
Removal, Storage, Conversion and Redemption of Vehicles
§ 229-31. Abandoned vehicles.
When any vehicle is deemed to fit the following criteria such vehicle may be removed
or caused to be removed by the Village of Hamburg in the manner herein provided.
§ 229-32. Removal and storage; notice; charges.
§ 229-33. Conversion of vehicles.
The Village of Hamburg may, in any calender year, convert to Village use up to 1% of
the Village's unclaimed abandoned vehicles or two such vehicles, whichever is greater,
provided that each such vehicle at the time of removal had number plates affixed and
was of a wholesale value, taking into consideration the condition of the vehicle, of more
than $750.
A. Found to be an abandoned vehicle within the meaning of Section 1224 (1, a-d) of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law;
B. Used or operated by a person in violation or alleged violation of Sections 511 (2) of
511 (3) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law;
C. Used by a person in violation or alleged violation of Section 1192 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law;
D. Evidence required in connection with the trial of any person charged with a crime;
or
E. Parked or allowed to stand on any public street or public parking lot during a snow
storm, flood, fire or other public emergency
A. After removal of a vehicle as provided in this article, the Village of Hamburg may
store such vehicle or cause such vehicle to be stored in a location deemed suitable
by the Village of Hamburg. The removal and storage shall be at the expense of the
most recent owner of the vehicle. The most recent owner or person in charge of the
vehicle may redeem said vehicle upon payment of the amount of all expenses
actually and necessarily incurred in effecting the removal and storage of the vehicle
to the agency which removed and stored the same.
B. The maximum charges for removal and storage as herein provided shall be as
follows:
Removal To be determined by removing agency
Storage (inside) To be determined by removing agency
Storage (outside) To be determined by removing agency
C. Notice of the removal and storage of a vehicle shall be given to the last owner
thereof, if known, in the form and manner provided by Section 1224 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
§ 229-31 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-34
229:11
§ 229-34. Designation of owner.
The last owner or the last known owner of a vehicle shall be liable to the Village of
Hamburg or to the agency effecting the removal and storage of the vehicle.
§ 229-34 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-34
229:12
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 229-35. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision of this
chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not
more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than
45 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $1000 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ 229-35 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-35
229:13

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 229-36. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-4, traffic control signals shall be installed at
the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 229-37. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-5, speed limits other than 30 miles per hour
are hereby established as indicated upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
All private roads and public or private
parking lots
15 Entire length
§ 229-38. Schedule III: School Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-6, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess
of the speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below.
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Charlotte Avenue 15 300 feet in either direction from the school
building line
Division Street 15 300 feet in either direction from the school
building line
Legion Street 15 300 feet in either direction from the school
building line
Pine Street 15 300 feet in either direction from the school
building line
Pleasant Avenue 15 300 feet in either direction from the school
building line
Union Street 15 300 feet in either direction from the school
building line
§ 229-39. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-7, the following described streets or parts
thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
§ 229-36 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-39
229:15
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 229-40. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-8, no person shall make a turn of the kind
designated below at any of the following intersections:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
Charlotte Avenue
[Added 5-16-2016
by L.L. No.
5-2016]
South Left All 150 feet south of Euclid
Avenue
Hamburg Shopping
Center - north exit
driveway
West Left All Buffalo Street
Hamburg Shopping
Center - south exit
driveway
West Right All Buffalo Street
Pine Street [Added
2-2-2015 by L.L.
No. 1-2015]
North Left 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.,
school
days
350 feet north of East
Main Street
§ 229-41. Schedule VI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-9, no person shall make a right turn when
facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Direction of Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
East Prospect Avenue West Buffalo Street
Elizabeth Avenue West Buffalo Street
Euclid Avenue West Buffalo Street
North Street East Buffalo Street
Prospect Avenue East Buffalo Street
§ 229-42. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-10, the following described streets or parts
thereof are hereby designated as through streets. Traffic control devices shall be installed
on each street intersecting the through street:
§ 229-39 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-42
229:16
Name of Through
Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
Buffalo Street Beverly Place East Stop sign
Buffalo Street Dudley Avenue East Stop sign
Buffalo Street Highland Avenue West Stop sign
Buffalo Street Maple Avenue West Stop sign
Buffalo Street Oliver Place West Stop sign
Buffalo Street Pleasant Avenue West Stop sign
Charlotte Avenue Euclid Street East Stop sign
Charlotte Avenue George Street East Stop sign
Charlotte Avenue Huntington Court East Stop sign
Charlotte Avenue Mark Avenue East Stop sign
Charlotte Avenue Parkside Avenue East Stop sign
Charlotte Avenue Raymond Street East Stop sign
Charlotte Avenue Robert Street East Stop sign
Charlotte Avenue Sharon Avenue West Stop sign
Charlotte Avenue Sherwood Avenue East Stop sign
East Main Street Hunt Avenue North Stop sign
East Main Street Newton Road Northeast Stop sign
East Main Street Pine Street North Stop sign
East Main Street St. Mary's Place North Stop sign
East Main Street Victory Avenue North Stop sign
Evans Street Huron Street South Stop sign
Evans Street Memorial Drive South Stop sign
Evans Street West Avenue North Stop sign
Lake Street Church Street West Stop sign
Lake Street Haviland Avenue West Stop sign
Lake Street Linwood Avenue West Stop sign
Lake Street Norwood Avenue East Stop sign
Lake Street Prospect Avenue East Stop sign
Pierce Avenue Central Avenue East Stop sign
Pierce Avenue Evans Street Southwest Stop sign
Pierce Avenue Huron Street West Stop sign
Pierce Avenue Idlewood Avenue East Stop sign
Pierce Avenue Long Avenue East Stop sign
Pierce Avenue Rosedale Avenue East Stop sign
Pleasant Avenue Canterbury Drive Northeast Stop sign
§ 229-42 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-42
229:17
Name of Through
Street
Name of Entrance
Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Traffic Control
Device
Pleasant Avenue Church Street Northeast Stop sign
Pleasant Avenue Haviland Place North Stop sign
Pleasant Avenue Hawkins Avenue Both Stop sign
Pleasant Avenue Lenora Drive South Stop sign
Pleasant Avenue Meadow Run North Stop sign
Pleasant Avenue Milford Street South Stop sign
Pleasant Avenue Scott Street South Stop sign
Pleasant Avenue Sunset Drive North Stop sign
Pleasant Avenue Westview Avenue South Stop sign
South Buffalo Street Crescent Avenue Both Stop sign
South Buffalo Street Long Avenue East Stop sign
South Buffalo Street Old South Buffalo Northeast Stop sign
§ 229-43. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-11, the following described intersections are
hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Anderson Place North Highland Avenue
Anderson Place North Norwood Avenue
Areta Drive [Repealed 7-1-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
Beverly Place East George Street
Birkshire Road North Browning Drive
Birkshire Road South Brookwood Drive
Blake Lane East Boxwood Circle
Blake Lane South Browning Drive
Boxwood Circle (east
entrance)
South Browning Drive
Boxwood Circle (west
entrance)
South Browning Drive
Brendel Avenue [Added
6-16-2008 by L.L. No.
2-2008]
Both Hunt Avenue
Brendel Avenue East Darlich Avenue
Brendel Avenue West Pine Street
Brenton Lane East Birkshire Road
§ 229-42 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-43
229:18
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Brenton Lane Southwest Brookwood Drive
Brookwood Drive East Meadow Run
Brookwood Drive South and Holiday Lane Northwest
Brookwood Drive Southwest Chapel Glen Drive
Browning Drive East Sunset Drive
Browning Drive Southwest Brookwood Drive
Burton Lane East Birkshire Road
Burton Lane Southwest Brookwood Drive
Byrd Drive East Sunset Drive
Byrd Drive West Brookwood Drive
Center Street Both Long Avenue
Center Street Both Union Street
Central Avenue Southeast South Lake Street
Chapel Glen Drive Northwest Brookwood Drive
Chapel Glen Drive South Oakhill Drive
Charlotte Avenue Both East Prospect Avenue
Charlotte Avenue North Sherburn Drive
Charlotte Avenue South Newton Road
Colvin Avenue Both Highland Avenue
Colvin Avenue North Norwood Avenue
Colvin Avenue South Prospect Avenue
Cottonwood Drive Northeast Chapel Glen Drive
Cottonwood Drive Southwest Forestal Drive
Crescent Avenue Southeast Taylor Road
Crownview Terrace East Areta Drive
Crownview Terrace Southeast Canterbury Drive
Darlich Avenue South Huntington Court
Division Street Both Highland Avenue
Division Street Both North Street
Division Street Both Oliver Place
Division Street Both Prospect Avenue
Division Street South Maple Avenue
Donald Place North Norwood Avenue
Donald Place South Highland Avenue
Dreschler Court East George Street
§ 229-43 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-43
229:19
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Dudley Avenue East George Street
East Prospect Avenue Both Charlotte Avenue
East Prospect Avenue Both Martha Place
East Prospect Avenue East McKinley Parkway
East Union Street Both Pine Street
East Union Street East Hunt Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue East Hunt Avenue
Elmview Avenue East At angle point
Elmview Avenue Northeast Camp Road
Elmview Avenue West Sunset Drive
Euclid Avenue Both George Street
Forestal Drive Northwest Areta Drive
Forestal Drive South Foxcroft Drive
Foxcroft Drive East Chapel Glen Drive
George Street Both Euclid Avenue
George Street South East Prospect Avenue
Grimsby Drive South Elmview Avenue
Haviland Place West 51 Haviland Place
Hawkins Avenue Both Maple Avenue
Hawkins Avenue Both Pleasant Avenue
Hawkins Avenue Both Prospect Avenue
Hawkins Avenue North Highland Avenue
Hawkins Avenue South Union Street
Henderson Place East Hunt Avenue
Henderson Place West Pine Street
Highland Avenue Both Colvin Avenue
Highland Avenue Both Division Street
Hillview Place North Long Avenue
Holiday Lane East Sunset Drive
Holiday Lane Southwest Brookwood Drive
Hunt Avenue Both Brendel Avenue
Hunt Avenue North East Prospect Avenue
Huntington Court West Hunt Avenue
Janice Place South East Prospect Avenue
Kenton Place (north entrance) East Sunset Drive
§ 229-43 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-43
229:20
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Kenton Place (south entrance) East Sunset Drive
Lenora Drive South Westview Avenue
Linwood Avenue West West Avenue
Little Pine Road East McKinley Parkway
Lombardy Lane North Idlewood Avenue
Long Avenue Both Center Street
Long Avenue Both South Lake Street
Maple Avenue Both Hawkins Avenue
Maple Avenue West Sickmon Avenue
Marengo Street Both Maple Avenue
Marengo Street South Pleasant Avenue
Marengo Street South Prospect Avenue
Mark Avenue East McKinley Parkway
Martha Place Both East Prospect Avenue
Martha Place Both Robert Street
Martha Place North Parkside Avenue
Martha Place South Huntington Court
Marvin Court North Church Street
Meadow Run North Byrd Drive
Milford Street South Westview Avenue
North Street Both Division Street
Norwood Avenue East Oakwood Place
Oakhill Drive East Brookwood Drive
Oakland Place North North Street
Oakland Place South Highland Avenue
Oliver Place Both Division Street
Oliver Place West Oakland Place
Olympiad Drive North Oakhill Drive
Parkside Avenue West George Street
Paxton Court West Kenton Place
Pine Street Both East Union Street
Pleasant Avenue Both Hawkins Avenue
Prospect Avenue Both Division Street
Prospect Avenue Both Hawkins Avenue
Prospect Avenue East Marengo Street
§ 229-43 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-43
229:21
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Prospect Avenue West Colvin Avenue
Randall Terrace North East Prospect Avenue
Randall Terrace West Sharon Avenue
Raymond Street Both Martha Place
Robert Street West Darlich Avenue
Rosedale Avenue East Lombardy Lane
Rovner Place (northeast
entrance)
Northwest Holiday Lane
Rovner Place (southwest
entrance)
Northwest Holiday Lane
Sandra Place South East Prospect Avenue
Sharon Avenue North East Prospect Avenue
Sherburn Drive Both Charlotte Avenue
Sherburn Drive East McKinley Parkway
Sherburn Drive Northwest Clark Street
Sherwood Avenue Both Martha Place
Sherwood Avenue West George Street
Sickmon Avenue North Prospect Avenue
Sickmon Avenue South Pleasant Avenue
South Lake Street Both Long Avenue
St. Mary's Place North Huntington Court
Summit Avenue [Added
1-19-2016 by L.L. No.
3-2016]
West Old East Eden Road
Therin Drive East McKinley Parkway
Therin Drive West Torry Drive
Torry Drive East McKinley Parkway
Torry Drive Southwest Sherburn Drive
Union Street Both Center Street
Victory Avenue Both East Union Street
Victory Avenue North Brendel Avenue
West Avenue North Union Street
Woodview Avenue East Center Street
Woodview Avenue West South Lake Street
Woodview Court West Center Street
§ 229-43 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-44
229:22
§ 229-44. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-12, the following described intersections are
hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
51 Haviland Place exit driveway South Haviland Place
§ 229-45. Schedule X: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-13, all vehicles shall move as described
below:
Intersection (Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
South Buffalo Street South Right lane (west) must turn right at
Long Avenue
§ 229-46. Schedule XI: Commercial Vehicles.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-14, all commercial vehicles are hereby
excluded from the following streets with the Village:
Name of Street Location
Haviland Place From Lake Street to Scott Street
§ 229-47. Schedule XII: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-15, gross weight limits are hereby established
as indicated for commercial vehicles or other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer
combinations, upon the streets or portions thereof described below, except as provided
in said section:
Name of Street
Max. Gross Weight
(pounds) Location
(Reserved)
§ 229-48. Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-17, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 229-49. Schedule XIV: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-18, no person shall stop a vehicle upon any
of the following described streets or parts thereof:
§ 229-44 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-49
229:23
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 229-50. Schedule XV: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-19, no person shall stand a vehicle upon any
of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Anderson Place West From Highland Avenue to Norwood
Avenue
Beverly Place North From Buffalo Street to George Street
Birkshire Road East From Browning Drive to Brookwood
Drive
Blake Lane North From Boxwood Circle to Browning Drive
Boxwood Circle East, North and
West
From Browning Drive (east terminus of
circle) to Browning Drive (west terminus
of circle)
Brenton Lane North From Brookwood Drive to Birkshire Road
Brookwood Drive Both From Meadow Run to Crownview Terrace
Browning Drive North From Sunset Drive to Brookwood Drive
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-200880]
East From East Main Street to a point 130 feet
north thereof
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
East From a point 238 feet north of East Main
Street to a point 148 feet north thereof
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
East From East Union Street to a point 110 feet
south thereof
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
East From East Union Street to a point 130 feet
south of Maple Avenue
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
East From Pine Street to a point 122 feet south
thereof
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
East From Pine Street to Legion Drive
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
West From Highland Avenue to a point 65 feet
north thereof
80. Editor's Note: This local law superseded all former entries for Buffalo Street.
§ 229-49 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-50
229:24
Name of Street Side Location
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
West From Main Street to a point 130 feet north
thereof
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
West From a point 254 feet north of Main Street
to a point 82 feet north thereof
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008[
West From a point 195 feet north of Maple
Avenue to Prospect Avenue
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
West From Oliver Place to a point 92 feet south
thereof
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
West From a point 145 feet north of Oliver
Place north to Legion Drive
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
West From Prospect Avenue to Highland
Avenue
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
West From Union Street to a point 110 feet
south thereof
Buffalo Street [Added
10-20-2008 by L.L. No.
3-2008]
West From Union Street to a point 130 feet
north of Maple Avenue
Burton Lane North From Brookwood Drive to Birkshire Road
Byrd Drive South From Brookwood Drive to Meadow Run
Canterbury Drive Northwest From Pleasant Avenue to Crownview
Terrace
Center Street East From Main Street to a point 145 feet south
thereof
Center Street East From Woodview Avenue to Long Avenue
Center Street West From Long Avenue to Union Street
Central Avenue North From Pierce Avenue to South Lake Street
Chapel Glen Drive West From Brookwood Drive to Oakhill Drive
Church Street [Amended
9-5-2000 by L.L. No.
6-2000]
North From west curbline of Lake Street to east
curbline of Pleasant Avenue
Colvin Avenue West From Prospect Avenue to Norwood
Avenue
Cottonwood Avenue Northwest From Forestal Drive to Chapel Glen Drive
§ 229-50 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-50
229:25
Name of Street Side Location
Crownview Terrace Northeast, east
and south
From Canterbury Drive to Brookwood
Drive
Division Street
[Amended 9-6-2005 by
L.L. No. 5-2005]
East From North Street to the north Village line
Donald Place West From Highland Avenue to Norwood
Avenue
East Main Street North From Pine Street to a point 158 feet east
thereof
East Main Street [Added
8-17-1998 by L.L. No.
4-1998]
North From the west curbline of Pine Street to a
point 250 feet west thereof
East Main Street South From South Buffalo Street to the east
Village line
East Prospect Avenue North From Buffalo Street to the north extension
of Hunt Avenue
East Prospect Avenue North From the west curbline of McKinley
Parkway to a point 120 feet westerly
therefrom
East Prospect Avenue South From Buffalo Street to Hunt Avenue
East Union Street South From Buffalo Street to Pine Street
Elmview Avenue South From Camp Road to Sunset Drive
Euclid Avenue North From Buffalo Street to George Street
Evans Street North From the east right-of-way line of West
Avenue to the west right-of-way line of
Pierce Avenue
Evans Street (as formerly
laid out)
South From the Memorial Drive to a point 155
feet northeast thereof
Forestal Drive West From Brookwood Drive to Foxcroft Drive
Foxcroft Drive
[Amended 6-16-2008 by
L.L. No. 2-2008]
North From Chapel Glen Drive to Pleasant
Avenue
Grimsby Drive East From Elmview Avenue to a point 620 feet
south thereof
Hawkins Avenue West From Union Street to Pleasant Avenue
Highland Avenue South From the east curbline of Lake Street to a
point 214 feet easterly therefrom
Hillview Avenue East From Long Avenue to a point 454 feet
south thereof
Holiday Lane North From Sunset Drive to Brookwood Drive
(extended southwest)
§ 229-50 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-50
229:26
Name of Street Side Location
Holiday Lane South From a point 865 feet west of Sunset
Drive to a point 100 feet west thereof
Kenton Place Both Entire length
Lake Street Both From the north curbline Main Street to the
north line of the Village
Legion Drive Both From Division Street and the Village line
Linwood Avenue South From Lake Street to West Avenue
Long Avenue -- Southwest side of Marine Midland Bank
exits - 2 car lengths
Long Avenue North From South Buffalo Road to Pierce
Avenue
Long Avenue South From South Buffalo Road to a point 200
feet west thereof
Main Street North From a point 284 feet west of Buffalo
Street to a point 20 feet west thereof
Main Street North From a point 285 feet east of Lake Street
to a point 80 feet east thereof
Main Street North From a point 429.5 feet west of Center
Street to a point 40 feet west thereof
Main Street [Repealed
10-15-2001 by L.L. No.
8-2001]
Main Street North From Buffalo Street to a point 60 feet west
thereof
Main Street South From a point 122 feet west of South
Buffalo Street to Buffalo Street
Main Street [Added
10-15-2001 by L.L. No.
8-2001; amended
2-4-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
South From a point 260 feet west of South
Buffalo Street to a point 80 feet west
thereof
Main Street [Repealed
10-15-2001 by L.L. No.
8-2001]
Main Street [Repealed
10-15-2001 by L.L. No.
8-2001]
Main Street South From Center Street to a point 115 feet
west thereof
Mark Avenue North From Charlotte Avenue to McKinley
Parkway
§ 229-50 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-50
229:27
Name of Street Side Location
Meadow Run East From Byrd Drive to Pleasant Avenue
Memorial Drive East From Evans Street to a point 194 feet
southeast of Evans Street
Memorial Drive West From a point 136 feet south of Evans
Street (as formerly laid out) to a 293 feet
south thereof
North Street [Amended
8-21-2000 by L.L. No.
5-2000]
North From Buffalo Street to Division Street
North Street South From Division Street to Oakland Place
Norwood Avenue North From Oakland Place to Lake Street
Oakhill Drive South From Brookwood Drive to the west
extension of Foxcroft Drive
Oakland Place West From Highland Avenue to North Street
extended
Olympiad Drive Both From Oakhill Drive to a point 125 feet
south thereof
Pierce Avenue
[Amended 1-19-2016 by
L.L. No. 3-2016]
East From South Lake Street to the Village line
Pierce Avenue [Added
1-19-2016 by L.L. No.
3-2016]
West From South Lake Street to the Village line
Pine Street East From Elizabeth Street to East Main Street
Pleasant Avenue Both From the west curbline of Lake Street to a
point 188 feet westerly therefrom
Pleasant Avenue North From Hawkins Avenue to Lake Street
Pleasant Avenue North From Buffalo Street to Hawkins Avenue
Pleasant Avenue North From the northwest right-of-way line of
Erie Railroad premises to Church Street
Pleasant Avenue South From Buffalo Street to a point 404 feet
west thereof
Pleasant Avenue South From Hawkins Avenue to a point 38 feet
east thereof
Prospect Avenue South From Hawkins Avenue to a point 226 feet
west thereof
Pleasant Avenue South From the east curbline of Lake Street to
point 132 feet easterly therefrom
Rosedale Avenue North From Pierce Avenue to Lombardy Lane
Rovner Place Both Entire length
§ 229-50 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-50
229:28
Name of Street Side Location
Sherburn Drive North From Clark Street to a point 252 feet
southeast thereof
Sherburn Drive South From Clark Street to McKinley Parkway
South Buffalo Street East From East Main Street to Crescent Avenue
South Buffalo Street
[Added 11-17-2008 by
L.L. No. 4-2008]
West From Main Street to a point 235 feet north
of Long Avenue
South Buffalo Street
[Amended 11-17-2008
by L.L. No. 4-2008]
West From Long Avenue to Cresent Avenue
South Lake Street West From Long Avenue to Idlewood Avenue
Therin Drive South From Torry Drive to McKinley Parkway
Torry Drive South From Sherburn Drive to McKinley
Parkway
Union Street North From Buffalo Street to Lake Street
Union Street North From Scott Street to a point 91 feet east
thereof
Union Street North From the west curbline of Lake Street to a
point 134 feet westerly therefrom
Union Street [Added
7-2-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
North 220 feet west of Lake Street and running
west to Scott Street
Union Street South From a point 158 feet east of Center Street
to a point 109 feet east thereof
Union Street South From Lake Street to the east right-of-way
of Erie Railroad
Union Street South From the east curbline of Lake Street to a
point 128 feet easterly therefrom
Woodview Avenue North From South Lake Street to Center Street
§ 229-51. Schedule XVI: No Standing in Apartment Complex Driveways.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-20, no person shall stand a vehicle upon any
of the following described apartment complex driveways:
Name of Apartment Complex Side Location
Creekbend Heights Apartment
Complex (25 Buffalo Street)
Northwest From a point 412 feet east of
Buffalo Street to a point 70
feet east thereof
Creekbend Heights Apartment
Complex (25 Buffalo Street)
South and
southeast
From a point 222 feet east of
Buffalo Street to a point 385
feet east thereof
§ 229-50 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-52
229:29
§ 229-52. Schedule XVII: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-21, no person shall park a vehicle between
the times specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
All streets Both 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m./From
November 1 to April 1
All
§ 229-53. Schedule XVIII: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-22, no person shall stop a vehicle between
the times specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Charlotte Avenue [Added
7-1-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
East 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From a point 178 feet
south of Mark Avenue
to a point 882 feet
south thereof
Charlotte Avenue [Added
7-1-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
West 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From Parkside Avenue
to George Street
School days
Division Street [Added
9-6-2005 by L.L. No.
5-2005]
East 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From a point 225 feet
south of the northerly
most north line of the
Village to a point 360
feet south of the
northerly most north
Village line
§ 229-54. Schedule XIX: No Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-23, no person shall stand a vehicle between
the times specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Charlotte Avenue
[Repealed 7-1-2002 by
L.L. No. 3-2002]
Division Street
[Amended 9-6-2005 by
L.L. No. 5-2005]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From North Street to
Prospect Avenue
[Added 3-19-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001; amended 2-19-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
Division Street
[Amended 9-15-2003 by
L.L. No. 3-2003]
West 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From North Street to
Legion Drive
§ 229-52 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-54
229:30
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Division Street [Added
9-4-2001 by L.L. No.
6-2001]
West 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From the Village line
north to the end of
Division Street
North Street [Amended
8-21-2000 by L.L. No.
5-2000]
North 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From Division Street
to a point 264 feet
west thereof
North Street [Added
8-21-2000 by L.L. No.
5-2000]
South 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From Division Street
to a point 36 feet east
thereof
Oliver Place [Added
9-15-2003 by L.L. No.
3-2003]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From the west line of
Buffalo Street to the
east line of Division
Street
Oliver Place [Added
9-15-2003 by L.L. No.
3-2003]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From the west line of
Division Street to the
east line of Oakland
Place
Pine Street [Added
2-2-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
West 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./School days
From East Union
Street to a point 250
feet south
Union Street South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays
From Center Street to
a point 216 feet west
thereof
§ 229-55. Schedule XX: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-24, no person shall park a vehicle for longer
than the time limit specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Buffalo Street
[Added
10-20-2008 by
L.L. No.
3-200881]
East 2 hours; 8:00 to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 130 feet north
of East Main Street to a point
105 feet north thereof
Buffalo Street
[Added
10-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 3-2008]
East 2 hours; 8:00 to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 386 feet north
of East Main Street to a point
110 south of East Union
Street
81. Editor's Note: This local law superseded all former entries for Buffalo Street.
§ 229-54 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-55
229:31
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Buffalo Street
[Added
10-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 3-2008]
East 2 hours; 8:00 to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 130 feet south
of Maple Avenue to a point
122 feet south of Pine Street
Buffalo Street
[Added
10-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 3-2008]
West 2 hours; 8:00 to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 65 feet north of
Highland Avenue to a point
92 feet south of Oliver Place
Buffalo Street
[Added
10-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 3-2008]
West 2 hours; 8:00 to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 130 feet north
of Main Street to a point 122
feet north thereof
Buffalo Street
[Added
10-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 3-2008]
West 2 hours; 8:00 to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 336 feet north
of Main Street to a point 110
feet south of East Union
Street
Buffalo Street
[Added
10-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 3-2008]
West 2 hours; 8:00 to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 130 feet north
of Maple Avenue to a point
65 feet north thereof
Buffalo Street
[Added
10-20-2008 by
L.L. No. 3-2008]
West 2 hours; 8:00 to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 65 feet north of
Oliver Place to a point 40
feet north thereof
Center Street East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From Main Street to Long
Avenue
Center Street East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From Main Street to Union
Street
East Main Street North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 90 feet east of
Buffalo Street to a point 180
feet west of Pine Street
East Main Street South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 50 feet east of
South Buffalo Street to a
point 166 feet east thereof
East Union Street North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 42 feet east of
Buffalo Street to a point 225
east thereof
East Union Street North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 267 feet east of
Buffalo Street to Pine Street
§ 229-55 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-55
229:32
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Main Street North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 84 feet west of
Buffalo Street to a point 248
feet west thereof
Main Street North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 324 feet west of
Buffalo Street to Center
Street
Main Street North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From Center Street to a point
381 feet west thereof
Main Street South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From Center Street to a point
686 feet east thereof
South Buffalo
Street [Added
9-21-1998 by
L.L. No. 6-1998;
amended
10-17-2005 by
L.L. No. 6-2005;
11-17-2008 by
L.L. No. 4-2008]
West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From Long Avenue to a point
235 feet north thereof
Union Street South 2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All except
Sundays and holidays
From Buffalo Street to
Hawkins Avenue
§ 229-56. Schedule XXI: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-25, no person shall park a vehicle upon any
of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 229-57. Schedule XXII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-26, the following described locations are
hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 229-58. Schedule XXIII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-27, the following described locations are
§ 229-55 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 229-58
229:33
hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 229-59. Schedule XXIV: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-28, the following described locations are
hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
East Main Street South From South Buffalo Street to a point
100 feet east thereof
§ 229-60. Schedule XXV: Handicapped Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 229-29, no person shall park a vehicle for longer
than the time limit specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof
except handicapped persons holding a permit:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Main Street North 1 hour; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All
From a point 60 feet west
of Buffalo Street to a point
24 feet west thereof
Main Street North None; 6:00 p.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
From a point 60 feet west
of Buffalo Street to a point
24 feet west thereof
Main Street South 1 hour; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All
From a point 344 feet east
of Center Street to a point
22 feet east thereof
Main Street South None; 6:00 p.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
From a point 344 feet east
of Center Street to a point
22 feet east thereof
Main Street [Repealed 9-15-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
§ 229-58 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 229-60
229:34
Chapter 233
VEHICLES, JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 198. Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 238.
§ 233-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Junked Motor Vehicle Law of the
Village of Hamburg."
§ 233-2. Purpose.
The outdoor storage of junked motor vehicles on publicly or privately owned property
within the Village of Hamburg is detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare
of the community. The same also constitutes an attractive nuisance to children and in
many ways imperils their safety. Such storage also endangers the person and property of
members of the community, since fuel tanks containing gasoline or gasoline fumes may
easily explode. Such storage is unsightly and depreciates all property values. The control
of the outdoor storage of junked motor vehicles on privately owned properties within the
Village of Hamburg is, therefore, regulated for the preservation of the health, safety and
general welfare of the community.
§ 233-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires:
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle parts or
equipment, that is old, wrecked, discarded, abandoned or dismantled or partially
dismantled which is in such deteriorated condition that it cannot be legally operated
upon the public highway without substantial repairs. With respect to any motor vehicle
not required to be licensed or motor vehicles not usually used on public highways, the
fact that such motor vehicle has remained unused for more than six months and is not
in condition to be moved under its own power shall be presumptive evidence that such
motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle originally designed and intended to be operated,
drawn or driven or capable of being operated, drawn or driven upon a public highway by
any power other than muscular power. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "motor
vehicle" shall include, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles,
snowmobiles and trailers.
OWNER OF MOTOR VEHICLE — A person, firm or corporation having the property
in or title to a motor vehicle, a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle,
subject to a security interest in another person and also including any lessee or bailee of
a motor vehicle having the use thereof under lease or otherwise.
§ 229-60 VEHICLES, JUNKED § 233-3
233:1
OWNER OF PRIVATE PROPERTY —A person, firm or corporation being the owner,
contract purchaser, tenant, lessee, occupant, undertenant, receiver or assignee of private
premises or private property located within the Village of Hamburg.
PRIVATE PREMISES or PRIVATE PROPERTY — Includes all parcels of real
property not owned by any unit of government situated in the Village of Hamburg,
whether occupied or vacant, regardless of size, topography or location.
§ 233-4. Outdoor storage on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner, occupant, lessee,
agent, tenant or otherwise of property within the Village of Hamburg, to store or deposit,
or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, a junked motor vehicle, or part or piece
thereof, on any private property within the Village of Hamburg, unless:
§ 233-5. Notice; duties of Building Inspector.
If the provisions of the foregoing sections are believed to be violated, the Building
Inspector shall serve a written notice, either personally or by registered, certified or
ordinary mail, upon the owner, occupant or person having charge of such private
property, to comply with the requirements of this chapter. If the Building Inspector is
unable to ascertain the ownership of such private property by any other means, he or
she may determine ownership of any such parcel of land in the Village of Hamburg
from the current assessment roll of the village and may serve written notice upon the
owner thereof by mailing such notice by certified mail to the owner at the address
listed on the current assessment roll. If the Building Inspector is unable to determine
the ownership or address of the owner of said private property, such notification may be
made by publishing same in the official newspaper of the village once each week for two
consecutive weeks. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
A. Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited on premises legally used and operated as
a junkyard; or
B. Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited in a completely enclosed building; or
C. Such motor vehicle is under repair, reconstruction or refurbishing by the owners
thereof who must actually be residing on the premises. Not more than one such
motor vehicle shall be permitted at any one time on any premises. Such motor
vehicle must be so maintained and protected as not to create any safety hazard or
nuisance to surrounding property owners and shall not remain on the premises more
than one month; or
D. Such motor vehicle is temporarily stored on the premises of a public garage, motor
vehicle service station or body repair shop within a commercial or industrial district
of the village while awaiting repair or servicing at such place of business. Not more
than five such vehicles shall be permitted to be stored on any such premises at any
one time. Temporary storage is defined as no more than 30 consecutive days.
§ 233-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 233-5
233:2
To the owner, occupant or person having charge of land within the Village of
Hamburg briefly described as follows:
___________________________________________________________
(here describe subject property)
Notice is hereby given that a junked motor vehicle is stored or deposited on the above
described property in violation of the Junked Motor Vehicle Law of the Village of
Hamburg. This vehicle must be removed therefrom within 10 days from the date of
this notice; provided, however, that if this notice is served on you by publication, said
motor vehicle shall be removed within 24 days from the first publication date of this
notice. If such motor vehicle is not removed on or before the expiration of said 10 days
from the date hereof, or on or before the expiration of said 24 days from the date of
this notice, in the event that it is served on you by publication, you are hereby
summoned to appear before the Village Court Justice of the Village of Hamburg, New
York, at _________ p.m. on the ______ day of ________, 19___ at which time a
hearing will be held to determine why the Village of Hamburg, New York, acting
through its duly authorized agents, servants, officers and employees, should not enter
upon said property and remove and cause said motor vehicle to be destroyed. In the
event that the Village Court Justice directs that said motor vehicle be removed and
destroyed, the expense incurred by the Village of Hamburg shall be assessed against
said property and shall constitute a lien thereon and be collected in the manner
provided by law.
Dated: BUILDING INSPECTOR OF THE
Village of Hamburg
§ 233-6. Penalty for offenses.
A violation of this chapter or any provision or part thereof by any person, firm or
corporation is hereby declared to be a violation of the Penal Law, punishable by a fine
not exceeding $250, or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both. Any person who
shall resist or obstruct the duly authorized agents, servants, officers and employees of the
Village of Hamburg in the removal and destruction of a junked motor vehicle by order
of the Board of Trustees shall be subject to the fines and penalties provided herein.
§ 233-7. Procedure.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Village of Hamburg may serve
such notices, hold such hearings and do such other and further things as are set forth
in § 233-5 hereof and may at the same time, or at any other time, without prior notice,
proceed under § 233-6 hereof, concerning the imposition of penalties.
§ 233-5 VEHICLES, JUNKED § 233-7
233:3

Chapter 238
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 233. Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 238-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
BOAT—A vessel capable of carrying one or more people and intended for use on or in
water.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
CAMPER or MOTOR HOME — A motorized or nonmotorized, self-propelled vehicle
containing sleeping and other facilities for habitation.
COMMERCIAL REPAIR—Repair for compensation in cash, kind or other property or
service.
COMMERCIAL STORAGE — Storage for compensation in cash, kind or other
property or service.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle used in connection with any business or
trade, with the exception of the automobile of a salesperson, professional person or the
like.
CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE — A commercial vehicle customarily used in the
construction trades, including but not limited to vehicles used for excavation and moving
of earth and vehicles used for hauling of construction materials.
DUMPSTER — See "trailer, utility."
DWELLING — A building designed or used as the living quarters for one or more
families, other than a tourist home, tourist court, motel, hotel or rooming house.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage living and
cooking together, exclusive of household servants; a number of persons living together
as a single housekeeping unit although not related by blood, adoption or marriage shall
be deemed to constitute a family unit.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets. Where a parcel of land fronts on more than one street, all portions
of the yard fronting on any such street shall be considered to be front yard and all other
yards shall be considered to be side yards.
MOBILE HOME — A structure mounted on axles and wheels containing living
facilities and which may be towed by automobile or truck from place to place. Such
structure will be considered a mobile home for purposes of this chapter, whether or not
§ 233-7 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 238-1
238:1
the wheels and axles are still in place.
MOTORCYCLE — An unclosed vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider
and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground.
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, on public
or private property.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PRESUMPTION — Burden of proof is on the business owner or homeowner.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — See "camper."
REPAIR — Restore to sound or good condition; alter or improve the appearance or
internal operation of a vehicle.
SEMITRAILER — A detachable trailer for hauling freight, having its forward end
supported by the rear of its truck tractor when attached.
STORAGE — The location of autos or auto equipment on a lot without the means of
mobility for a period in excess of 72 hours.
TEMPORARY—Parking, servicing or repair of a vehicle, boat, camper, camper trailer,
mobile home, house trailer or commercial vehicle for a duration less than 24 consecutive
hours in the same or proximate location.
TRACTOR — A short truck with a body containing only a cab for the driver, used to
haul detachable trailers.
TRACTOR-TRAILER —A combination trucking unit consisting of a tractor and trailer
or semitrailer.
TRAILER—A vehicle drawn or towed by another vehicle, except motorcycle sidecars.
TRAILER, BOAT — A trailer intended for the purpose of moving boats from place to
place.
TRAILER, CAMPER — A trailer containing sleeping and other facilities, the outside
walls of which are partially collapsible into the body of the trailer to facilitate towing.
TRAILER, HOUSE — Any portable or mobile vehicle used or designed to be used for
living purposes and with its wheels, rollers or skids in place.
TRAILER, UTILITY — A trailer generally used for the hauling of miscellaneous
household and yard materials.
UNLICENSED — Any vehicle without current and valid registration of valid license
plates affixed to the vehicle.
VEHICLE — All of the foregoing vessels, vehicles, structures and trailers and also
including every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway.
VILLAGE — The Village of Hamburg.
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
between the front line of the building and the front fine of the lot extending the full width
of the lot.
§ 238-1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 238-1
238:2
YARD, REAR — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building between
the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot extending the full width of the lot.
§ 238-2. Storage of boats, trailers, campers, motor homes, mobile homes and
recreational vehicles; permit required. [Amended 5-6-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
A. No boat, trailer, camper, motor home, mobile home or recreational vehicle having
an overall length greater than 24 feet shall be stored outside any place in the Village
on public or private property without first obtaining a permit. Storage, for the
purposes of this section, shall be defined as remaining on the premises for a period
of time greater than 120 hours. A boat, trailer, camper, motor home, mobile home
or recreational vehicle exceeding 24 feet in length may be temporarily parked on
private property without a permit for a period of time not to exceed 120 hours, so
long as the boat, trailer, camper, motor home, mobile home or recreational vehicle
does not impede pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic and the parking of said vehicle
complies with all other applicable regulations set forth in this Code.
B. Subject to obtaining a permit, a boat, trailer, camper, motor home, mobile home or
recreational vehicle having an overall length greater than 24 feet may be parked or
stored on private property, subject to the following regulations:
(1) The boat, trailer, camper, motor home, mobile home or recreational vehicle
must belong to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which it is being
parked or stored.
(2) Only one of the aforementioned vehicles may be parked or stored on any lot
containing a dwelling unit.
(3) The storage or parking of any of the aforementioned vehicles on the premises
longer than 180 days must be in the rear yard, or in the side yard of a corner
lot, of any property containing a building. The 180 days shall commence on
the date immediately following the date the permit is granted.
(4) The storage of any of the aforementioned vehicles shall not preempt the use of
space needed for off-street parking of other vehicles on the premises, as may
be required by the parking requirements of this Code,82 and any parking or
storage of any of the aforementioned vehicles must be in full compliance with
all applicable sections of this Code.83
(5) None of the aforementioned vehicles shall be used for any residential purpose
or temporary habitation.
(6) There shall be no restriction on the aforementioned vehicles if the entire
vehicle is parked or stored within an enclosed garage, shed or barn.
C. No boat, trailer, camper, motor home, mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be
parked on any public street. This section shall be enforced as parking is prohibited
at all times pursuant to §§ 229-17 and 229-48 of the Vehicles and Traffic chapter of
this Code.
82. Editor's Note: See § 250-24, Off-street parking space requirements.
83. Editor's Note: See Ch. 229, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 238-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 238-3
238:3
§ 238-3. Application for permits. [Added 5-6-2013 by L.L. No. 2-201384]
§ 238-4. (Reserved)85
A. An application for a permit for the parking or outside storage of any boat, trailer,
camper, motor home, mobile home and/or recreational vehicle shall be made to the
Planning Commission. Application for said permit, along with the nonrefundable
application fee, will be filed with the Village Clerk. Upon receipt of the application
and the nonrefundable application fee, the Village Clerk shall place the application
on the agenda for the next available Planning Commission meeting. In addition, the
Village Clerk shall provide a minimum of 10 days' written notice, via certified
mailing, of such meeting to all resident home owners living within 100 feet of the
outer extremities of the applicant's property.
B. The Planning Commission may grant or deny the permit upon hearing the applicant
and all interested parties at its meeting. The Planning Commission may also
consider any written submissions in favor of or against the permit application. The
Planning Commission may grant the permit subject to conditions in addition to
those conditions set forth in this section.
C. When evaluating a permit application, the Planning Commission shall consider the
following:
(1) Whether or not the proposed location is hazardous or creates safety issues
including, but not limited to, the obstruction of necessary sight lines for the
residents of the property, the neighbors, and/or the general public.
(2) Mitigation of any hazardous condition or safety issue.
(3) Visibility of the boat, trailer, camper, motor home, mobile home and/or
recreational vehicle to the neighbors and general public at the proposed storage
site. The more visible it is, the less preferable the site is and, in particular,
when the storage will last longer than 180 days.
(4) Less preferable sites may require screening.
(5) Side yard and rear yard setback requirements, where practical, in determining
an appropriate storage location.
D. Permits shall be granted for a term not to exceed one year. Permits are subject to
review and revocation at any time should the Board of Trustees or the Planning
Commission receive a complaint regarding the applicant's storage of the boat,
trailer, camper, motor home, mobile home and/or recreational vehicle.
E. Permits must be renewed each year by submitting a renewal application and a
nonrefundable application fee to the Village Clerk. A renewal of an existing permit
may be granted by the Planning Commission without a mailing or hearing should
the Planning Commission determine, in its discretion, that no mailing and/or
hearing is required.
84. Editor's Note: Pursuant to this local law, former § 238-3, Storage of boats; permit required, was deleted. See now
§ 238-2.
85. Editor’s Note: Former § 238-4, Application for permits, was deleted pursuant to L.L. No. 2-2013. See now § 238-3.
§ 238-3 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 238-5
238:4
§ 238-5. Storage of utility trailers and/or commercial vehicles.
§ 238-6. Vacant property.
No vehicle, as defined in this chapter, shall be parked or stored outside in a residence
district on any privately owned vacant property held in single and separate ownership.
§ 238-7. Unlicensed, inoperative or discarded vehicles.86
The outside storage of unlicensed, inoperative and/or discarded vehicles on privately
owned property within the Village of Hamburg is a source of annoyance to residents
and to owners and occupants of adjacent land. The outdoor storage of such vehicles is
unsightly and constitutes an attractive nuisance to children and a peril to their safety.
The purpose of this section is the preservation of peace and good order, the protection of
public health and property and the prevention of fires and explosion.
§ 238-8. Repairs.
A. No utility trailer, commonly called a "dumpster," shall be parked or stored on any
public street at any time. Such utility trailer or dumpster may be parked or stored
outside on private property only during such time that construction activity is in
progress at the premises on which the utility trailer or dumpster is parked or stored.
B. No commercial vehicle of any type nor any tractor, tractor-trailer, semitrailer or
construction vehicle of any type shall be stored outside on any private or public
property in the Village except those used by the homeowner for personal
transportation.
C. No commercial vehicle of any type nor any tractor, tractor-trailer, semitrailer or
construction vehicle of any type shall be parked outside on any public or private
property in the Village unless temporarily in connection with a bona fide
commercial service, sales or delivery visit to such property.
D. The restrictions of Subsections B and C of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Village-owned vehicles.
(2) The Light Industrial Zone District.
A. No unlicensed, inoperative or discarded vehicles, except as may otherwise be
permitted in this chapter, shall be parked or stored outside on any public or private
property in the Village.
B. The restrictions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Village-owned vehicles.
(2) The Light Industrial Zone District.
(3) Duly authorized new and used car agencies.
A. In any residential district, any repairs made to any vehicle should be completed in
86. Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Vehicles, Junked.
§ 238-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 238-8
238:5
§ 238-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
one twenty-four-hour period unless the vehicle is in an enclosed building.
B. Commercial repair of vehicles in a residential district is prohibited.
A. Any duly authorized police officer, designated official or employee of the Village
of Hamburg may, by service of a summons or appearance ticket, require the owner,
occupant or person having charge of the property on which a violation of this
chapter exists to appear before the Village Justice of the Village of Hamburg.
B. In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed pursuant to law, the Village
Justice shall be empowered to direct that any vehicle or vehicles be removed and
the violation corrected within 15 days from the return date of the summons or
appearance ticket.
C. In the event that the violation is not removed or corrected within such time as shall
be provided by the Village Justice Court, the Village Board of Trustees may,
pursuant to law, order its authorized agent to perform such work as shall be
necessary to remove or correct the violation and assess the costs thereof against the
land, to be a lien against the property and to be collected as taxes.
D. Any vehicle removed from the property may be declared as abandoned property by
the Board of Trustees and disposed of pursuant to law. This remedy shall be in
addition to any other penalty which may be imposed or provided by law.
§ 238-8 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 238-9
238:6
Chapter 250
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire prevention — See Ch. 123.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 127.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 141.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 146.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 182.
Sewers — See Ch. 186.
Solid waste — See Ch. 198.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 203.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 207.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 238.
§ 238-9 ZONING § 238-9
250:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 250-1. Enacting clause.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Article 7 of the Village Law of the State of New
York, the Board of Trustees of the Village of Hamburg hereby amends the Zoning Code
of the Village to read as follows.
§ 250-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Code of the Village of Hamburg, New
York," as amended 1974.
§ 250-3. Purpose.
§ 250-4. Application of regulations.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be erected, moved, altered
or extended, and no land, building or structure as part thereof shall be occupied or used
unless in conformity with the regulations specified for the district in which it is located.
§ 250-5. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying this chapter, such provisions shall be held to be minimum
requirements for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the people
of the Village. Where the provisions of any statute, code or ordinance impose greater
restrictions than this code, the provisions of such statute or regulation shall be
controlling.
A. The purposes of this chapter, regulations and zoning districts, as outlined on the
Zoning Map, are to provide for orderly growth in accordance with a comprehensive
plan, to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, flood and other
dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent overcrowding of land, to avoid
undue concentration of population, to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements, and
to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
B. This chapter, regulations and zoning districts have been made with reasonable
consideration, among other things, as to the character of each district and its
peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land.
§ 250-1 ZONING § 250-5
250:3

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 250-6. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have these meanings:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal building and located on the same lot. No detached accessory buildings shall be
permitted in required front yards, and the area of all accessory buildings on a residential
property shall not exceed 50% of the area of the principal building, up to a maximum of
150 square feet. No one building will exceed 120 square feet.[Amended 6-18-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-199087]
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
use. The area devoted to the accessory use may not exceed 15% of the total living
area.[Amended 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
ADULT DAY CARE — A place, person, association, corporation, institution or agency
licensed by the State of New York providing care for adults.[Amended 6-18-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990]
ALTERATION—Structural change, rearrangement, change of location or addition to a
building, other than repairs and modification in building equipment.
AUTOMOTIVE USE AREA — Any portion of a lot used for open off-street parking or
reservoir space or for open sales, service or storage areas for motor vehicles, contractors'
equipment or boats.[Amended 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
BASEMENT—Story partly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story if the
vertical distance between basement ceiling and average grade level of adjoining ground
is more than six feet.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — Dwelling, occupied by the owner thereof, in which
overnight accommodation is provided for transient guests for compensation.[Amended
6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls, or within
exterior and party walls, and a roof affording shelter to persons, animals or property. See
definition of "structure."[Added 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
BUILDING AREA — Total of area taken on a horizontal plane at main finished grade
level of principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches,
terraces and steps. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
BUILDING FRONT LINE — Line parallel to front lot line transecting that point in the
building face which is closest to the front lot line. This face includes porches, whether
enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.
BUILDING HEIGHT—Vertical distance measured from average elevation of proposed
finished grade at the front of the building to highest point of the roof for flat and mansard
roofs; to average height between eaves and ridge for other roof types.
BUILDING LINE MINIMUM — For the purposes of §§ 250-10, 250-11, 250-12,
87. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-6 ZONING § 250-6
250:5
250-14 and 250-15, shall be determined by measuring the building line at the minimum
building front line, or at a line marking the depth of the minimum required front yard
as specified for each use and for each zoning classification specified in said §§ 250-10,
250-11, 250-12, 250-14 and 250-15.[Added 2-21-1977 by L.L. No. 4-1977]
BUSINESS FLOOR AREA — Area of a room or rooms used or designed to be used
for the purpose in question measured from interior wall surface to interior wall surface,
excluding permanently installed counters, cabinets, cupboards, closets, hallways, rest
rooms and stairways.[Added 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
CLUB — Building or use catering exclusively to club members and their guests for
recreational purposes and not operated primarily for profit. Includes YMCA, YWCA,
YMHA, fraternity, sorority, lodge, religious and similar clubs which may have
dormitory accommodation.
COMMUNITY CENTER — Meeting hall or place of assembly, museum, art gallery,
library not operated primarily for profit.
COVERAGE — The percentage of building coverage of a lot, which includes all
principal buildings, roofed porches, carports, garages and other accessory
buildings.[Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
DAY-CARE CENTER AND NURSERY SCHOOL — A place, person, association,
corporation, institution or agency licensed by the State of New York, providing care for
three or more children for at least three hours, but less than 24 hours, away from their
homes and in which parents, guardians or others responsible for care place children.
This does not include care provided in an after-school program operated for the primary
purpose of religious education.[Amended 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
DORMITORY USE — Fraternity, sorority, nurses' home, college dormitory.
DRIVE-IN RETAIL SALES — Building or use where the principal activity is the sale
of tangible personal property or products and the performance of services is incidental
to the principal activity from customers while in or near a motor vehicle.[Amended
5-3-1976 by L.L. No. 14-1976; 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
DRIVE-IN SERVICE—Building or use where the principal activity is the performance
of services, and the sale of tangible personal property or products is incidental to the
principal activity for customers while in or near a motor vehicle.[Amended 5-3-1976 by
L.L. No. 14-1976; 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
DUMP — Land used for disposal by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning or any
other means and for whatever purpose of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded
machinery, vehicles, or parts thereof, or waste material of any kind.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — Building used as living quarters by three or
more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — Detached building used as living quarters by one
family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY—Building used as living quarters by two families living
independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — Building or part thereof used as living quarters for one family.
The terms "dwelling," "one-family dwelling," "two-family dwelling," or "multiple-
§ 250-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-6
250:6
family dwelling" shall not include a motel, hotel, boardinghouse, tourist home, mobile
home or similar structure.
FAMILY — One or more persons living, sleeping, cooking and eating on the same
premises as a single housekeeping unit, provided that unless all members are related by
blood, marriage or adoption, no such single housekeeping unit shall contain more than
five unrelated members.
FLOOR AREA—Sum of the gross horizontal area of the floors of a building, excluding
basement floor areas. All dimensions shall be measured between interior faces of walls.
FUNERAL HOME, MORTUARY — A business in which dead bodies are kept until
burial.[Added 5-5-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
GARAGE, PORCH OR YARD SALE — Sale of items of a personal household nature
which are owned by persons conducting the sale.[Added 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — One enclosed space, attached or detached from the primary
building, with access from a public street, for storage of not more than three motor
vehicles, provided that no business or service is conducted for profit therein. A private
attached garage may not exceed the larger of 600 square feet or 50% of the area of the
principal building. A private detached garage may not exceed 600 square feet in size.
No detached garage can exceed a height of 18 feet at the highest point of the roof. The
perimeter walls of detached garages cannot exceed 10 feet as measured from existing
grade to the point of intersection with the top plate.[Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998; 10-6-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Garage, available to public, operated for gain and used for
storage, rental, repair, painting, washing, servicing or equipping motor vehicles.[Added
6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
GASOLINE STATION — Building or land used for sale of motor fuel, oil and motor
vehicle accessories and which may include facilities for lubricating, washing or
servicing motor vehicles, but not including painting or body repairs.
HOME OCCUPATION [Amended 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 6-18-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990] — Accessory use of a service character conducted within a dwelling by
residents thereof, which is clearly secondary to the dwelling use for living purposes and
does not change the character thereof or have any exterior evidence of such use, and
which conforms to the following additional conditions:
The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal or accessory
building. Not more than one person outside the family shall be employed. There
shall be no exterior storage of materials used in the home occupation. No offensive
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, light or glare shall be produced.
A.
Home occupation includes dressmaking, home cooking, teaching and musical
instruction (limited to single pupil at a time) and practice by an artist.
B.
Home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the following: commercial
stable and kennel; animal hospital; restaurant; music or dancing instruction to
groups; convalescent home; mortuary; garage or premises for the repair of motor
vehicles; television, electrical or radio repair; barber; beautician; residence-office;
garage or porch sales; day care; bed-and-breakfast; or other trades and businesses
of similar nature.
C.
§ 250-6 ZONING § 250-6
250:7
HOSPITAL — Sanitarium, clinic, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, home
for the aged and any other place for diagnosis and treatment of human ailments.
HOTEL — Building containing rooms which are used or rented to be occupied for
sleeping purposes and where a general kitchen and dining room may be provided within
the building or in an accessory building.
JUNKYARD — Land or building used for collecting, storage or sale of waste paper,
rags, scrap metal or discarded material; or for collecting, wrecking, dismantling, storage,
salvaging or sale of machinery parts of vehicles not in running condition.
KENNEL — Land or building used for harboring three or more dogs over six months
old for commercial purposes.[Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
LOADING SPACE — Off-street space at least 12 feet wide by 40 feet long used for
temporary location of one licensed motor vehicle. Such space shall have access to street
or alley.
LOT — Land occupied or which may be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are required, having not less than minimum
area, width and depth required for a lot in the district in which such land is situated and
having frontage on a street.
LOT, CORNER — Lot which has an interior angle of less than 135º at the intersection
of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot
if tangents to the curve at points of intersection of side lot lines intersect at an interior
angle of less than 135º.
LOT DEPTH — Horizontal distance from street line of the lot to its opposite rear line
measured at right angles to the building front line in the general direction of side lines of
the lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — Distance measured across width of the lot at the street
line.[Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
LOT WIDTH — Distance measured at right angles to its lot depth at the required
minimum building line.[Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.[Added 6-15-1998 by
L.L. No. 3-1998]
MOBILE HOME — Movable living unit with or without wheels, whether on a
foundation or rigid support, capable of being used for living quarters year round,
excluding trailers or recreational vehicles as defined herein.[Amended 6-20-1977 by
L.L. No. 6-1977; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
MOBILE HOME PARK — Land on which two or more mobile homes are parked or
which is used for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for two or more
mobile homes.
MOTEL — Building containing rooms which are rented or hired out as a series of
sleeping units for automobile transients; each sleeping unit consisting of at least a
bedroom and a bathroom.
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of land or structure which does not comply with
§ 250-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-6
250:8
all regulations for the district in which it is located, where such use conformed to all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations prior to enactment or amendment of this
chapter.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied area open to the sky in a natural state, but including
squares, plazas and formal gardens. Also the unoccupied area open to the sky in the same
lot with a principal building and/or accessory building. Open area does not include paved
parking areas or driveways.[Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
OWNER — Person or persons holding title to the property.
PARKING SPACE — Off-street parking space 10 feet wide by 20 feet long used for
temporary location of one licensed motor vehicle. Such space shall have direct access to
a street or alley.[Amended 6-21-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
PERSONAL SERVICES — Barber, hairdresser, beauty parlor, shoe repair, shoe shine,
health spa, laundry, laundromat, dry cleaner, music school, dancing school, driving
school, photographic studio and businesses providing similar services of a personal
nature.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office or offices in which a professional or
professionals, including para-professionals, practice their professions(s) of consulting
with clients and carrying out (minor) activities in connection therewith.[Added 6-3-1985
by L.L. No. 3-1985]
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any business establishment which provides electric, natural gas,
telephone, telegraph, television cable, water or sewer service for public use, or which is
governed by regulations of the New York Public Service Commission.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR — Golf course, trap, skeet and archery
range, swimming pool, skating rink, riding stable, park, tennis court, recreation stadium
and skiing facility.[Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
RECREATION, INDOORS — Indoor bowling alley, theater, table tennis and pool hall,
skating rink, gymnasium, swimming pool, hobby workshop, video arcade and similar
places of indoor commercial recreation.[Amended 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990;
3-7-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
RECREATION, PUBLIC OUTDOOR — Publicly owned and operated playground,
playfield, park, open space, swimming pool, tennis courts, golf course or ice
rink.[Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — Church, temple, parish house, convent, seminary and
retreat house.
RESIDENCE OFFICE — Residence in which the owner, who is also the occupant,
has a professional office, such as an architect, accountant, chiropractor, dentist, doctor
of medicine, engineer, insurance agent, landscape architect, land surveyor, lawyer,
optometrist, osteopath, physiotherapist, planning consultant, photographer, podiatrist,
psychologist, realtor, which is clearly secondary to the one-family dwelling use for
living purposes and does not change the residential character thereof and where not more
than one person is employed.[Amended 8-7-1978 by L.L. No. 6-1978; 6-18-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990]
RESIDENTIAL USE — One-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, multiple-family
dwelling and residence office.[Amended 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
§ 250-6 ZONING § 250-6
250:9
RETAIL STORE — Enclosed restaurant, cafe, shop and store for sale of retail goods,
personal service shop and department store and shall exclude any drive-up service,
freestanding retail stand, gasoline service and motor vehicle repair service, new and used
car sales and service, trailer and mobile home sales and service.
SCHOOL — Parochial, private or public school, college, university and accessory uses
and shall exclude commercially operated schools of beauty culture, business, dancing,
driving, music and similar establishments.88[Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
STREET LINE — Property line abutting street right-of-way.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.[Added 6-20-1977
by L.L. No. 6-1977]
TOURIST HOME — Owner-occupied dwelling in which overnight accommodation is
provided for transient guests for compensation.
TRAILER — Vehicle used as sleeping or living quarters, whether self-propelled or
towed, or a camper body mounted on a motor vehicle. Trailer shall also include any
vehicle towed and used for carrying goods, equipment and machinery or used for
a business or professional office. Trailer shall include recreation vehicles.[Amended
6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
USE — Specific purpose for which land, building or structure is designed, intended,
used or maintained.
USE, PERMITTED — Use specifically allowed in the district, excluding illegal uses
and nonconforming uses.
VARIANCE, AREA — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the use
of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or physical requirements of
the applicable zoning regulations.[Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
VARIANCE, USE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the use
of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by the applicable
zoning regulations.[Added 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
WINDMILL — A structure utilizing a blade or blades designed, or which appear to be
designed, to capture the energy of the wind for the purpose of converting said wind to
electricity or other uses.[Added 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
YARD — Space on a lot not occupied with a building or structure. Porches, whether
enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of main building and shall not project
into a required yard.
YARD, FRONT — Yard between front lot line and front line of a building extended
to side lot lines. Depth of front yard shall be measured from street to the building
line.[Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
YARD, REAR —Yard between rear lot line and rear line of a building extended to side
lot lines. Depth of rear yard shall be measured from rear lot line to rear line of principal
building.
88. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "sign," "sign, business," "sign, directional or informational," "sign, flashing"
and "sign, illuminated," which immediately followed this definition, were deleted 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
§ 250-6 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-6
250:10
YARD SIDE — Yard between principal building or accessory building and a side lot
line and extending through from front yard to rear yard.
§ 250-6 ZONING § 250-6
250:11

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts; Zoning Map
§ 250-7. Establishment of zoning districts. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No.
6-1977; 12-3-1979 by L.L. No. 9-1979; 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 6-18-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990; 6-21-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004; 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
The Village of Hamburg is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
Residential 1
Residential 2
Residential 3
Professional Office
Central Business
Commercial
Light Industrial
Industrial
Planned Development
§ 250-8. Zoning Map.
The zoning districts are shown, defined and bounded on the Zoning Map accompanying
this chapter. The Zoning Map is hereby made a part of this chapter and shall be on file
in the office of the Village Clerk.89
§ 250-9. Interpretation of zoning district boundaries.
A. Questions concerned with the exact location of the district boundary lines as shown
on the Zoning Map shall be resolved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Where a district boundary line divides a lot of record at the time such line is
adopted, the regulations for the less restricted part of such lot shall extend not more
than 30 feet into the more restricted part, provided that the lot has frontage on a
street in the less restricted district.
89. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for review in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 250-7 ZONING § 250-9
250:13

ARTICLE IV
Zoning District Regulations
§ 250-10. Residential 1. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977; 8-7-1978 by L.L.
N. 6-1978; 8-2-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982; 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 6-18-1990 by
L.L No. 2-1990; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in Residential 1 Districts:
(1) Public outdoor recreation.
(2) Accessory use.
(3) Home occupation.
(4) Garage sales, for a maximum of two times a year for each premises for a
period not to exceed two continuous days.
(5) One-family dwelling.
(6) Accessory building.
B. Uses requiring special permits. The following uses are permitted after issuance of a
special permit:
(1) Public utility substation.
(2) Community center.
(3) Residence-office.
(4) School.
(5) Religious institution.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast, tourist home.
(7) Day-care center, nursery school.
(8) Adult day care.
(9) Private garage.
C. Area, yard, coverage, height; supplemental regulations; site plan review.
Dimension Residential Uses
Nonresidential Uses
(except public utilities)
Lot area minimum 8,400 square feet 40,000 square feet
Lot width minimum 60 feet 150 feet
Lot depth minimum 110 feet 200 feet
Front yard minimum 25 feet 50 feet
Rear yard minimum 30 feet 50 feet
§ 250-10 ZONING § 250-10
250:15
§ 250-11. Residential 2.
Dimension Residential Uses
Nonresidential Uses
(except public utilities)
Side yard minimum Total 15 feet Minimum 6
feet
30 feet each side
Coverage maximum None 20%
Height maximum Three stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less;
accessory building 15
feet
Three stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less; accessory building 15 feet
Supplementary
regulations
Compliance with the provisions of
Article V is required for all
nonresidential uses
Site plan review Required for all nonresidential uses,
except as provided in § 250-19C(2)
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in Residential 2 Districts:
[Amended 8-7-1978 by L.L. No. 6-1978; 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985;
6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Community center.
(4) Public outdoor recreation.
(5) Private garage.
(6) Accessory use.
(7) Home occupation.
(8) Garage sales, for a maximum of two times a year for each premises for a
period not to exceed two continuous days.
(9) Accessory building.
B. Uses requiring special permits. The following uses are permitted after issuance of a
special permit: [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977; 8-7-1978 by L.L. No.
6-1978; 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(1) Public utility substation.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast, tourist home.
(3) Club.
(4) Hospital.
§ 250-10 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-11
250:16
§ 250-12. Residential 3. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977; 8-7-1978 by L.L.
No. 6-1978; 8-2-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982; 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 6-18-1990
by L.L. No. 2-1990; 5-5-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998;
(5) Cemetery.
(6) Residence-office.
(7) School.
(8) Religious institution.
(9) Day-care center and nursery school.
(10) Adult day care.
(11) Barber. [Added 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
(12) Beautician. [Added 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
(13) Pet grooming. [Added 4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
C. Area, yard, coverage, height; supplemental regulations; site plan review.
[Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977; 8-2-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982;
6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Residential Uses Nonresidential Use
Dimension One-Family Two-Family (except public utilities)
Lot area minimum 7,500 square feet 10,000 square
feet
40,000 square feet
Lot width minimum 60 feet 70 feet 150 feet
Lot depth minimum 110 feet 110 feet 200 feet
Front yard minimum 25 feet 25 feet 50 feet
Rear yard minimum 30 feet 30 feet 50 feet
Side yard minimum Total:15 feet Minimum:
6 each side
10 feet each side 30 feet each side
Coverage maximum None None 20%
Height maximum Three stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less;
accessory building: 15
feet
35 feet
Supplementary
regulations
Zero lot line construction is permitted for
residential uses. Site plan review is required
Compliance with the provisions of
Article V is required for all
nonresidential uses
Site plan review Required for all nonresidential
uses, except as provided in
§ 250-19C(2)
§ 250-11 ZONING § 250-12
250:17
4-16-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 1-19-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of R-3 Residential Zoning Districts is to protect the general
welfare, health and safety of the Village of Hamburg resident. The R-3
Residential District shall establish a transitional area to prevent commercial
development from encroaching into established R-1 and R-2 residential
neighborhoods consisting primarily of single-family and two-family homes.
The streets within the R-3 Residential Zoning District should maintain the
visual character and function similar to a residential street.
(2) The Village of Hamburg highly encourages the reestablishment of residential
uses for properties currently used for commercial purposes and to restore a
traditional Village residential character to the building. Current residential use
properties adjacent to a commercial use property cannot be combined to
enlarge or expand an existing or new commercial use.
(3) The character or design aesthetic of new buildings within the R-3 Residential
District shall balance with the character of the adjacent R-1 and R-2
Residential Zoning Districts.
(4) The R-3 Residential Zoning District encourages high-density residential-use
buildings for the purpose of increasing the population and potential customers
of the adjacent commercial districts.
B. All site plans and permit applications submitted for work to be done in the
Residential 3 Zoning District will be reviewed pursuant to the Village of Hamburg
Building Design Standards, except plans and applications for work to be done on
one- and two-family dwellings.
C. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in Residential 3 Districts:
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Multiple-family dwelling.
(4) Community center.
(5) Hospital.
(6) Public outdoor recreation.
(7) Private garage.
(8) Accessory use.
(9) Home occupation.
(10) Garage sales from a one- or two-family dwelling for a maximum of two times
a year for each premises for a period not to exceed two continuous days.
(11) Accessory building.
§ 250-12 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-12
250:18
(12) Swimming pools for private residential, noncommercial use.
(13) Decks for private residential, noncommercial use.
D. Uses requiring special permits. The following uses are permitted after issuance of a
special permit:
(1) Public utility substation.
(2) Tourist home, bed-and-breakfast.
(3) Residence-office.
(4) School.
(5) Religious institution.
(6) Day-care center and nursery school.
(7) Funeral home, mortuary.
(8) Adult day care.
(9) Barber.
(10) Beautician.
(11) Pet grooming.
(12) Indoor charitable or civic organizations.
(13) Group homes with a maximum of eight residents, The quantity of group home
staff shall be clearly identified.
(14) Indoor community center.
(15) Professional office.
(16) Other commercial or residential uses upon the finding by the Village Board
that such use is compatible with the uses set forth in § 250-12C and D and will
not be detrimental to other uses within this district or to adjoining land uses.
E. Area, yard, coverage and height regulations.
Dimension 1-Family 2-Family Multiple-Family
Lot area, minimum 7,500 square feet 10,000 square feet 3,000 square feet per bedroom
unit; a studio or 0-bedroom
unit shall be considered a one
bedroom unit
Lot width,
minimum
60 feet 70 feet 120 feet
Lot depth 110 feet 110 feet 150 feet
§ 250-12 ZONING § 250-12
250:19
§ 250-13. Professional Office. [Added 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; amended
6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990; 7-11-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
Dimension 1-Family 2-Family Multiple-Family
Front yard,
minimum
15 feet
-or-
Follow the rhythm of the
neighborhood average or the
established setback for the
district
15 feet
-or-
Follow the rhythm of the
neighborhood average or the
established setback for the
district
15 feet
-or-
Follow the rhythm of the
neighborhood average or the
established setback for the
district
Rear yard,
minimum
30 feet 30 feet 40 feet
Side yard,
minimum
5' 0" minimum; 15' 0"
minimum on driveway side of
building
5' 0" minimum; 15' 0"
minimum on driveway side of
building
15' 0" each side of the
building; driveway side(s)
shall be driveway width, +15'
0"; 40 feet abutting an R1 or
R2 District
Coverage,
maximum
None None 35%
Lot frontage 120 feet
Height, maximum 2 1/2 stories; sloped roofs are
encouraged
2 1/2 stories; sloped roofs are
encouraged
2 1/2 stories; sloped roofs are
encouraged
Building area No building with solely a commercial use shall exceed 5,000 square feet
F. Screening is required between all multiple-family dwellings and all R-1/R-2 zoning
per § 250-31A.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Professional Office District is to encourage mixed-use
development of professional offices and residential uses that are compatible with
the traditional residential character and appearance of this district.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in Professional Office District:
(1) Office of a physician, chiropractor, lawyer, architect, engineer, surveyor,
musician, teacher, accountant, dentist, insurance agent, optometrist, osteopath,
physiotherapist, planning consultant, podiatrist, psychologist, realtor, and
other similar professions.
(2) Residential, one-, two-, or multiple-family.
(3) Parking as an accessory use to a principal building.
(4) Religious institution.
(5) Accessory use of an accessory building.
C. Uses requiring special permits. The following uses are permitted after issuance of a
§ 250-12 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-13
250:20
special permit:
(1) Day-care center and nursery school.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast.
(3) Funeral home; mortuary.
(4) Home occupation.
(5) Residence office.
(6) Adult-care facility.
(7) Other commercial or residential uses upon the finding by the Village Board
that such use is compatible with those permitted and which will not be
detrimental to other uses within the district or to adjoining land uses.
D. Lot and building rules.
(1) Front yard setback:
(a) All principal buildings shall have a front yard setback measuring the
average front yard setback in the district.
(b) Existing residential-house-type structures, regardless of current use, shall
have and maintain a front yard setback from the front lot line to the
structure's original building front line.
(2) Side yard setback: The principal building shall have a total maximum side yard
setback of 15 feet; minimum of six feet on one side.
(3) Rear yard setback: minimum of 30 feet from rear lot line to back of principal
building.
(4) All principal buildings shall be a minimum of two aboveground stories and a
maximum of three aboveground stories high.
(5) The principal building shall have no more than 6,000 square feet of total floor area.
(6) The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet, and the minimum lot depth shall he
110 feet.
(7) No drive-throughs shall be permitted.
(8) Parking is not a permitted use and may only be constructed as an accessory
use. Parking, if any, shall be located entirely behind the principal building on
the lot. No parking shall front on any street.
(9) Permitted residential and professional uses may be located on any floor of a
building. Also, a building may contain either permitted professional office or
residential uses exclusively, or it may serve both types of permitted uses.
(10) Principal buildings shall have and maintain the main entrance to the building
on the front of the building facing Main Street.
§ 250-13 ZONING § 250-13
250:21
§ 250-14. Central Business District (CBD).90 [Added 6-21-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
(11) It is encouraged that all additions and/or improvements to existing structures
be of the same architectural style, use the same type of materials, be of the
same height and width, and have the same window and door orientation as the
original structure.
(12) Lots abutting residential districts shall:
(a) Maintain adequate screening (either solid fencing or live, healthy
vegetation) of at least five feet in height;
(b) Direct all illumination away from the adjoining residential district; and
(c) Maintain a minimum yard of 20 feet (side and/or rear) adjoining the
residential district. All accessory buildings abutting a residential district
shall maintain a minimum twenty-foot setback from the residential lot.
(13) All accessory buildings (including garages) shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from the rear of the principal building.
(14) Accessory buildings shall be no more than one aboveground story high, except
that accessory garages may be a maximum of two aboveground stories high.
(15) No lot shall have more than two accessory buildings.
(16) Accessory buildings shall maintain a minimum six-foot setback from the rear
and side yard lines on lots 60 feet in width or greater and a minimum three-foot
setback from the rear and side yard lines on lots 59 feet in width or less.
A. Purpose. The Central Business District is the heart of the Village. It is one of the
central purposes of this Zoning Code to ensure a vibrant and successful restaurant,
retail, and service economy in the Central Business District so that many, if not all,
of the shopping, dining, personal service, and entertainment needs of Village
residents can be satisfied in the Central Business District. In order to better support
businesses and increase safety and security in the Central Business District, one of
the central purposes of the Zoning Code is to increase the density of population in
the Central Business District by encouraging the occupation of aboveground stories
of existing buildings by apartment dwellers and the development of new mixed-use
buildings. All site plans and permit applications submitted for work to be done in
the Central Business District will be reviewed pursuant to the Village of Hamburg
Building Design Standards. [Amended 2-21-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Central Business District:
(1) Retail store.
(2) Business and professional offices.
(3) Personal service.
(4) Restaurant; bar.
90. Editor's Note: This district replaced the former Commercial 1 District, which comprised former § 250-14, as amended.
§ 250-13 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-14
250:22
(5) Hotel.
(6) Residential, one-, two- or multiple-family.
(7) Parking as an accessory use to a principal building.
(8) Religious institution.
C. Uses requiring special permits. The following uses are permitted after issuance of a
special permit:
(1) Adult-care facility.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast.
(3) Community center.
(4) Day-care center and nursery school.
(5) Other commercial uses upon the finding by the Village Board that such uses
are compatible with those permitted and which will not be detrimental to other
uses within the district or to adjoining land uses.
D. Lot and building rules.
(1) All lots shall have no front yard, and the principal building thereon shall abut
the sidewalk, except:
(a) Existing residential-house-type structures, regardless of current use, shall
have and maintain a front yard setback from the front lot line to the
structure's original building front line.
(2) All lots shall have a maximum total side yard of 20 feet but are encouraged to
have no side yard and for the principal building thereon to abut the principal
building(s) next to it where feasible.
(3) All principal buildings shall be a minimum of two aboveground stories and a
maximum of four aboveground stories high.
(4) Drive-throughs are permitted under the following conditions only:
(a) Only one drive-through lane per building lot;
(b) Drive-throughs shall be located entirely behind the principal building and
shall not be visible from the street;
(c) Drive-throughs may not exit directly onto a street;
(d) Drive-throughs are permitted only on lots where at least 10 motor
vehicles can be stacked on the lot and separate from the parking
circulation while wait for service at the drive-through.
(5) Parking is not a permitted use and may only be constructed as an accessory
use. Parking, if any, shall be located entirely behind the principal building on
the lot. No parking shall front on any street.
§ 250-14 ZONING § 250-14
250:23
§ 250-15. Commercial. [Amended 5-3-1976 by L.L. No. 14-1976; 6-20-1977 by
L.L. No. 6-1977; 8-2-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982; 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985;
6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998; 7-11-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
(6) Residential and commercial uses may be located on any floor of a principal
building; provided, however, that one-family residential shall only be located
on aboveground stories of multi-use buildings. It is encouraged that retail uses
be located on ground floors.
(7) Principal buildings shall have no more than 7,500 square feet of total area on
any floor.
(8) Minimum clear-glass area. At least 75% of the first floor of the front of the
principal building shall be clear glass.
(9) Principal buildings shall have and maintain the main entrance to the building
on the front of the building.
(10) Lots abutting residential districts shall:
(a) Maintain adequate screening (either solid fencing or live, healthy
vegetation) of at least five feet in height;
(b) Direct all illumination away from the adjoining residential district; and
(c) Maintain a minimum yard of 20 feet (side and/or rear) adjoining the
residential district.
(11) It is encouraged that all additions and/or improvements to existing structures
be of the same architectural style, use the same type of materials, be of the
same height and width, and have the same window and door orientation as the
original structure.
(12) Corner lots shall have no front yard on either side of the corner, and the
principal building thereon shall abut the sidewalk on both sides of the corner.
Principal buildings on corner lots shall have and maintain the main entrance to
the building at the front corner of the building or on the front of the building
on the principal street. All of the above lot and building rules in Subsection D
shall apply with equal force to corner lots.
(13) Storefront alterations, window alterations, signs and awnings will require a
permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. [Added 2-21-2006 by L.L.
No. 1-2006]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Commercial District is to provide for a compatible and
attractive blend of residential and commercial uses that serves to promote the
historic and pedestrian-friendly nature of the Village and that accentuates this
district's presence as the gateway to the Village on Lake and Buffalo Streets, while
avoiding generic suburban development that encourages unnecessary automobile
use and detracts from the historic and pedestrian-friendly nature of the Village.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Commercial District:
§ 250-14 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-15
250:24
(1) Retail store.
(2) Business and professional offices.
(3) Personal service.
(4) Restaurant; bar.
(5) Hotel.
(6) Residential, single-, two-, or multiple-family.
(7) Religious institution.
(8) Parking as an accessory use to a principal building.
(9) Accessory use of an accessory building.
C. Uses requiring special permits. The following uses are permitted after issuance of a
special permit:
(1) Day-care center and nursery school.
(2) Adult-care facility.
(3) Mortuary; funeral home.
(4) Community center.
(5) Club.
(6) Laundromat/dry cleaner.
(7) Gasoline station/public garage.
(8) Hospital.
(9) Home occupation.
(10) Residence office.
(11) Public utility substation.
(12) Commercial outdoor recreation.
(13) Indoor recreation.
(14) School.
(15) Public indoor or outdoor recreation.
(16) Other commercial or residential uses upon the finding by the Village Board
that such use is compatible with those permitted and which will not be
detrimental to other uses within the district or to adjoining land uses.
D. Lot and building rules.
(1) All lots shall have a zero front setback, except:
§ 250-15 ZONING § 250-15
250:25
(a) Existing residential-house-type structures, regardless of current use, shall
have and maintain a front yard setback from the front lot line to the
structure's original building front line.
(b) An exception to the zero front setback may be allowed when an area
immediately in front of the principal building is intended for an outdoor
eating/drinking area or for a display or activity related directly to the
occupancy of the principal building. A setback to allow parking in front
of the principal building is expressly prohibited.
(2) All lots shall have a maximum total side yard of 30 feet.
(3) All principal buildings shall be a minimum of two aboveground stories and a
maximum of three aboveground stories high.
(4) Drive-throughs are permitted under the following conditions only:
(a) Only one drive-through lane per building lot;
(b) Drive-throughs shall be located entirely behind the principal building and
shall not be visible from the street;
(c) Drive-throughs may not exit directly onto a street;
(d) Drive-throughs are permitted only on lots where at least 10 motor
vehicles can be stacked on the lot and separate from the parking
circulation while waiting for service at the drive-through.
(5) Parking is not a permitted use and may only be constructed as an accessory use
to a principal building. Parking, if any, shall be located entirely behind the
principal building. No parking shall front on any street.
(6) Residential and commercial uses may be located on any floor of a principal
building. It is encouraged that retail and other permitted commercial uses be
located on ground floors.
(7) Principal buildings shall have no more than 7,500 square feet of total area on
any floor.
(8) Principal buildings shall have and maintain the main entrance to the building
on the front of the building.
(9) Lots abutting residential districts shall:
(a) Maintain adequate screening (either solid fencing or live, healthy
vegetation) of at least five feet in height;
(b) Direct all illumination away from the adjoining residential district; and
(c) Maintain a minimum yard of 20 feet (side and/or rear) adjoining the
residential district.
(10) All accessory buildings shall be located entirely behind the principal building.
(11) Accessory buildings shall be no more than one aboveground story high.
§ 250-15 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-15
250:26
§ 250-16. Industrial IN.
(12) No lot shall have more than one accessory building.
(13) Accessory buildings shall maintain a ten-foot setback from the rear and side
yard lines.
(14) It is encouraged that all additions and/or improvements to existing structures
be of the same architectural style, use the same type of materials, be of the
same height and width, and have the same window and door orientation as the
original structure.
(15) Corner lots shall have no front yard on either side of the corner, and the
principal building thereon shall be a zero setback on both sides of the corner.
All of the above lot and building rules in Subsection D shall apply with equal
force to corner lots.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in Industrial Districts: [Amended
6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977; 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(1) Enclosed manufacturing industries.
(2) Enclosed warehouse or wholesale use.
(3) Public utility.
(4) Enclosed service and repair.
(5) Enclosed industrial processes and service.
(6) Public garage.
(7) Parking.
(8) Accessory building use.
B. Uses requiring special permit. The following uses are permitted after issuance of a
special permit:
(1) Open storage yards.
(2) Machinery and transportation equipment; sales, service and repair.
(3) Freight or trucking terminal.
(4) Gasoline station, carwash.
(5) Retail store.
(6) Mobile home sales lot. [Added 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
(7) Day-care center and nursery school. [Added 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(8) Indoor and outdoor commercial recreation. [Added 6-18-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
§ 250-15 ZONING § 250-16
250:27
§ 250-17. Light Industrial. [Added 12-3-1979 by L.L. No. 9-1979]
(9) Adult day care. [Added 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(10) Adult entertainment.91
(11) Other industrial and commercial uses upon the finding that such use is
compatible with those permitted and which will not be detrimental to other
uses within the district or to adjoining land uses.
C. Area, yard, coverage, height regulations; supplementary regulations; site plan
review.
Dimension Requirement
District area minimum 15 acres
Lot area minimum 10,000 square feet
Lot frontage minimum 60 feet
Lot depth minimum 150 feet
Front yard minimum 20 feet
Rear yard minimum 50 feet abutting residential districts
Side yard minimum 50 feet abutting residential districts
Coverage maximum 35%
Height maximum Two stories or 35 feet, whichever is less
Supplementary regulations
[Amended 8-2-1982 by L.L. No.
4-1982]
Compliance with the provisions of Article V
is required
Site plan review [Amended
8-2-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982]
Required, except as provided in § 250-19C(2)
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in Light Industrial Districts when
conducted within a completely enclosed building:
(1) Laboratories engaged in research, testing and experimental work, including
any process normal to laboratory practice and techniques, provided that all
necessary safeguards are employed to prevent hazard or annoyance to the
community.
(2) Manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or
merchandise from previously prepared materials.
(3) General office complexes.
B. Limitations on permitted uses.
(1) No use shall be permitted if the use involves or results in any:
91. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-16 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-17
250:28
(a) Storage of materials outside of buildings or structures.
(b) Parking of trucks or trailers for more than 72 hours.
(c) Unscreened location of trash receptacles outside of buildings or
structures.92
(d) Fire, explosive, chemical or radiation hazard.
(e) Dissemination of atmospheric pollutants, noise, vibration, illumination or
glare outside of the boundaries of the premises on which the use is
located.93
(2) No machinery, piping, duct work or other such facilities shall be installed or
maintained on rooftops so as to be visible from ground level.
C. Area, yard, coverage, height regulations; supplementary regulations; site plan
review.
Dimension Requirement
District area minimum None
Lot area minimum None
Lot frontage minimum 70 feet
Lot depth minimum94 120 feet
Front yard minimum 20 feet
Rear yard minimum 50 feet
Side yard 10 feet minimum; 35 feet total
Coverage maximum 40%
Height maximum 35 feet
Supplementary regulations [Added
8-2-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982]
Compliance with provisions of Article
V is required
Site plan review [Added 8-2-1982 by
L.L. No. 4-1982]
Required, except as provided in
§ 250-19C(2)
D. 95Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in Light Industrial Districts:
(1) Public garage.
(2) Open storage yards.
(3) Machinery and transportation equipment; sales, service and repair.
(4) Freight or trucking terminal.
92. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
93. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 461-2(2), dealing with storage of flammable liquids in underground tanks, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
94. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
95. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-17 ZONING § 250-17
250:29
§ 250-18. Planned Unit Development Districts.
(5) Gasoline station, carwash.
(6) Retail store.
(7) Mobile home sales lot.
(8) Indoor and outdoor commercial recreation.
(9) Residential use.
E. Uses requiring special permits. The following uses are permitted after issuance of a
special permit: [Added 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(1) Day-care center and nursery school.
(2) Adult day care.
(3) Other industrial and commercial uses upon the finding that such use is
compatible with those permitted and which will not be detrimental to other
uses within the district or to adjoining land uses.96
A. Provision is included for Planned Unit Development Districts to permit
establishment of areas in which diverse residential, commercial or industrial uses
may be brought together as a compatible and unified plan of development which is
in the interest and general welfare of the public.
B. Area, yard coverage, height and supplementary regulation requirements shall be
comparable to minimum requirements in appropriate residential, commercial or
industrial zoning districts for each specific use, except where the Planning
Commission finds that it is in the public interest to modify these requirements with
approval of the Board of Trustees. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
C. Site plan. The owner shall submit four sets of site plans of the proposed
development to the Planning Commission for review as required in § 250-20. One
copy shall be sent to the County of Erie, Division of Planning, as required by
§ 239-l and 239-m of the General Municipal Law. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L.
No. 6-1977]
D. Findings required. The Planning Commission shall recommend the approval,
approval with modifications or disapproval of the site plans. The Planning
Commission may recommend to the Board of Trustees establishment of the Planned
Development District, provided that they find the facts submitted with the plans
establish that: [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
(1) Uses proposed will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding
uses.
(2) Land surrounding the proposed development can be planned in coordination
with the proposed development and that it be compatible in use.
96. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-17 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-18
250:30
(3) The proposed zoning change is in conformance with the intent of the
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Existing and proposed streets are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated
traffic within, and in the vicinity of, the proposed district.
(5) Existing and proposed utility services are adequate for proposed development.
(6) Each phase of the proposed development as proposed to be completed contains
the required parking spaces and landscaped areas necessary for creating and
sustaining a desirable and stable environment.
E. Public hearing. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
(1) The Board of Trustees may amend the Zoning Map after holding a public
hearing, but such action shall have the effect only of granting permission for
development of the specific proposal in accordance with the site plans
approved by the Board of Trustees. An appropriate notation to that effect shall
be made on four sets of plans. One set shall be retained by the Village Clerk,
one given to the Planning Commission, one returned to the owner and one sent
to the County of Erie, Division of Planning.
(2) Planned development approval by the Board of Trustees shall be secured by
the owner for each phase of development.
§ 250-18 ZONING § 250-18
250:31

ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations
§ 250-19. Special permits and site plan review. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No.
6-1977; 8-2-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982; 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
A. In addition to all other powers provided by law the Planning Commission is
empowered to approve, disapprove or approve with modifications special permits
required by this chapter. The procedures hereinafter set forth for site plan review
shall also apply to special permits and in addition if the application indicates that a
special permit will be required, the Building Inspector shall, not less than five days
prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which the application is to be
considered, mail a notice which briefly but clearly describes the intent of the
proposed special permit to all property owners abutting and within 100 feet of the
property which is the subject of the proposed special permit. If the application is
approved or approved with modifications, the Building Inspector shall issue the
permit, provided that the Building Inspector has determined that all code
requirements have been met and approved modifications, if any, have been met.
B. Where site plan review is required, the Building Inspector shall refer the
application, site plan and supporting data to the Planning Commission which shall,
except for applications for special permits, at a regular meeting make a
recommendation to the Board of Trustees. Upon receipt of the Planning
Commission recommendations, the Board of Trustees, after determining that all
code requirements have been met, shall approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove the site plan. In approving with modifications or in disapproving such
site plan, the Board of Trustees shall enter its reasons for such action in the minutes
of the meeting at which Board action is taken.
C. Site plan review shall be required with respect to all construction, reconstruction,
additions, change of use classification or any other similar activity which results in
changes to the exterior of a site, affects site conditions or use and/or has any
environmental impact on the premises or adjoining properties. This provision
applies to all structures or properties within the Central Business District,
Professional Office District, Commercial District and Light Industrial, except for a
one-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling and their permitted uses, buildings or
structures that are located in the aforementioned districts. [Amended 6-18-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990; 1-22-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 8-6-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
D. Site plan review is not required where there is a change of use to a different use
permitted in the zoning district in which the structure use is located, provided that
the change does not involve new construction or structural addition, alteration,
demolition or relocation of or to a structural member acquired by this chapter or by
any other applicable code, local law, ordinance or regulation, and that the different
use does not result in a change in the application of other requirements in this
chapter or other codes, laws, ordinances or regulations (e.g., parking, landscaping,
fire rates, etc.) to the use or to the premises. [Added 1-22-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
E. The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine whether or not site plan review is
required and shall proceed according to the regulations set forth in this Code. The
Code Enforcement Officer may also refer any submission to the Architectural
§ 250-19 ZONING § 250-19
250:33
§ 250-20. Submission of site plan and supporting data. [Amended 6-20-1977 by
L.L. No. 6-1977; 9-4-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
§ 250-21. Special permit decisions and site plan recommendations. [Amended
6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
Review Committee should he determine that the proposed construction,
reconstruction, remodeling, repairs, additions or demolition is subject to the
guidelines set forth in the Village of Hamburg's Building Design Standards.
[Added 1-22-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
A. The owner shall submit a site plan. The Planning Commission may require
supporting data prepared by an architect, landscape architect, engineer or land
surveyor, and may include any or all of the following information presented in
drawn form and accompanied by a written text:
(1) Survey of the property, showing existing features, including contours, large
trees, buildings, structures, streets, utility easements, rights-of-way and land
use; and zoning and ownership of surrounding property;
(2) Site plan showing proposed lots, blocks, building locations and land use areas;
(3) Traffic circulation, parking and loading spaces and pedestrian walks;
(4) Landscaping plans, including site grading landscape design and all exterior
lighting, prepared in accordance with any stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) required under § 250-20B;
(5) Preliminary architectural drawings for buildings to be constructed;
(6) Preliminary engineering plans, including street improvements, storm drainage
system, public utility extensions, water supply and sanitary sewer facilities;
(7) Engineering feasibility studies of any anticipated problems which might arise
due to the proposed development, as required by the Planning Commission;
(8) Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase for
buildings, parking spaces and landscaped areas;
(9) A description of the proposed uses, including hours of operation, number of
employees, expected volume of business, and any type and volume of traffic
expected to be generated.
B. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), if required for the proposed site
plan under Chapter 200, Stormwater Management, shall be submitted with the site
plan as supporting data. Any such SWPPP shall be submitted together with the
written recommendation of the Stormwater Management Officer to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to § 200-4B of the Code
of the Village of Hamburg. The SWPPP submitted shall conform to the substantive
requirements of Chapter 200, Stormwater Management.
A. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan and supporting data before
making their recommendation to the Board of Trustees or making their decision
§ 250-19 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-21
250:34
§ 250-22. Performance bond requirement for site plan review or special permit.
[Amended 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
with respect to the special permit and take into consideration the following:
(1) Harmonious relationship between proposed uses and existing adjacent uses.
(2) Maximum safety of vehicular circulation between the site and street network.
(3) Adequacy of interior circulation, parking and loading facilities with particular
attention to vehicular and pedestrian safety.
(4) Adequacy of landscaping and setbacks in regard to achieving maximum
compatibility and protection to adjacent residential districts.
(5) That the location, size, use of structure, nature and intensity of operations
involved, size of site in relation to it and location of site with respect to streets
giving access to it are such that it will be in harmony with orderly development
of the district.
(6) That the location, nature, architectural characteristics and height of buildings,
walls and fences will not discourage the appropriate development and use of
adjacent land and buildings, or impair their value.
(7) That the special use shall not conflict with any master plan, or part thereof.
(8) Operation of any special use shall not be more objectionable to nearby
properties than would be the operations of any permitted use.
(9) No special permit shall be issued for the use on a property where there is an
existing violation of this code.97
(10) That if any stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) was submitted
together with a site plan in accordance with § 250-20B, such SWPPP and site
plan shall conform to the substantive requirements of Chapter 200, Stormwater
Management. [Added 9-4-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
B. The Planning Commission shall act promptly, and in the event that it has not
rendered its recommendations to the Board of Trustees or made its decision with
respect to a special permit within 62 days after the date of submission of the site
plan, the Commission shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the site
plan to the Board of Trustees or to have approved the special permit and the
Building Inspector shall issue the permit. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
A. The Planning Commission may recommend as a condition of site plan review or
special permit approval, that the owner file a performance bond in such amount to
be determined by the Superintendent of Public Works to ensure that the proposed
development will be built in compliance with the accepted plans.
97. Editor's Note: The final unnumbered paragraph of former Section 503, dealing with approval being conditioned upon
compliance with Planning Commission recommendations, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted
6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998.
§ 250-21 ZONING § 250-22
250:35
§ 250-23. Changes.
Owner wishing to make changes in an approved site plan shall submit a revised site plan
to the Planning Commission for review and to the Board of Trustees for approval.
§ 250-24. Off-street parking space requirements. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No.
6-1977]
For every building hereafter erected, altered or changed in use, there shall be provided
off-street parking spaces as set forth below:
B. This performance bond shall be sufficient to cover the full cost of any required
streets, sidewalks, street lights, curbs, gutters, street trees, landscaping, water
mains, fire alarm signal devices, sanitary sewers and storm drains.
A. A required driveway shall be at least 20 feet clear in width, except for one- and
two-family dwellings. Except for one- and two-family dwellings, all off-street
parking spaces are to be arranged so that all backing movements take place within
the parking area and not in a public street.
B. Residential uses:
(1) One- and two-family conversions and multiple dwellings: two parking spaces
for every dwelling unit.
(2) Professional residence-office: two parking spaces, plus one additional parking
space for every 200 square feet of office floor area.
C. Hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast, tourist home: two parking spaces, plus one space
for every guest room. [Amended 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
D. Dormitory, fraternity, sorority, nurses' home, hospital: two parking spaces, plus one
space for every two beds.
E. Places of public assembly: one parking space for every five seats; or one parking
space for every 100 square feet of floor area, plus one parking space for every two
employees.
F. Business, professional and medical offices: two parking spaces, plus one space for
every 200 square feet of business floor area.
G. Commercial: one parking space for every motor vehicle used directly in the
business, plus one parking space for every 150 square feet of business floor area.
H. Industrial, wholesale, warehouse, storage, freight and trucking uses: one parking
space for every motor vehicle used directly in the business, plus additional parking
as required by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
I. Light Industrial: All required parking shall be on premises and no parking shall be
permitted in a required front yard: 1 1/2 spaces for each employee up to 20
employees; one space for every two employees over 20 employees. [Added
12-3-1979 by L.L. No. 9-1979]
§ 250-22 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-24
250:36
§ 250-25. Special parking and loading space requirements.
The Planning Commission under their powers of site plan review may recommend to the
Board of Trustees modification of requirements for parking and loading spaces, and:
§ 250-26. Parking in Commercial 2 and Professional Office Districts. [Amended
6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
§ 250-27. Construction and lighting of parking lots. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L.
No. 6-1977; 6-21-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
Parking lot construction and lighting specifications shall be as follows:
§ 250-28. Radio and television antennas. [Added 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
J. Unspecified uses: as required by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of
the Planning Commission, based upon use intensity, turnover, customers,
employees and vehicles used.
A. Require additional spaces if they find the requirements insufficient.
B. Require fewer spaces if they find the requirements excessive.
C. Permit spaces for separate uses to be combined in one parking lot. The Planning
Commission shall take into account existing parking spaces and parking in the
vicinity of the proposed development. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
D. Require fewer spaces to reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion
and nonpoint source pollution in accordance with Chapter 200, Stormwater
Management. [Added 9-4-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
A. In a Commercial 2 District, no parking is permitted in a required front yard.
B. In a Professional Office District, no parking is permitted in the area between the
building front line and the street line.
A. Size and maintenance of spaces. A parking space is nine feet by 19 feet exclusive
of designated access drive and walks and shall be maintained in good condition and
shall be improved with drainage and pavement subject to the approval of the
Department of Public Works. [Amended 7-2-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
B. Driveways must be designated to accommodate two-way traffic for any parking lot
with more than five parking spaces.
C. All illumination of off-street parking lots shall be so arranged as to direct all light
away from the street and adjacent property.
A. Radio and television antennas and any other communications equipment may be
installed as an accessory use in any Residential, Professional Office, Business or
Industrial Zoning District, provided that the equipment shall be located only in the
rear yard or attached to a roof of the main building, and further provided that each
installation shall be subject to approval by the Building Inspector who shall ensure
that the installation is structurally sound, except that said communications
§ 250-24 ZONING § 250-28
250:37
§ 250-29. Windmills. [Added 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
A windmill may be installed as an accessory use in any Residential, Professional Office,
Business or Industrial Zoning District, provided that the equipment shall be located only
in the rear yard or attached to a roof of the main building, and further provided that each
installation shall be subject to approval by the Building Inspector who shall ensure that
the installation is structurally sound, except that said windmill shall not be permitted on
a roof in a Light Industrial District.
§ 250-30. Landscaping requirements. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977;
6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998; 6-21-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
Following are the minimum landscaping requirements:
§ 250-31. Screening and location requirements for dumpsters and refuse
containers; service and parking areas. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977;
12-3-1979 by L.L. No. 9-1979; 6-21-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004; 3-18-2013 by L.L. No.
equipment shall not be permitted on a roof in a Light Industrial District.
B. For the period commencing on the effective date of this local law98 and for six
months thereafter, there shall be a moratorium on the approval and construction of
telecommunications facilities within the Village of Hamburg. [Added 12-18-2017
by L.L. No. 12-18-2017]
A. Where any land use in nonresidential districts abuts land in any residential district,
a strip of land at least 20 feet in width shall be maintained by the owner as a
landscaped area in the side and rear yard which adjoins the residential district.
B. Where any nonresidential land use or multiple-family development in a residential
district abuts any land use in a residential district, a strip of land at least 20 feet in
width shall be maintained as a landscaped area in the side and rear yard which
adjoin these uses.
C. In an industrial or commercial district, each use shall have a strip of land at least
three feet in width in any required front yard and at least five feet in width in any
required rear and side yards which shall be maintained as a landscaped area.
D. In a Planned Development District or mobile home park, requirements shall be as
approved by the Planning Commission.
E. Landscaping required by this section shall be installed and maintained in a healthy
growing condition in front, side and rear yards and shall consist of shade trees,
deciduous shrubs, evergreens, grassed areas or ground cover or any combination
thereof as approved by the Planning Commission.
F. Landscaping required under this section shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with any stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) required under
the Code of the Village of Hamburg. [Added 9-4-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
98. Editor's Note: "This local law" refers to L.L. No. 6-2017, adopted 12-18-2017. Section 6 of this local law stated that any
applications received after 12-1-2017 are subject to the moratorium
§ 250-28 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-31
250:38
1-2013]
A. In any district, all areas designated or used as service and/or parking areas for any
building or land use, other than one- or two-family dwelling units, shall be screened
with nondeciduous plantings, or a solid fence to a height of at least five feet above
grade level, on all sides where the adjacent land is in a residential district or use.
Such screening shall not be required within 15 feet of the intersection of a driveway
with the right-of-way line of a public street.
B. Dumpsters, trash containers, receptacles or garbage cans used for industrial,
commercial and residential (excepting one- and two-family dwelling units) use
must be enclosed and/or screened with a suitable material. This provision does not
apply to temporary construction containers. Trash containers and receptacles used
for one- and two-family dwelling units are regulated pursuant to § 250-31B(2)(a).
In those districts where the architectural design standards apply, all plans must be
submitted to the Architectural Review Committee for review and approval.
(1) Enclosure and screening material. In industrial, commercial, central business
and residential (excepting one- and two-family dwelling units) use, enclosures
shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Enclosures shall provide complete visual screening.
(b) Enclosures shall be compatible in material and color with the principal
structure on the lot.
(c) The enclosure is to be a wall, solid fence or nondeciduous planting.
(d) If a nondeciduous planting is used, plantings must be spaced no more than
three feet apart and meet the height requirements specified below.
(e) Materials for walls and solid fences shall be wood, masonry, metal or
concrete.
(f) Enclosures shall have gates or doors with an appropriate mechanism for
holding the doors open only during garbage pickup operations.
Otherwise, the gates and/or doors shall be equipped with a mechanism to
keep them closed when access is not required.
(g) Enclosures and dumpsters shall sit on a concrete (or like substance) pad,
the construction of which shall meet or exceed minimum specifications
for the anticipated weight of such dumpster.
(h) The height of the enclosure and/or nondeciduous plantings shall be
sufficient to block the view of the garbage receptacles from the view of
adjoining properties, sidewalks and/or streets, but in any event shall be no
less than six feet in height.
(i) Enclosures and/or screening shall be kept in good repair or condition, and
all trash shall be kept only within the container, and lids on said container
must remain completely closed at all times.
(j) The Planning Commission may also require a roof over the enclosure if
§ 250-31 ZONING § 250-31
250:39
the site is sloped and adjoining neighbors are at a higher elevation,
making the containers visible.
(2) Location for dumpsters, trash containers and enclosures.
(a) Trash containers used for one- and two-family dwellings are not
permitted in the front yard. If practical difficulty in locating them in the
side or rear yards can be proven to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission, then said containers may be placed in the front yard in a
manner and location acceptable to the Planning Commission. If
containers are to be placed in the front yard, then the Planning
Commission may require enclosure, screening or both as may be
acceptable to the Commission, following the guidelines contained herein
for commercial, central business, industrial or multifamily properties.
(b) In industrial, commercial, central business and multifamily (excluding
one- and two-family dwellings) use, enclosures shall not occupy a rightof-
way and be located in the required yard setback, or within eight feet of
the side or rear property lines. In zoning districts where there is no
required front setback, dumpsters and/or garbage cans are prohibited
from being within 20 feet of the front property line.
(c) The Planning Commission will exercise the following preferences with
regard to the proposed enclosure location:
[1] The first (most) preferred location is in the rear yard.
[2] The second preferred location is the side yard.
[3] The third (least) preferred location is the front yard.
(d) The Planning Commission shall use the following criteria to assess the
proposed location:
[1] The more visible a location is to adjoining properties, pedestrians
and passing vehicles, the less preferred the location will be.
[2] The lesser preferred locations shall be required to have more
screening and a higher-quality aesthetic value than a more preferred
location.
(3) Enclosure review, approval and enforcement of compliance.
(a) The Planning Commission shall review any enclosure and/or screening as
part of a site plan application, using the standards contained herein.
(b) The Planning Commission shall review any new enclosure and/or
screening, or change to an existing enclosure and/or screening, on a lot
that has already received site plan review. This may be due to a change in
use, building renovations or additions, or to a change in parking lot.
(c) The construction of a required enclosure shall require a building permit
issued by the Building Department.
§ 250-31 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-31
250:40
(d) For all industrial, commercial, central business and residential users,
failure to comply with this section of the Code is an offense punishable
by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
50 days, or both. Each day of the continued violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(4) Compliance for preexisting dumpsters, refuse containers, enclosures and/or
screenings.
(a) Any dumpster or refuse container in existence prior to the effective date
of this section will be required to be enclosed and properly placed
pursuant to the requirements of this section.
(b) Any enclosures and/or screening for dumpsters and/or refuse containers
in existence prior to the effective date of this section shall be required to
comply with the requirements of this section.
(c) To provide a more orderly system of compliance, the Village of Hamburg
will do the following:
[1] The Village of Hamburg will send each property owner who has a
preexisting dumpster, refuse container and/or enclosure/screening
which now must comply with this section a compliance notice
containing the details of the review process and a blank application
form.
[2] Upon receipt of the completed application, the Village of Hamburg
shall notify the property owner of an appointment date with the
Planning Commission to review the property owner's application.
(d) Application requirements. The property owner shall:
[1] Complete a one-page application form, providing the property
owner's name, address, names of tenants (if applicable), block and
lot numbers and the nature of the application.
[2] Attach to the completed application a site survey or tax map of the
area showing the applicant's property and the proposed enclosure
and/or screening location; a description of the enclosure's visibility
to the adjoining properties, sidewalks and streets, and whether those
properties are residential; and a drawing of the proposed enclosure
and/or screening, a photograph of the existing enclosure and/or
screening, and/or a photograph of an enclosure or screening similar
to the proposed enclosure or screening.
(e) The Planning Commission shall review the enclosure and/or screening
application and shall approve, approve with recommended changes, or
deny the application in one meeting.
(f) If approved, the Planning Commission shall forward the approved
application to the Building Department/Code Enforcement for follow-up
inspection for compliance.
§ 250-31 ZONING § 250-32
250:41
§ 250-32. Removal of soil.
In any district, the removal of soil for sale, except when incidental to or connected
with the construction of a building on the same premises, shall be permitted only after
issuance of a special permit.
§ 250-33. Landfill.
In any district the dumping of refuse and waste material for landfill is prohibited. Loam,
rock, stone, gravel, sand, cinders and soil may be used for landfill to grades approved by
the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 250-34. Mobile homes.99
No person shall park a mobile home on any public or private property, except in
accordance with this chapter as follows:
§ 250-35. Mobile home park.
No person shall construct or operate a mobile home park without first obtaining site
plan approval from the Board of Trustees after review by the Planning Commission in
accordance with §§ 250-19 through 250-23.
§ 250-36. Mobile home park standards.
Following regulations shall apply to all mobile homes in mobile home parks:
A. All excavation slopes in excess of one to one shall be adequately fenced.
B. Stripping of topsoil for sale or for use on other premises, except as may be
incidental to a construction project is prohibited.
A. In an approved mobile home park.
B. In an approved mobile home sales lot.
C. After issuance of a special permit to permit a mobile home to be located on the
construction site of a new residence for a period not to exceed six months, if in the
Zoning Board of Appeals' opinion, not to do so would cause a hardship.
D. In a Planned Unit Development District specifically zoned to permit mobile homes
as living accommodation.
A. Mobile home parks shall be at least five acres in area and shall provide for
individual mobile home lots, access driveways and parking.
B. Each mobile home lot shall be at least 6,600 square feet in area and at least 60 feet
wide by at least 100 feet in depth and shall front onto an access driveway or street.
C. All access driveways within a mobile home park must be at least 30 feet in width
and be constructed to Village standards.
99. Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Vehicles, Storage of.
§ 250-32 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-36
250:42
§ 250-37. Public utility substations.
Public utility substations and similar utility structures shall comply with the following:
§ 250-38. Gasoline stations, car washes, public garages, motor vehicle and mobile
home sales agencies. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
Gasoline stations, car washes, public garages, motor vehicles and mobile home sales
agencies shall comply with the following:
D. Each lot shall have concrete foundation pads to support the mobile homes
satisfactorily.
E. Each mobile home lot shall have an attachment for water supply. Water supply
source must be approved by the Superintendent of Public Works and Erie County
Health Department.
F. Each mobile home lot shall have an attachment for sewage disposal. The method of
sewage disposal must comply with Village codes and state and county health
department regulations. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
G. No mobile home lot or service building shall be closer to a public street right-ofway
line, nor closer to a property line, than 25 feet.
H. A strip of land at least 25 feet in width shall be maintained as a landscaped area
abutting all mobile home park property lines.
I. No additions shall be made to a mobile home except a canopy and/or porch open on
three sides, or an addition made by the mobile home manufacturer.
J. Mobile home parks shall provide recreation area and facilities, as required by the
Board of Trustees upon recommendation of Planning Commission.
K. Mobile home parks shall be lighted according to street-lighting regulations for
residential areas of the Village.
L. Mobile home sales lots are prohibited in mobile home parks. [Added 6-20-1977 by
L.L. No. 6-1977]
A. The facility shall be surrounded by a fence set back from property lines in
conformance with district regulations for front, side and rear yards.
B. A landscaped area at least 15 feet wide shall be maintained in front, rear and side
yards.
C. There shall be no open equipment visible from surrounding property.
D. Where practical, low profile equipment shall be used.
A. Lot shall not be located within 500 feet of any lot occupied by a school, hospital,
playground, library or religious institution. Measurement shall be made between
nearest respective lot lines.
B. Lot sizes shall be at least 20,000 square feet.
§ 250-36 ZONING § 250-38
250:43
§ 250-39. Conversion of one-family dwelling to two-family dwelling. [Amended
6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977; 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
In Residential 2 and Residential 3 Districts a one-family dwelling may be converted into
a two-family dwelling, provided that the lot is at least 10,000 square feet in area and that
the lot width is at least 50 feet.
§ 250-40. Habitable living space in multiple-family dwellings.
No habitable living space in a multiple-family dwelling shall be more than two feet
below grade level of the ground adjoining that habitable room.
§ 250-41. Multiple-family dwelling units below grade.
No habitable living spaces are permitted in basements of multiple-family dwellings.
C. Lot frontage shall be at least 150 feet.
D. Lot depth shall be at least 125 feet.
E. Pumps, other service devices and fuel and oil storage shall be located at least 30
feet from all lot lines.
F. All automobile parts and dismantled vehicles are to be stored within a building, and
no major repair work is to be performed outside a building.100
G. There shall be no more than two access driveways from any street. Maximum width
of each access driveway shall be 30 feet.
H. A suitable curbed landscaped area shall be maintained at least three feet in depth
along all street frontage not used as driveway.
I. Site plan review is required for both new and remodeled gasoline stations, car
washes, garages and motor vehicle and mobile home sales facilities.
J. Restriction on use. No automotive use area shall be used for auto wrecking or for
the storage of wrecked, partially dismantled or junked vehicles or equipment or
motor vehicles which do not qualify for New York State vehicle registration.
[Amended 6-18-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990101]
K. Any of the provisions of §§ 250-69, 250-70 or 250-71 of this chapter to the contrary
not withstanding any use of premises existing on the date on which Subsection J of
this section shall take effect which does not comply with the provisions of
Subsection J must be discontinued within one year from the date on which this
chapter takes effect, and any vehicles or equipment which do not comply with the
provisions of Subsection J must be removed from the premises within one year
from the date on which this chapter takes effect. [Amended 6-18-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
100.Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Vehicles, Storage of.
101.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-38 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-42
250:44
§ 250-42. Nonconforming lots.
In residential districts nothing shall prohibit the use of a lot of less area or less frontage
than required for a one-family dwelling in the district in which the lot is located, when
such lot was held under separate ownership from adjoining lots at time of amendment of
this chapter.102
§ 250-43. Dwellings on lots. [Amended 11-17-1986103]
In Residential 1 R1 and Residential 2 R2 Zoning Districts, not more than one residential
building or structure may be constructed or maintained on a lot.
§ 250-44. Calculation of building coverage. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No.
6-1977]
In determining the percentage of building coverage of a lot or the size of yards, all
principal buildings, roofed porches, car ports, garages and other accessory buildings
shall be included.
§ 250-45. Reduction of lot area.
No lot shall be so reduced in area that the area, yards, lot width, frontage, coverage
or other requirements of this chapter shall be smaller than herein prescribed for each
district. The provisions of this section shall not apply when part of a lot is taken for
public purpose.
§ 250-46. Required area or yards.
No space necessary under this chapter to satisfy area, yard, parking, driveway or other
open space requirements in relation to any building or use, whether now or subsequently
built or occupied, shall be counted as part of a required open space in relation to any
other lot or building.
§ 250-47. Front yard exceptions.
Where front yards in any district have been established for more than 50% of the
frontage in any block at a depth greater than the minimum required for the district, the
depth of required front yards shall be increased to comply with such established average
depth. In no case shall the depth of the required front yard be less than that specified for
the district in which it is located, nor be more than 40 feet.
§ 250-48. Yards on corner lots.
Any yard adjoining a street shall be considered a front yard for the purposes of this
chapter. Only one front yard is required to comply with the minimum depth requirement,
102.Editor's Note: Former Section 550, Signs, as amended, former Section 551, Signs permitted, as amended, former
Section 552, Maximum size of permitted signs, as amended, former Section 553, Computation of permissible sign area,
former Section 554, Traffic hazard, safety and obstruction, former Section 555, Illuminated, flashing and moving signs,
as amended, and former Section 556, Sign removal, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See now Article VI, Signs, of this chapter.
103.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-42 ZONING § 250-48
250:45
all other front yards shall either equal the minimum or be at least 20 feet in depth,
whichever is less.
§ 250-49. Projection in yards.
Every part of a required yard shall be open from the ground to the sky unobstructed,
except for ordinary projections of sills, cornices, pilasters, chimneys and eaves, provided
that no such projections extend more than two feet into any required yard.
§ 250-50. Permit for temporary uses and structures.
The Building Inspector may issue a temporary permit for a period not exceeding one
year for incidental nonconforming uses as follows:
§ 250-51. Abandonment of construction projects and structures.
Within six months after work on an excavation for a building has begun or within six
months after a construction project building or structure has been destroyed, demolished
or abandoned, all structural materials shall be removed from the site, and any excavation
remaining shall be covered over or filled to the normal grade by the owner.
§ 250-52. Obstruction of vision. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
§ 250-53. Fences.104
A. Temporary uses incidental to a construction project.
B. Temporary real estate sales office incidental to a subdivision.
C. Other similar temporary incidental uses.
A. In all districts on a corner lot, within the triangular area formed by the intersection
of two street property lines and a third line joining them at points 30 feet away from
their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between the height of three
feet and 10 feet above the average grade of each street.
B. No fence, planting, entrance structure or gates over three feet in height shall be
permitted within 15 feet of the intersection of either side of a driveway with the
street line. No fence or planting shall be permitted within one foot of the street line.
A. Fences may be erected, installed or maintained in all districts, notwithstanding the
yard requirements of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions as follows. A
permit must first be obtained from the Village Building Inspector before any work
can be started.
B. Any fence shall have its most pleasant or decorative side facing the adjoining lot
with all posts being in the applicant's yard, unless such posts or supports are an
integral part of the decorative design of the fence.
C. Front yard fences. An open or solid fence not exceeding three feet in height,
measured from sidewalk grade, shall be permitted within the front yard area. For
104.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-48 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-53
250:46
§ 250-54. Height exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to limit or restrict the height of silos,
church spires, cupolas, bell, clock, fire and observation towers and essential public utility
structure.
§ 250-55. Height exception by special permit.
No radio or television tower, water or cooling tower, oil or gas holder, elevator bulkhead,
the purposes of this section, the front yard area shall be deemed to be bounded by
the front property line and the front building line of the principal building and the
side property lines enclosing such front yard. Any yard which abuts a public street
shall be subject to regulations for front yard fences.
D. Side yard fences. An open or solid fence not exceeding six feet in height, measured
from the natural grade along the line of installation, shall be permitted within the
side yard areas. For the purposes of this section, the side yard areas shall be deemed
to extend along a side property line to the nearest side of the principal building from
the front building line of such principal building to the rear building line.
E. Rear yard fences. An open or solid fence not exceeding six feet in height, measured
from the natural grade along the line of installation, shall be permitted in the rear
yard area at any point where such rear yard abuts the rear yard of an adjoining
property. For the purposes of this article, the rear yard area shall be deemed to be
bounded by the rear building line of the principal building and the rear property line
and the side property lines enclosing such rear yard. In all other cases, an open or
solid fence not exceeding six feet in height shall be permitted in the rear yard area.
F. Barbed, electrical and other fences.
(1) In no case shall barbed wire, spikes, chipped glass, electricity or similar
materials or devices be used in conjunction with or as part of any fence.
Exceptions to this provision may be permitted upon issuance of a conditional
use permit issued by the Village Board where it can be determined that:
(a) The fence is needed to prevent entry to an area which could be hazardous
to the health, safety or welfare of a person or persons.
(b) The fence is needed to secure an area where materials and/or equipment
are stored.
(c) The fence is needed to keep animals other than common household pets,
except in a kennel situation, from leaving the site.
(d) Where, in the Board's opinion, resources are presented which in the
general community interests, or interests of national safety, justify the
need for such a fence.
(2) Where such fences are permitted, the fact that they are either barbed or
electrified shall be clearly indicated on the fences at intervals of not more than
75 feet. Such fence shall be eight feet in height and must not be detrimental to
the health, safety or welfare of any person coming into contact with it.
§ 250-53 ZONING § 250-55
250:47
chimney or similar structure in excess of the district height limits may be erected until
after issuance of a special permit.
§ 250-56. Accessory buildings in residential districts. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L.
No. 6-1977; 10-2-1978 by L.L. No. 7-1978]
Outbuildings, garages, carports, storage sheds, greenhouses and all similar accessory use
buildings must be attached to the main building on the lot, except that each residential
use may have two unattached accessory buildings on a lot. Such detached accessory
buildings shall not be more than one story high and no closer than six feet to side or rear
lot lines on lots more than 60 feet in width and no closer than two feet to side or rear lot
lines on lots 60 feet or less in width.
§ 250-57. Storage of motor vehicles and recreational vehicles.105
In any residential district, vans and trucks of more than one-ton carrying capacity,
unlicensed motor vehicles and motor vehicles used for drag or stock car racing must be
parking in an enclosed garage and not be parked in front, side or rear yards. Trailers,
campers, boats, snowmobiles and other recreation vehicles must be stored in rear yard of
residential property or in an enclosed garage. A trailer, camper or mobile home so stored
shall not be used as living quarters and shall not be connected to any sewer and water
utilities.
§ 250-57.1. Adult uses; penalties for offenses. [Added 3-7-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
A. Purpose.
(1) It is recognized that buildings and establishments operated as adult uses have
serious objectionable operational characteristics. In order to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Village of Hamburg,
this part of the Zoning Ordinance is intended to restrict adult uses to certain
nonresidential areas of the Village of Hamburg and otherwise regulate their
operation. This part of the Zoning Ordinance is intended to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the Village of Hamburg by
regulating the concentration of such uses.
(2) The Constitution and laws of the State of New York grant to the Village of
Hamburg powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable legislation and
measures to regulate and supervise adult entertainment establishments in order
to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(3) It is not the intent of the Village of Hamburg in enacting this section to deny
to any person rights to speech protected by the United States and/or State
Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the Village of Hamburg to impose any
additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and/or other
materials. Further, by enacting this section, the Village of Hamburg does not
intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view any
sexually oriented materials protected by the United States and/or State
105.Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Vehicles, Storage of.
§ 250-55 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-57.1
250:48
Constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally
protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented
materials may have.
B. Definitions.
(1) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment or business, whether retail or
wholesale, having 25% or more of its gross income from the sale or rental of,
or utilizes 25% or more of its retail selling area for books, magazines and other
periodicals, films and viewing materials for sale or viewing on premises by use
of motion-picture devices or any coin-operated means, including videotapes
and props and toys, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CABARET — A business enterprise which serves food or beverages
for consumption on the premises, with or without carry-out service, which
features entertainers or waiters and/or waitresses who display any specified
anatomical area or who depict, describe or simulate specified sexual activities.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private
establishment which presents topless dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators or exotic dancers, or other similar entertainments.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building or
structure, or portion of a building or structure, used for presenting materials
having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT USE — An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult entertainment
cabaret, adult motion-picture theater, massage establishment, body-rub
establishment, peep show or any other business(es) where specified
anatomical areas are displayed or specified sexual activities are encountered.
BODY-RUB ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place
of business where body rubs are administered for pay.
MASSAGE — A method of treating the external part of the human body
by rubbing, stroking, kneading or vibrating with the hand or any instrument
or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body, which occurs as
part of or in connection with specified sexual activities or where any person
providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his
or her specified anatomical areas.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any business where body rubs, body
shampoos, massages (as defined above) or similar services are administered.
This definition shall not include persons licensed or authorized pursuant to
Article 155 of the Education Law, or specifically exempt from Article 155
of the Education Law (See Education Law § 7800 et seq.) This definition
shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home or medical clinic
or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or duly licensed
§ 250-57.1 ZONING § 250-57.1
250:49
physical therapist or barbershops or beauty salons in which massages are
administered only to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders. This definition also
shall exclude health clubs which have facilities for physical exercise, such as
tennis courts, racquetball courts or exercise rooms, and which do not receive
their primary source of revenue through the administration of massages. Such
establishments are not prohibited, provided they have a duly licensed or
authorized person pursuant to Article 155 of the Education Law, or are
specifically exempt from Article 155 of the Education Law.
PEEP SHOWS—A theater which presents material in the form of live shows,
films or videotapes viewed from an individual enclosure for which a fee is
charged and which is not open to the public generally.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
SUBSTANTIAL CONNECTION —
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region
or female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
(a)
The human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
(b)
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of actual or simulated human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation or bestiality.
(b)
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
(c)
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections (a) through (c) of this definition.
(d)
In a sole proprietorship, an individual who owns, operates, controls or
conducts, directly or indirectly, any premises, building or location upon
which any adult use takes place.
(a)
In a partnership, limited or general, an individual who shares in any
potential profits or losses of the business or who shares in the ownership
of any of the assets of the partnership business.
(b)
In a corporation, an individual who is an officer, director or a holder,
either directly, indirectly or beneficially, of more than 20% of any class
of stock.
(c)
Any person who furnishes more than 20% of the capital financing or
assets of such business, whether in cash, goods or services.
(d)
(2) These definitions are to include any type of business(es) or combination of
business(es) where specified anatomical areas are displayed or specified
sexual activities are encountered.
§ 250-57.1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-57.1
250:50
C. Restrictions affecting adult uses.
(1) The adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult entertainment cabarets, adult
motion-picture theaters, adult motels, massage establishments, body-rub
establishments and peep shows or any other adult use governed by these
provisions shall be allowable only for properties located in the Industrial
District and subject to the requirements herein established.
(2) No more than one of the uses governed by these provisions shall be permitted
on any single lot in the Village of Hamburg.
(3) Uses not allowed; enclosed buildings required; violations; age of employees.
(a) None of the uses governed by these provisions shall be allowed:
[1] Within 500 feet of the boundary of any residential zoning district.
[2] Within 1,000 feet of the property line of a public or private school,
hospital, synagogue, church or other religious institution, day-care
center, youth center, park or playground, public library or areas
where minors congregate.
[3] Within 1,000 feet of the property line of another lot containing an
adult use.
(b) All adult uses, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult entertainment
cabarets, adult motion-picture theaters, massage establishments, bodyrub
establishments and peep shows, with the exception of their permitted
signs, landscaping and off-street parking, shall be conducted in an
enclosed building. Regardless of location or distance, no one who is
passing by an enclosed building having a use governed by these
provisions shall be able to see any specified anatomical area or any
specified sexual activity by virtue of any act or display which depicts or
shows said area or activity. This requirement shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, window or other opening.
(c) A person who knowingly owns, manages, operates, conducts or maintains
any of the uses governed by these provisions in any way which is contrary
to these regulations shall be subject to prosecution under § 250-57.1J of
this chapter.
(d) No such establishment, as defined in this section, shall employ any
individual below the age of 18 years.
(4) No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of
any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any property not
registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window, screen or other opening.
D. Registration.
(1) No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall lease, rent, maintain, operate,
§ 250-57.1 ZONING § 250-57.1
250:51
use or allow to be operated or used any business or establishment, any part
of which contains an adult use, without first complying with the provisions of
this part of the Zoning Ordinance as set forth below.
(2) In addition to any and all other necessary licenses and permits, no form of
adult use shall be allowed to operate or continue to operate until a certificate
of registration is filed with the Village Clerk containing:
(a) The name and address of the business or the establishment subject to the
provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) The names, business and home addresses and business or home phone
numbers of all owners of the business or establishment subject to the
provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) The names, business and home addresses and business or home phone
numbers of all those persons having a substantial connection with the
business or establishment subject to the provisions of this part of the
Zoning Ordinance.
(d) The date of the initiation of the adult use.
(e) The exact nature of the adult use.
(f) If the premises or the building in which the business containing the adult
use is located is leased, a copy of the lease, name of the tenant and name,
address and telephone number of the landlord.
(g) The applicant shall also submit a plan drawn to appropriate scale of the
premises proposed for registration, indicating the areas to be covered by
the registration, all windows, doors, entrances and exits and the fixed
features of the proposed registered premises. The term "fixed features"
shall include walls, stages, immovable partitions, projection booths,
admission booths, concession booths and stands, immovable counters and
similar appurtenances that are intended to be permanent.
(h) The applicant shall state all criminal convictions, the nature of the
convictions and location for all persons set forth in Subsection D(2)(b)
and (c) of this section.
(3) If there occurs any change in the information required for the information of
registration or the certification of registration, the Village Clerk shall be
notified of such change and a new or amended certificate shall be filed within
30 days of such change.
(4) The processing fee for such certificate of registration or amendment thereto
shall be $200.
(5) No certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this part of the
Zoning Ordinance shall be transferable to any person other than the registrant,
nor shall a certificate of registration be transferable for use at any premises,
building or location other than stated in the certificate of registration.
§ 250-57.1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-57.1
250:52
(6) Change of name. A registrant may not move the registered adult use to a new
location without first following the same procedure for the issuance of a new
registration and the payment of an application fee of $200. The registrant shall
submit to the Village Clerk an application for a change of location,
accompanied by the application fee of $200.
(7) The owner, manager or agent of any adult use shall cause a copy of the
certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this part of the Zoning
Ordinance to be prominently displayed on the premises, building or location
for which it is issued.
(8) Any knowingly false statement or any statement which the registrant or
applicant should reasonably have known to be false, which is provided in the
certificate of registration or any document or information supplied therewith,
shall be grounds for denial, rejection, suspension or revocation of the
certificate of registration.
(9) It is a violation of tins part of the Zoning Ordinance for the owner or person in
control of any property to establish or operate thereon or to permit an adult use
without having in force a certificate of registration complying with this
subsection.
E. Issuance.
(1) Upon the completion of the investigation of an application by the
Superintendent of Public Works and the Chief of Police, the Superintendent of
Public Works and the Chief of Police shall submit a recommendation for
approval or disapproval of the application to the Village Clerk. If approved,
the Village Clerk shall issue the registration upon the payment of the
appropriate registration fee.
(2) If the Superintendent of Public Works or the Chief of Police recommends
disapproval, that person shall indicate the reason for the disapproval on the
application or in a separate writing. The Village Clerk shall inform the
applicant of approval or disapproval. A notice of disapproval shall state the
reason therefor. Notification of disapproval shall be by certified mail and shall
be sent to the address on the registration application, which shall be considered
to be the correct address.
F. Term of registration.
(1) All registrations issued under this part of this Zoning Ordinance shall be
classified as annual registrations which shall be paid for on or before June 1
and shall expire on May 31 of the following year. A registrant beginning
business after June 1 and before December 1 may obtain a new registration
upon application therefor and the payment of the appropriate annual
registration fee, and such registration shall expire on the following May 31. A
registrant beginning business after November 30 and before May 30 may
obtain a new registration upon application therefor and the payment of 1/2 of
the appropriate annual registration fee herein required, and such registration
shall expire on the following May 31. The provisions of this subsection shall
not affect any other provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 250-57.1 ZONING § 250-57.1
250:53
(2) A registrant under this section shall be entitled to a renewal of his or her annual
registration from year to year, as a matter of course, on or before June 1, by
presenting the registration for the previous year or satisfactory evidence of its
loss or destruction to the Village Clerk and by paying the appropriate
registration fee.
G. Denial. A new or renewal application for registration shall be denied:
(1) When the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to this part
of the Zoning Ordinance have had their registration previously suspended or
revoked or have been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
principal stockholder of a corporation whose registration under this part of the
Zoning Ordinance has previously been suspended or revoked.
(2) When any false statement is made on the application for registration.
(3) When the applicant or partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
principal stockholder or any person with a substantial connection to a former
or existing corporation or the corporation itself has been convicted of a
criminal act in this state or any other state within five years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
(4) To any new corporation formed by an officer, directors or principal
shareholders of a corporation which has been convicted of a criminal act in
this state or any other state within five years immediately preceding the date
of the application.
H. Revocation. The registration issued under this part of this Zoning Ordinance shall
be revoked immediately if the applicant or partner, officer or principal stockholder
of a former or existing corporation or the corporation itself, or any person with a
substantial connection thereto, is convicted of a criminal act in this state or any
other state.
I. Amortization. In all districts, except as provided in this part of the Zoning
Ordinance, any adult use shall terminate not later than one year after the effective
date of this part of the Zoning Ordinance, and thereafter, the space or premises or
building formerly occupied by such use shall be used only for a conforming use.
J. Penalty. Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by a term of imprisonment of not more
than 15 days, or both. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 250-57.1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-57.1
250:54
ARTICLE VI
Signs
[Added 2-18-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998; amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998;
4-3-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000; 2-21-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006; 8-6-2012 by L.L. No.
3-2012]
§ 250-58. Signs and other advertising structures.
A. The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and
safety by regulating existing and proposed advertising signs and signs of all types.
It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community,
preserve the scenic and natural beauty and provide a more enjoyable and pleasing
community. It is further intended to hereby reduce sign or advertising distractions
and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may
be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way, provide
more visual open space and curb the deterioration of the community's appearance
and attractiveness.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FACING or SURFACE—That part of the structure upon, against or through which
the message of the sign is exhibited, including molding or trim, but not that part of
the structure used solely for support. When the area of a sign is referred to in this
chapter, it shall mean the surface of such sign.
SETBACK — The distance from any street, highway, roadway, structure or
property line.
SIGN—Any permanent or temporary device or structure for visual communication
that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the
public, which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner, emblem,
pennant, insignia, or representation which is in the nature of an announcement,
direction, or advertisement, and which is placed out of doors or can be viewed
from the street, sidewalk or other public place. "Sign" does not include holiday
decoration, lawn ornament or flag or insignia of any nation, state or community,
and shall not include works of art, including murals, which do not contain any
commercial message, logo, graphic, business name or trademark. Works of art,
including murals, shall be subject to review by the Architectural Review Committee
in those zoning districts which require review by the Architectural Review
Committee.[Amended 11-16-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020]
SIGN STRUCTURE — The supports, uprights, bracing, framing, mountings and
framework for a sign. In the case of a sign structure consisting of two or more
sides in which the angle formed between any two sides and the projections thereof
exceeds 45°, each side will be considered a separate sign structure for the purpose
of calculating sign area.
SIGN SURFACE AREA — The entire area within a single, continuous perimeter
enclosing all elements which form an integral part of the sign. The structure
supporting the sign shall be excluded unless the structure is designed in such a
§ 250-58 ZONING § 250-58
250:55
manner as to form an integral background for the display. One side of a doublefaced
sign shall be used to calculate the total surface or area of such sign.
SPECIAL EVENT—A rare, unusual, extraordinary business occurrence, such as a
grand opening or liquidation sale. Special event does not include periodic discount
sale or hiring notice. These signs will be allowed for a period not to exceed 30 days.
TYPES OF SIGNS —
FRAME SIGN — — Any sign which consists of two message boards joined
together at the top (usually a hinged connection), commonly referred to as a
"sandwich board sign." This sign type would include any temporary two-sided
sign supported on a base or any temporary sign which functions to display
changeable promotional messages for a single business establishment.
(1)
BANNER SIGN — Any sign intended to be hung either with or without
frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornaments applied to
paper, plastic or fabric of any kind.
(2)
BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign that contains no advertising
matter other than the name and/or address of the building to which it is affixed.
Building identification signs are not included in the computation to determine
the cumulative area of all signs.
(3)
BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premises sign which advertises or directs
attention to a business commodity, service, industry or other activity which is
sold, offered or conducted other than incidentally on the premises upon which
such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
(4)
DIGITAL SIGN — Any computer-programmable sign capable of displaying
words, symbols, figures or graphic images that can be altered or rearranged
by remote or automatic means without altering the face or surface of the sign.
Typically, these signs utilize LEDs (or light-emitting diodes) or plasma or
LCD technology to produce the character and graphics of the display. Digital
signs are not permitted in any zoning district within the Village boundaries.
(5)
DIRECTIONAL OR INFORMATION SIGN — Sign used for stating the
name or location of a public facility, church, institution or meeting place of a
public service organization.
(6)
DOUBLE-FACE OR V-TYPE SIGN — Any two-faced sign utilizing both
surfaces for display purposes.
(7)
FREESTANDING/GROUND SIGN — Any detached self-supporting sign
resting or supported by means of an independent foundation and/or structure.
The height of the freestanding sign shall be measured from the average grade
to the top of the sign. It shall not hang over sidewalks or roadways. It shall be
located 10 feet behind all established rights-of-way, and no sign shall be closer
than 15 feet to any adjacent lot or property line.
(8)
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN—Any sign in which the light source
is within the confines of the surface, face or structure of the sign (commonly
referred to as a "cabinet sign"). An internally illuminated sign is not permitted
(9)
§ 250-58 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-58
250:56
in any zoning district within the Village boundaries. Exception: Neon or LEDneon-
type signs shall be allowed when considered exclusively as window
signage only.
DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A directly illuminated sign is
designed to give forth artificial light directly or through transparent or
translucent material from a source of light within such sign, including but not
limited to neon and exposed lamp signs.
(10)
INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign illuminated with light so
shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on the lot where
said illumination occurs. If such shielding device is defective, such sign shall
be deemed to be a directly illuminated sign.
(11)
NONILLUMINATED SIGN—A sign which is not illuminated either directly
or indirectly.
(12)
FLASHING SIGN — An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in
use. Included are oscillating or revolving lights or animation. Flashing signs
are not permitted in any zoning district because of normal competition with
traffic and other safety lighting.
(13)
BEACON LIGHT — Any light with one or more beams capable of being
directed in any direction or directions or capable of being revolved
automatically. Beacon lighting is not permitted in any zoning district within
the Village boundaries.
(14)
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to and made a part of a marquee.
A "marquee" is defined as a permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond
a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building's wall and
generally designed and constructed to provide protection against the weather.
(15)
MOBILE/PORTABLE SIGN—Any mobile or portable sign or sign structure
not securely attached to the ground or any other structure. This definition shall
not include trailer signs as defined in this section. These types of signs will be
considered permanent signs.
(16)
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which does not conform to the
regulations of this section.
(17)
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign that advertises a business, person,
activity, goods, products or services or directs persons to a different location
from where the sign is installed, also commonly known as a "billboard," "offsite,"
or "outdoor advertising" sign.
(18)
ON-PREMISES SIGN—Any on-premises sign which advertises or otherwise
directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry or other activity
which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is
located, or to which it is affixed.
(19)
PARALLEL or WALL SIGN — Any sign mounted parallel to a wall or other
vertical building surface. Parallel signs shall not extend beyond the end of any
(20)
§ 250-58 ZONING § 250-58
250:57
§ 250-59. General sign regulations.
wall or other surface to which they are mounted, or shall not project more than
eight inches from the surface.
(21) PERMANENT SIGN — Any sign not a temporary sign.
PROJECTING/PERPENDICULAR SIGN —
Any sign other than a wall sign affixed to any building or wall whose
leading edge extends beyond such building or exterior wall. Also known
as a "perpendicular sign."
(a)
Any sign mounted to a wall or other vertical building surface other than
a parallel sign. Projecting signs shall not project more than four feet from
the wall or surface to which they are mounted, shall not extend beyond
the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted, shall
be a minimum of eight feet to the bottom of the sign above the ground
level immediately below and shall not in any way interfere with normal
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(b)
(22)
ROOF SIGN—Any sign erected, constructed or supported upon and over the
roof, gutter, line or eave of any building or structure. Roof signs are prohibited
in all zoning districts within the Village boundaries.
(23)
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign not intended or determined to be a
permanent sign, related to an activity or event having a duration of 30 days or
less, the sale of a home, business or personal belongings or which expresses
a personal viewpoint or statement. Any such sign shall only be displayed in
relative proximity to the event or sale and shall be removed within seven days
after the event or sale has concluded. Any sign not related to an activity, event
or sale, which merely expresses a personal viewpoint, shall not be displayed
for more than 60 days in any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period. Unless
expressly permitted, such signage shall not be located within any public rightof-
way nor be attached to fences, trees, utility poles, rocks or other parts of
a natural landscape, nor be placed in a position that will obstruct or impair
traffic or in any manner create a hazard or disturbance to the health, safety and
welfare of the general public.
(24)
TRAILER SIGN — Any sign mounted on a vehicle normally licensed by the
State of New York and used for advertising or promotional purposes.
(25)
WALL SIGN — Any sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to
the face of or erected and confined within the limits of the outside wall of any
building and which displays only one advertising surface.
(26)
WINDOW SIGN — Any temporary or permanent sign visible from a
sidewalk, street or other public place, painted or affixed on glass, glazed
storefront or other window material, or located inside in such a manner to
be viewed from outside, not to include any signage in connection with the
customary window display of goods, products or services.
(27)
§ 250-58 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-59
250:58
A. Flashing, animated, digital/LED, internally lit or moving signs shall not be
permitted in any district.
B. All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of durable material and kept
in good condition and repair. Temporary signs may be constructed of materials in
accordance with their intended use but must be kept in good condition and repair.
C. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Nonconforming signs existing at the time of the passage of this article which
do not conform to the requirements of this article shall be considered
nonconforming signs and once altered shall be replaced only with conforming
signs; provided, however, that nonconforming signs may be maintained,
repainted or repaired, such repairs conducted solely in conjunction with
incurrence of damage or deterioration of the sign and provided that such
repainting or repair done does not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign.
(2) A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged or replaced by another
nonconforming sign. Any change in use of the business or activity for which
the nonconforming sign was intended shall require that the sign be brought
into conformance with this section. The replacement of any plastic or
translucent sign face is strictly prohibited. Such replacement shall require
bringing the entire sign into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and the Village Building Design Standards.
D. No signs, except those of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic
signs and similar regulatory notices, and permitted A-frame signs, shall be allowed
within street rights-of-way.
E. Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of such
sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle's primary purposes, but becomes
a primary purpose in itself, shall be considered a freestanding sign and, as such,
shall be subject to the provisions regarding freestanding signs in the district in
which such vehicle is located.
F. A sign that is not expressly permitted in any given zoning district is prohibited by
this section.
G. Any sign that is located on property which becomes vacant or relates to a business
no longer operating on the property and is unoccupied for a period of three months
or more (excluding signs which offer the property for sale, lease or rent), or any
sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be
deemed to have been abandoned and shall be removed in its entirety, including all
sign structure, frame and supporting members, by the owner of the sign or owner of
the premises. Upon 10 days' notice, the sign may be removed by the Village at the
expense of the owner if the owner fails or refuses to remove it.
H. No person shall permit a dangerous or defective sign to remain on any premises
owned or controlled by him as set forth in these regulations. Upon 10 days' notice,
if said sign is not repaired or removed, the Village may remove it at the owner's
expense. Notwithstanding the above, in cases of emergency, the Code Enforcement
Officer may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign, without
§ 250-59 ZONING § 250-59
250:59
notice, at the owner's expense.
I. The Code Enforcement Officer shall remove any sign which endangers public
safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous or materially, electrically or structurally
defective sign or a sign for which no permit has been issued. Said Code
Enforcement Officer shall prepare a notice and shall describe the sign and specify
the violation involved in which he will state that, if the sign is not removed and the
violation is not corrected within 10 days, the sign shall be removed in accordance
with the provisions of this section. Notices shall be sent by certified mail, and any
time periods provided for in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date
of the receipt of the certified mail. Any person having an interest in the sign may
appeal the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer by filing written notice
of appeal with the Village Board within the ten-day notice period of mailing of the
notice. Notwithstanding the above, in cases of emergency, the Code Enforcement
Officer may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign, without
notice, at the owner's expense.
J. No window, storefront or door signs shall be permitted when it has been determined
that they constitute a hazard or which will obscure light or air from a building,
prevent ingress or egress from a window or exit or interfere or obstruct the view of
motorists or pedestrians. (Building Code of New York State, Section 1205.2).
K. Signs may not be attached to utility poles or street trees except for municipal
purposes.
L. Prohibited sign treatments:
(1) Internally illuminated signs, digital or LED signs.
(2) Signs projecting above the eave, cornice or roofline.
(3) Flashing, intermittently lighted or moving signs.
(4) Sign lighting which creates glare for pedestrians or drivers.
M. Area of signs:
(1) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether
open or enclosed, on which they are displayed. If a sign consists of individual
letters or symbols attached to a building wall or window, the area shall be
considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or regular geometric shape
which encompasses all of the letters and symbols. This provision includes any
permitted neon, LED signage or any other light emitting signage.
(2) In computing square foot area of a double-faced sign, only one side shall be
considered, provided that both faces are identical. If the interior angle formed
by the two faces of the double-faced sign is greater than 45°, then both sides
of the sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area. However, for
permit purposes, it shall be construed as two signs.
N. Location of signs. Every sign shall be designed and located in such a manner as to:
§ 250-59 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-59
250:60
§ 250-60. Permit required.
(1) Not impair public safety.
(2) Not restrict clear vision between a sidewalk and street.
(3) Not be confused with any traffic sign or signal.
(4) Not prevent free access to any door, window or fire escape.
O. Sign removal. Signs which advertise an activity, business, product or service which
no longer is conducted or available on the premises on which the sign is located
shall be prohibited. Signs which are prohibited under this section shall be removed
within 30 days of receipt by the owner or tenant of the property of a written notice
from the Code Enforcement Officer, unless a shorter time period is required
pursuant to this section.
P. All new signage in the Professional Office, Commercial and Central Business
Districts within the Village must comply with the current Building Design
Standards and be reviewed and approved by the Architectural Review Committee
(ARC) and Village Board prior to making an application for a sign building permit
as required. It should be further understood that any proposed building facade
renovation or new construction submitted for review and approval before the ARC
be accompanied by any associated signage as a part of the overall building facade
design to assure compliance with the Building Design Standards.
A. Permit requirement and fees. Unless otherwise provided for, it shall be unlawful to
construct, erect, alter or relocate any sign without first obtaining a permit from the
Code Enforcement Official. No permit is required for the general repair or
maintenance of any permitted sign, unless the graphics or message is altered in any
way.
B. Plans. Plans, elevation, digitally produced photographs, graphics, etc., which
accurately depict the proposed sign shall be required as part of the sign design
application.
(1) Permanent sign requirements. Applications for sign permits shall be
accompanied by a scale drawing or digitally produced plan or design
document(s) showing the following:
(a) The dimensions of the sign and, where applicable, the dimension of the
wall surface of the building to which it is to be attached.
(b) The dimension of the sign supporting numbers and the maximum and
minimum height of the sign.
(c) The proposed location of the sign in relation to the face of the building in
front of which it is to be erected.
(d) The proposed location of the sign in relation to the boundaries of the lot
upon which it is to be situated.
(e) Where the sign is to be attached to an existing building, a current
§ 250-59 ZONING § 250-60
250:61
photograph of the face of the building to which the sign is to be attached.
(f) A description of the construction details, materials of the sign structure,
type of lettering, colors and the intensity and type of lighting to be
provided.
(g) A written statement showing the name of the owner of the sign, address,
telephone number and the name of the person in control of the building
or premises where such sign is to be located. The name of the sign
contractor or erector is also required.
(h) The owner of any permanent sign that is on a public right-of-way shall
provide the Village with a certificate of insurance issued by a qualified
and licensed insurance company naming the Village as an additional
insured against all claims in the face amount of $250,000 for property
damage and personal injury connected with said sign. The amount of the
deductible pertaining to the Village shall not exceed $500.
(i) A statement evaluation as to cost of construction.
(2) Temporary sign requirements. In addition to any required permit fee,
applications for sign permits for temporary signs shall be accompanied by the
following:
(a) The dimensions of the sign.
(b) The proposed location of the sign in relation to the boundaries of the lot
upon which it is to be situated.
(c) A written statement showing the name of the owner of the sign, address,
telephone number and the name of the person in control of the building
or premises where such sign is to be located.
(d) A written statement declaring whether an application for a temporary sign
permit has been applied for or approved within 12 months from the
application.
(e) A written statement as to the activity or event for which the sign is being
requested, the date the activity or event shall terminate or be completed
and the length of time for which the permit is being requested.
C. Construction standards.
(1) Permanent sign requirements:
(a) All freestanding signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand the
minimum wind loads as determined in accordance with Chapter 6 of
ASCE 7 (American Society of Civil Engineers).
(b) All signs, including wall-mounted and projecting signs, shall be securely
anchored.
(c) All signs, sign finishes, supports and electrical work shall be kept clean,
neatly painted and free from all hazards, such as but not limited to faulty
§ 250-60 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-60
250:62
§ 250-61. Issuance of permit; permit conditions.
wiring and loose supports, braces, guys and anchors.
(d) All signs shall be painted and/or fabricated in accordance with generally
accepted standards.
(2) Temporary sign requirements:
(a) All signs shall be painted and/or fabricated in accordance with generally
accepted standards.
(b) All signs, sign finishes and supports shall be kept clean, neatly painted
and free from all hazards.
(c) Signs shall be appropriate to the type of activities they represent.
(d) Illumination shall be prohibited.
A. Permanent sign requirements:
(1) Upon the filing of the necessary plans and documents, a completed application
for a sign permit and the required fee with the Village, the necessary plans and
documents will be reviewed by the Architectural Review Committee (ARC) to
assure compliance with the Building Design Standards. A Code Enforcement
Official shall also examine the plans, specifications and other data submitted
and the premises on which the sign is to be installed. If it appears that the sign
is in full compliance with all the requirements of this article, and the Village
Board has approved the application for compliance with the Building Design
Standards, the Code Enforcement Officer shall then, within seven days, issue
a permit for the erection of the proposed sign or for an existing sign. The
issuance of this permit shall not excuse the applicant from conforming to any
other laws or any local laws or ordinances. Code Enforcement must receive
written documentation of Village Board approval prior to issuing the permit.
(2) If the erection of the sign authorized under any such permit has not
commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall
become null and void but may be renewed within 30 days prior to the
expiration of said permit, for good cause shown, for an additional six months
upon payment of 1/2 of the original fee.
(3) The term of such permit shall extend through the useful life of the sign, unless
otherwise indicated in this article. A new permit shall be required if:
(a) Changes to the design, graphics, colors, illumination, structure, size or
supporting structure are such that the sign is no longer consistent with the
original application.
(b) The name of the business or type of business is no longer consistent with
the original application.
(c) The business is sold or property leased or in some manner comes under
the management of or is represented by a party or parties not consistent
§ 250-60 ZONING § 250-61
250:63
§ 250-62. Signs permitted.
The following signs are permitted:
with the original application.
(d) The original permit is found to be in violation under the provisions of this
or any other chapter.
B. Temporary sign requirements:
(1) Upon the filing of a completed application for a permit sign and the payment
of the required fee which has been determined by a schedule of fees as
established by the Village Board, the Code Enforcement Official or his/her
designee shall examine the application and other data submitted. If it shall
appear that the sign is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the
Building Inspector or his/her designee shall then issue a permit for the erection
of the proposed sign as soon as is practicable but in no event later than 10 days
from the filing date of the completed application. The issuance of this permit
shall not excuse the applicant from conforming to any other laws or any local
laws or ordinances. For any newly established business, the fee shall be
waived for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days prior to and 30 calendar
days after such opening.
(2) The temporary sign permit shall remain valid on the condition that the event
or activity pertinent to the temporary sign has not been concluded, the
temporary sign is in good condition, and the required fee has been paid.
A. In Residential Districts: Signs permitted in residential districts shall be placed no
closer than 20 feet to a side or rear yard line or 10 feet from a right-of-way. The
Code Enforcement Official may allow sign placement closer than 10 feet from a
right-of-way should adequate space not be available between the right-of-way and
a building on the property. At no time will an unsafe condition be allowed.
(1) No permit is required for the following signs in a Residential District:
(a) Public signs. Nonilluminated signs of a public or noncommercial nature
displayed for the direction, safety or convenience of the public, including
signs which identify rest rooms, telephone booths, parking entrances and
exits, freight entrances, public utilities, public transit, safety signs and
danger signs, provided that the areas of any one side of any such sign
shall not exceed two square fee.
(b) Address signs. One nonilluminated sign posted in conjunction with
doorbells and mailboxes, provided that the area of any one side of any
such sign shall not exceed one square foot. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four
inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch.
(c) Trespassing signs. Signs announcing "no trespassing," indicating the
private nature of a road, or "no fishing," "no solicitation," etc., are
permitted, provided that the area of any one side of any such sign shall
§ 250-61 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-62
250:64
not exceed two square feet.
(d) Plaques. Nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated memorial signs or
historical signs or tablets not to exceed six square feet.
(e) Off-premises signs are not permitted in residential areas except as follows
(Signs permitted within this section may also be on premises.):
[1] Signs necessary for the direction, regulation and control of traffic,
street name signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings and
other official signs which are similarly authorized or directed by a
duly constituted governmental body.
[2] Temporary signs not exceeding six square feet in size and 30 inches
in height may be displayed between sunup and sundown which are
intended to direct people or traffic to a specific activity, event or
sale. No such sign shall be permitted in a right-of-way area unless
the person(s) seeking to display the sign have filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer an indemnification and hold-harmless
agreement in the form required by the Code Enforcement Officer.
[a] Temporary signs advertising real estate property for sale or
rent. Only one sign is allowed per parcel or business
establishment, and each sign shall not exceed seven square feet
in area.
[b] Nonilluminated political signs, which shall not be located on
public property, shall not be erected more than four calendar
weeks prior to the election and must be removed within five
days after the election. Any political sign attached to a building,
including window signs, shall not exceed eight square feet and
shall be attached only to the front wall of the principal building
on occupied premises. Any attached freestanding political signs
shall not exceed eight square feet in area, shall be erected only
in the front setback area of occupied premises and shall be at
least 10 feet from any property line or street line.
(2) A permit is required for the following signs in a Residential District:
(a) One sign for each entrance from a public right-of-way identifying a real
estate development or subdivisions, not exceeding 16 square feet.
(b) Institutional signs. One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated bulleting
or announcement board or identification sign for a permitted public,
religious or charitable institution, park, school or church use, provided
that the area of any one side of any such sign shall not exceed 20 square
feet, and no more than one sign shall be placed on each street frontage.
B. In Central Business Districts, Commercial Districts and Industrial Districts: All
signs in the Central Business District, Commercial Districts and Industrial Districts
require a permit except those signs which do not require a permit in the Residential
Districts and are allowed in the Central Business District, Commercial Districts and
§ 250-62 ZONING § 250-62
250:65
Industrial Districts.
(1) All classifications of signs permitted in residential districts.
(2) In addition to any temporary signs not requiring a permit, additional temporary
signage may be allowed for good cause shown. However, under no
circumstances shall the cumulative amount of temporary signage exceed 32
square feet per each premise or lot.
(3) Parallel/wall signs, business signs, permanent window signs, A-frame signs
and perpendicular signs, provided that:
(a) Signs may only be displayed on the side(s) of a building that face and
abut a public street or whose property lines face or abut a public street.
However, businesses which face or abut a shared parking field, such as a
shopping center or plaza, may display signage on the side of the building
that faces and abuts the shared parking field.
(b) The total cumulative area of all parallel and business signs for each
building shall not exceed one square foot for each foot of length of the
face of the main building wall, nearest parallel to the street line, the length
of that portion of such wall which is devoted to such establishment.
Corner buildings may divide total square feet on signage permitted to two
sides as long as said signs do not project beyond the ends of the wall to
which they are attached. No single sign shall exceed 50 square foot in
area. In multitenant buildings, the Code Enforcement Official, while still
responsible for the enforcement of this article, will rely on the building
owner/landlord for the proper management and allocation of signs among
the tenants within the rules of this article.
(c) If such establishment does not occupy any floor area on the ground level
of the building, other than an entryway, the maximum area shall be only
1/2 of a square foot per foot of length of front face of the main building
wall, nearest parallel to the street line. Such signage shall not exceed five
square feet per sign per establishment.
(d) Mobile/portable signs, banner signs and flag signs may be erected on the
premises of an establishment having a grand opening or a special event,
provided that such signs shall be displayed for a period not to exceed 30
calendar days within any twelve-month period, and total footage does not
exceed 40 square feet.
(e) Parallel signs or portions of such signs shall not be located more than 12
feet above the ground level immediately below such sign.
(f) A-frame signs shall not be greater than nine square feet, shall not be taller
than 36 inches from the ground to the top of the sign, and shall not be
wider than 36 inches. Only one such sign shall be allowed per business or
tenant space. For multiple tenant businesses located on one parcel, one
enlarged A-frame sign is permitted, provided that it does not exceed 18
square feet in area, six feet in maximum height and three feet in total
width. A business may be listed on only one A-frame sign. No such sign
§ 250-62 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-62
250:66
shall be permitted in a right-of-way area unless the person(s) seeking
to display the sign have filed with the Code Enforcement Officer an
indemnification and hold-harmless agreement in the form required by
the Code Enforcement Officer. Placement of any such sign shall be as
to allow a minimum of six feet clear unobstructed width of passage for
pedestrian egress, and shall be allowed only during the normal business
hours of the establishment(s).
(g) Projection/perpendicular signs. Each building may have one sign
mounted to the front face of that building so as to be perpendicular to that
face.
[1] Projection/perpendicular signs must be constructed of wood, metal
or material complying with Village Building Design Standards.
[2] Perpendicular signs may not exceed 20 square feet in area, nor
project more than five feet from the building face.
[3] Perpendicular signs may be no lower than eight feet above sidewalk
level. The maximum height of any projecting sign mounted on a
multistory building shall be reviewed by the Architectural Review
Committee and recommended for final approval to the Village
Board.
(4) Freestanding business signs are permitted as follows:
(a) Only one such sign shall be permitted on each property and can be in
addition to a parallel business sign.
(b) The area of any such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. Such a sign
may be double faced.
(c) Freestanding signs mounted or otherwise affixed to the roof of a building
are not permitted.
(d) The maximum height of freestanding business signs shall be eight feet
from curb level to top of sign. Ground signs are encouraged.
(e) No portion of the sign shall be nearer than 10 feet behind any street rightsof-
way.
(f) No part of any sign shall be closer than 15 feet to any adjacent lot.
(5) In addition to an individual wall sign for each enterprise, in a group of business
establishments sharing an integrated shopping area with limited access, it is
permitted to erect a freestanding sign to serve such groups of business
establishments having two faces having a maximum sign area of 50 square feet
per side and located not closer than 20 feet to any public right-of-way and not
closer than 20 feet to an adjoining lot line. Its height may not exceed eight feet
from the ground. However, in such a case, all the individual wall signs shall
be no larger than 1/2 square foot per linear foot of the building or part of the
building occupied by such business.
§ 250-62 ZONING § 250-62
250:67
(6) A shopping center or an industrial park may have one freestanding sign to
identify the shopping center or industrial park and its occupants, located facing
each street providing direct vehicular access.
(7) Where a covered walk extends across the front of a building, signs may be
mounted on the foot of the walkway to a height of three feet. Signs related to
the entrance of the individual business establishment may also be hung from
the underside of a covered walkway, maximum size to be eight inches by four
feet.
(8) At the entrance to business establishments above the first floor, the name
plates of such establishments may be mounted at the side of such entrances,
size not to exceed nine inches by 18 inches.
(9) Window signs. The cumulative area of all permanent window signs shall not
exceed 40% of the area of the window.
(10) Awnings and awning signs.
(a) No sign shall project from an awning.
(b) Awning graphics may be painted or affixed flat to the surface of the front
or sides and shall indicate only the name and/or address of the enterprise
or premises.
(c) The surface area of awning graphics shall be debited against the permitted
wall sign surface area.
(d) Wood, metal and internally illuminated translucent awnings are
prohibited.
(e) Awnings may be retractable or fixed. Fixed awnings must be structurally
capable of withstanding high wind and winter snow loads.
(f) On both fully extended roll-up awnings and fixed awnings, the lower flap
shall be at least eight feet above the sidewalk.
(11) Illumination. All signs shall be illuminated only from an external source of
light.
(a) Signs may be illuminated by a steady light, provided that such lighting
does not shine directly onto other properties. Lighting must be confined
or directed exclusively to the face of the sign itself.
(b) Flashing, oscillating and revolving signs are not permitted, unless
necessary for public safety or welfare.
(c) No pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or similar moving, fluttering or
revolving devices are permitted.
(d) Portable illuminated signs shall not be allowed.
(12) Stop gap sign. A new business or a business in a new location awaiting
installation of a permanent sign may utilize a portable sign for a period of not
§ 250-62 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-62
250:68
§ 250-63. Computation of permissible sign area.
When computing the total permissible sign area for any use:
more than 60 days or until installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs
first. Such a portable sign must meet all the construction standards of the
municipality. A permit for such a portable sign shall be required. Upon
completion and installation of the permanent sign, the permit fee paid for the
portable sign shall be applied to the permit fee for the permanent sign.
C. In Professional Office Districts. All signs in the Professional Office Districts
require a permit except those signs that do not require a permit in a Residential
District and are allowed in the Professional Office District.
(1) Statement of legislative objective. Signs in the Professional Office District are
for the purpose of identifying, not advertising, the service. Signs in this district
must not detract from, nor be in aesthetic conflict with, the residential
character of the district because of sign design, construction and/or materials
used in construction.
(2) All classifications of signs permitted in residential districts.
(3) Ground signs.
(a) One ground sign shall be permitted per lot.
(b) Ground signs shall be placed not less than 10 feet from the street line.
(c) Ground signs shall not exceed seven feet in height.
(d) Ground signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
(4) Wall signs.
(a) One wall sign shall be permitted for each building.
(b) Wall signs shall not exceed four square feet in area.
(5) In Professional Office Districts, signs shall be illuminated externally only and
be so arranged as to direct the light away from the street and adjacent
properties. Lighting must also be confined or directed exclusively to the face
of the sign itself.
A. Total area of all signs is not to exceed the requirements set forth in this chapter.
B. Existing signs shall be included in the computations.
C. Signs consisting of freestanding letters, numerals or other devices shall include any
intervening spaces between them. This computation is applicable to neon window
signs.
D. Only the larger face area of a double-faced or V-type sign shall be used.
E. Back-to-back signs may be counted as one sign.
§ 250-62 ZONING § 250-64
250:69
§ 250-64. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity who shall
violate any of the provisions of this article or any conditions imposed by a permit
pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine not to exceed $250
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, and/or both such fine and
imprisonment. Every such person or entity shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each week such violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal
shall continue.
B. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the Village Board from maintaining
an action or proceeding in the name of the Village in a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to
restrain, by injunction, the violation of any of its provisions or any rule or regulation
promulgated.
§ 250-64 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-64
250:70
ARTICLE VII
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 250-65. Members; term; rules of conduct. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No.
3-1998]
A Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members, each to be appointed for five
years. The Board shall appoint a secretary and shall prescribe rules for the conduct of its
affairs.
§ 250-65.1. Alternate Zoning Board of Appeals members. [Added 10-21-2002 by
L.L. No. 4-2002]
A. Short title and applicability. Alternate Zoning Board of Appeals Members Act. This
section shall apply to the appointment, terms, functions and powers of alternate
members appointed to serve on the Zoning Board of Appeals in the Village of
Hamburg.
B. Declaration of policy. It is sometimes difficult to maintain a quorum on the Zoning
Board of Appeals, because members are ill, on extended vacation or find they have
a conflict of interest situation on a specific matter before such Board. In such
instances, official business cannot be conducted, which may delay or impede
adherence to required timelines. The use of alternate members in such instances is
hereby authorized pursuant to the provisions of this section.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATE MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Village Board to
serve on the Village Zoning Board of Appeals when a regular member is unable
to participate on an application or matter before the respective Board, as provided
herein.
MEMBER—An individual appointed by the Village Board to serve on the Village
Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the provisions of the local law or ordinance
which first established such Zoning Board of Appeals.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village
of Hamburg as established by the Village Board of Trustees by local law or
ordinance, pursuant to the provisions of § 7-712 of the Village Law.
D. Authorization/effect.
(1) The Village Board of Trustees hereby enacts this section to provide a process
for appointing alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. These
individuals would serve when members are absent or unable to participate on
an application or matter before the respective Board.
(2) Two alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed by
the Village Mayor, for a term of five years.
(3) The Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals may designate an alternate
to substitute for a member when such member is unable to participate on an
§ 250-65 ZONING § 250-65.1
250:71
§ 250-66. Permitted actions. [Amended 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 6-18-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990; 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
application or matter before the Board. When so designated, the alternate
member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of such member of
the Board. Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of the initial
Zoning Board of Appeals meeting at which the substitution is made.
(4) All provisions of state law relating to Zoning Board of Appeals member
eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, compatibility of office and service on
other boards, as well as any provisions of a local law relating to training,
continuing education, compensation and attendance, shall also apply to
alternate members.
E. Supersession of Village Law. This section is hereby adopted pursuant to the
provisions of § 10 of the New York State Municipal Home Rule Law and § 10 of
the New York State Statute of Local Governments. It is the intent of the Board of
Trustees, pursuant to § 10 of the New York State Municipal Home Rule Law, to
supersede the provisions of § 7-712 of the Village Law relating to the appointment
of members to Village zoning boards of appeal.
F. Severability. If any provisions of this section are held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
of the section shall remain in effect.
A. Orders, requirements, decisions, interpretations, determinations. The Zoning Board
of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed from and shall
make such order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination as in its
opinion ought to have been made in the matter by the administrative official
charged with the enforcement of such chapter and to that end shall have all the
powers of the administrative official from whose order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination the appeal is taken.
B. Use variances.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or determination
of the administrative officer charged with the enforcement of such chapter,
shall have the power to grant use variances, as defined herein.
(2) No such use variance shall be granted by a Zoning Board of Appeals without
a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and restrictions
have caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary
hardship the applicant shall demonstrate to the Zoning Board of Appeals that
for each and every permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular
district where the property is located:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that lack of
return is substantial as demonstrated by competent financial evidence;
(b) That the alleged hardship relating to the property in question is unique
and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or neighborhood;
§ 250-65.1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-66
250:72
(c) That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood; and
(d) That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(e) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proved by the applicant and at the same
time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the
health, safety and welfare of the community.
(3) Area variances.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an appeal from
a decision or determination of the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of such chapter, to grant area variances as defined herein.
(b) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into
consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as
weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such determination
the board shall also consider:
[1] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character of
the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be created
by the granting of the area variance;
[2] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by
some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than an area
variance;
[3] Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
[4] Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact
on the physical or environmental conditions in the neighborhood or
district; and
[5] Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created; which consideration
shall be relevant to the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, but
shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the area variance.
(c) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate
and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(4) Imposition of conditions. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in the granting
of use variances or area variances, have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental
to the proposed use of the property. Such conditions shall be consistent with
the spirit and intent of this chapter and shall be imposed for the purpose of
minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have on the neighborhood
or community.
§ 250-66 ZONING § 250-67
250:73
§ 250-67. Procedure for interpretation and variance. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L.
No. 6-1977; 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
A. All applications made shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every
application shall refer to the specific provision of the chapter involved and shall set
forth the interpretation claimed or details of the variance that is applied for and the
grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted.
B. Every decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be by resolution, which shall
contain a full statement of their findings of fact in the case, shall state reasons for
the decision and shall be recorded in their minutes.106
106.Editor's Note: Former § 610, Special permits, former § 611, Required plan, as amended, former § 612, Standards for
special use, and former § 613, Standards applicable to all special uses, as amended, which immediately followed this
section, were deleted 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985.
§ 250-67 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-67
250:74
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments and Nonconforming Uses
§ 250-68. Procedure for amendments.
The procedure and requirements for amendment of this chapter involving a change in
the zoning classification of any property on petition or for the establishment of a zoning
classification for any property newly annexed to the Village of Hamburg subsequent to
the date on which this amendment takes effect are hereby established as follows:
§ 250-69. Nonconforming uses, buildings and structures.
Lawful use of any building or land existing at the time of enactment or amendment of
this chapter may be continued although such use does not conform with this chapter,
except as provided in §§ 250-70, 250-71 and 250-73.
A. Contents of application. The application shall be in writing and shall be addressed
to the Board of Trustees and to the Erie County Development Board and shall set
forth: [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977]
(1) The names and places of residence of the owner or owners of the property, the
interest or estate of the applicant in the property if the applicant is not the
owner of the property.
(2) The names and places of residence of all persons residing within the
boundaries of the property.
(3) A brief description of the property sufficient to identify and locate the same.
(4) A full legal description of the property by metes and bounds as a single parcel.
(5) The zoning classification of the property at the time of the filing of the
application.
(6) The zoning classification to which the applicant requests the property be
changed or to be established for the property if newly annexed to the Village
of Hamburg.
(7) The facts constituting the reasons for or the need for the change in zoning
classification or constituting the basis for the establishment of a zoning
classification in the case of property newly annexed to the Village of
Hamburg.
B. Survey required. The application shall be accompanied by a survey made by a land
surveyor duly licensed by the State of New York, dated not more than six months
prior to the date on which the application is presented.
C. Verification; forms for application. The application shall be verified and shall be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk. The Village may provide forms for such
application and if so provided such form shall be used by the applicant.
D. Filing fee. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in such amount as
the Board of Trustees shall determine.
§ 250-68 ZONING § 250-70
250:75
§ 250-70. Discontinuance. [Amended 2-21-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
When a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year, such use
shall not thereafter be reestablished, and any future use shall be in conformity with
this chapter. This section shall not apply to a discontinued one-family dwelling or twofamily
dwelling residential use located in a Commercial 1 or a Commercial 2 District;
provided, however, that site plan review as provided in Article V is required before a
one-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling residential use located in a Commercial 1
or a Commercial 2 district and discontinued for a period of more than one year may be
reestablished.
§ 250-71. Change of use.
No nonconforming use shall be changed to other than a conforming use for the district
in which it is situated.
§ 250-72. Unsafe structures, restoration, alteration and extensions.
A nonconforming structure or part thereof may be:
§ 250-73. Construction approved prior to adoption or amendment of this chapter.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans or construction of a
nonconforming building for which a building permit has been issued.
A. Restored to a safe condition.
B. Repaired, if damaged by fire or other causes, provided that construction starts
within a period of six months.
C. Structurally altered only to the extent of its prior nonconformity. A nonconforming
use shall not be extended. Extension of a lawful use to any part of a nonconforming
building shall not be deemed extension of such nonconforming use.107
107.Editor's Note: Former Sections 720, Nonconforming signs, as amended, and 721, Maintenance of nonconforming signs,
as amended, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See now Article VI, Signs,
of this chapter.
§ 250-70 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-73
250:76
ARTICLE IX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 250-74. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector.
§ 250-75. Fees for permits, zoning changes and variances. [Amended 6-3-1985 by
L.L. No. 3-1985]
Fees may be charged for permits issued and for processing of applications for zoning
changes, variances and special permits; the Board of Trustees shall establish a schedule
of fees for permits.
§ 250-76. Building permit.
§ 250-77. Certificate of occupancy.
No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter erected, altered or extended
shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Building Inspector in accordance with provisions of the Building Code and this chapter.
§ 250-78. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-20-1977 by L.L. No. 6-1977108]
Any violation of this code is an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day of continued violation
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. No building or structure shall be erected, added to or structurally altered until a
building permit has been issued by the Building Inspector.
B. The Building Inspector shall not grant a building permit where the proposed
construction, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of this chapter.
C. The Building Inspector shall issue all building permits in accord with this chapter
as follows: [Amended 6-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
(1) For permitted uses as specifically listed in this chapter for which no site plan
approval is required under § 250-C.
(2) For use and/or area variance when so directed by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) For a special permit for use(s) specifically listed in this chapter which require
a special permit but only after a decision by the Planning Commission as
provided for in §§ 250-19 through 250-22 and any other references to site plan
review in this chapter.
(4) For permitted uses after site plan review by the Planning Commission and site
plan approval by the Board of Trustees.
108.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-74 ZONING § 250-79
250:77
§ 250-79. Complaints of violations: statute of limitations.
A. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a complaint in
regard thereto. All such complaints must be in writing and shall be filed with the
Building Inspector, who shall properly record such complaint and immediately
investigate.
B. If such complaint concerns a provision of this chapter relating to setback from front,
rear or side lines, the area that may be built upon, the location, independent
character or number of structures, height or general purpose of any structure, then
no action shall be taken by the Building Inspector or Board of Trustees, and no
action in law or equity shall accrue to anyone for the enforcement of any such
provision of this chapter by compelling the removal or alteration of a structure, or
to recover damages or the imposition of any penalty set forth in this chapter, unless
such complaint is filed with the Building Inspector before the expiration of two
years from completion of the structure concerned.
C. The date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or, if no such certificate shall
have been issued, the date of actual occupancy of the structure or of the structure as
replaced, enlarged or altered shall be deemed the date of completion of the
structure.
D. The application of this section shall not be barred by any disability or lack of
knowledge on the part of any person and shall not be barred by the fact that the
person against whom or by whom the action might have been brought was, during
the periods herein provided, a nonresident or absent from the state.
§ 250-79 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § 250-79
250:78
Appendix
§ 250-79 ZONING § 250-79
250:79

Chapter A255
FEES
§ A255-1. Fees established.109 [Amended 3-15-1999; 3-21-2005; 10-15-2012;
5-5-2014; 12-18-2017]
A. Fees referenced in Code.
Code
Section Subject Fee
109-2 Permit for keeping certain animals $25 per year
126-2 Demolition permit $100
159-3 Business licenses:
Auctioneer $50 per year or $10 per day
Bowling alley, billiard parlor and/or
theater
$50 per year
Circus $100 per day
Currency-operated amusement device
parlor
$100 per year
Restaurant, including fast-food and
drive-through
$25 per year
161-5 Mobile food vending permit and
renewal
$150 for first mobile food
vehicle; $50 for each
additional mobile food
vehicle
175-9 License fee for peddling and
soliciting
$100 per 60 days
175-19 License fee for transient retail
merchants
$100 per day
198-17 License fee for solid waste collectors $100 per year
203-21A License fee for paving contractors $35 per year
203-21B Right-of-way permit $35
203-32 Permit fee for snowplowing $35 per vehicle, per year;
nontransferable
212-1 Fee for searching and certifying
Village tax rolls
$10 each
109.Editor's Note: The fees listed below were officially adopted by the legislation comprising the chapters referenced below.
Said fees were relocated to this chapter during codification. Future amendments may be adopted from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, as such authority is set forth in the referenced Code sections.
§ 250-79 FEES § A255-1
A255:1

Disposition List
§ A255-1 FEES § A255-1
A255:3

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-1998 12-15-1997
(referendum
3-17-1998)
Gas utility Ch. 40
3-1998 6-15-1998 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
----- 6-15-1998 Fixed assets amendment Ch. 13
----- 6-15-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
4-1998 8-17-1998 Solid waste, streets and
sidewalks, and vehicles
and traffic amendments
Ch. 198, Art. II; Ch. 203,
Art. II; and Ch. 229
5-1998 8-17-1998 Noise Ch. 164
6-1998 9-21-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
7-1998 10-19-1998 Peddling and soliciting
amendment; transient
retail merchants
Ch. 175, Arts. I and II
1-1999 3-1-1999 Streets and sidewalks:
snowplowing
Ch. 203, Art. IV
2-1999 4-19-1999 Assessment of penalties;
business licenses, sewer
rents and charges, and
utility tax provisions
amendments
Ch. 1, Art. I; Ch. 159,
Art. I; Ch. 186, Art. I; Ch.
212, Art. II
3-1999 7-19-1999 Amendments to
Environmental
Conservation
Commission, animals,
peddling and soliciting,
and vehicles and traffic
Chs. 27, 109, 175, Art. I,
and 229
1-2000 3-6-2000 Environmental
Conservation
Commission amendment
Ch. 27
2-2000 2-7-2000 Electric utility Ch. 25
3-2000 4-3-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
4-2000 Moratorium NCM
§ A255-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2000 8-21-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
6-2000 9-5-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
1-2001 3-19-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
2-2001 3-19-2001 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 212, Art. V
3-2001 4-23-2001 Solid waste amendment Ch. 198
4-2001 8-6-2001 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 182
5-2001 8-6-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2001 9-4-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
7-2001 10-15-2001 Historic preservation Ch. 44
8-2001 10-15-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
9-2001 11-19-2001 Runoff elections Ch. 24, Art. I
1-2002 2-4-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
2-2002 2-19-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
3-2002 7-1-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
4-2002 10-21-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
1-2003 9-2-2003 Environmental
Conservation
Commission amendment
Ch. 27
2-2003 9-2-2003 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 175, Art. I
2-2003 9-15-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
3-2003 10-6-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
4-2003 10-6-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
1-2004 2-2-2004 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 23
2-2004 6-21-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
§ DL-1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § DL-1
DL:2
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2004 12-20-2004 Public sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. III
1-2005 3-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
2-2005 3-21-2005 Demolition of buildings Ch. 126
3-21-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A255
3-2005 5-16-2005 Alarm systems Ch. 102
4-2005 7-11-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
5-2005 9-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
6-2005 10-17-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
7-2005 12-5-2005 Planning Commission:
alternate Planning
Commission members
Ch. 61, Art. I
1-2006 2-21-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
1-2007 3-19-2007 Taxation: historic
property exemption
Ch. 212, Art. VII
2-2007 4-16-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
3-2007 9-4-2007 Flood damage prevention
amendment; sewers:
stormwater; subdivision
of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 146 (repealed by L.L.
No. 2-209); Ch. 186, Art.
III; Ch. 207; Ch. 250
4-2007 9-4-2007 Stormwater management Ch. 200
5-2007 10-15-2007 Sex offenders: residency
restrictions
Ch. 187, Art. I
6-2007 12-3-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 182
1-2008 1-22-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
2-2008 6-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
3-2008 10-20-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
4-2008 11-17-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
1-2009 2-2-2009 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 207
2-2009 8-18-2009 Business licenses
amendment
Ch. 159, Art. I
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2010 1-4-2010 Noise amendment Ch. 164
2-2010 7-19-2010 Sidewalk cafes and
outdoor dining
Ch. 190
3-2010 7-19-2010 Smoking in public places Ch. 193
1-2012 3-19-2012 Tax levy limit override
2012
NCM
2-2012 7-2-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
3-2012 8-6-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
4-2012 8-6-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
5-2012 10-15-2012 Animals amendment Ch. 109
10-15-2012 Fees amendment Ch. A255
1-2013 3-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
2-2013 5-6-2013 Storage of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 238
1-2014 1-6-2014 Dangerous buildings Ch. 127
5-5-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A255
1-2015 2-2-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
1-2016 1-19-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
2-2016 1-19-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3-2016 1-19-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
4-2016 3-21-2016 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. II
5-2016 5-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 229
6-2016 7-18-2016 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. II
7-2016 10-3-2016 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. II
8-2016 12-19-2016 Mobile food vending Ch. 161
1-2017 1-17-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2-2017 3-6-2017 Streets and sidewalks:
public sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. III
3-2017 3-6-2017 Tax levy limit override NCM
4-2017 12-18-2017 Taxicabs repealer Ch. 216, reference only
§ DL-1 HAMBURG VILLAGE CODE § DL-1
DL:4
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2017 12-18-2017 Solid waste: solid waste
management amendment
Ch. 198, Art. II
6-2017 12-18-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
1-2018 2-20-2018 Tax levy limit override NCM
2-2018 7-2-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 229
3-2018 9-17-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
4-2018 10-15-2018 Historic Preservation
Amendment
Ch. 44
1-2019 2-19-2019 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
2-2019 4-15-2019 Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 146
3-2019 4-15-2019 Small Cell Wireless
Telecommunications
Facilities
Ch. 191
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1-2020 1-6-2020 Procurement Policy: Best
Value Contracts
Ch. 67, Art. I 38
2-2020 9-21-2020 Officers and Employees:
Residency Requirements
Amendment
Ch. 54, Art. III 38
3-2020 10-19-2020 Animals Amendment Ch. 109 38
4-2020 11-16-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 250 38
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:5
